START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***ANNA KARENINAby Leo TolstoyTranslated by Constance GarnettContents PART ONE PART TWO PART THREE PART FOUR PART FIVE PART SIX PART SEVEN PART EIGHTPART ONEChapter 1Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own way.Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house. The wife haddiscovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a French girl, whohad been a governess in their family, and she had announced to her husband thatshe could not go on living in the same house with him. This position of affairshad now lasted three days, and not only the husband and wife themselves, butall the members of their family and household, were painfully conscious of it.Every person in the house felt that there was no sense in their livingtogether, and that the stray people brought together by chance in any inn hadmore in common with one another than they, the members of the family andhousehold of the Oblonskys. The wife did not leave her own room, the husbandhad not been at home for three days. The children ran wild all over the house;the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper, and wrote to a friendasking her to look out for a new situation for her; the man-cook had walked offthe day before just at dinner time; the kitchen-maid, and the coachman hadgiven warning.Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva,as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at his usual hour, thatis, at eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom, buton the leather-covered sofa in his study. He turned over his stout,well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though he would sink into a longsleep again; he vigorously embraced the pillow on the other side and buried hisface in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat up on the sofa, and opened hiseyes.“Yes, yes, how was it now?” he thought, going over his dream.“Now, how was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt;no, not Darmstadt, but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was inAmerica. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tables sang,Il mio tesoro—not Il mio tesoro though, but somethingbetter, and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and theywere women, too,” he remembered.Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a smile.“Yes, it was nice, very nice. There was a great deal more that wasdelightful, only there’s no putting it into words, or even expressing itin one’s thoughts awake.” And noticing a gleam of light peeping inbeside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his feet over the edgeof the sofa, and felt about with them for his slippers, a present on his lastbirthday, worked for him by his wife on gold-colored morocco. And, as he haddone every day for the last nine years, he stretched out his hand, withoutgetting up, towards the place where his dressing-gown always hung in hisbedroom. And thereupon he suddenly remembered that he was not sleeping in hiswife’s room, but in his study, and why: the smile vanished from his face,he knitted his brows.“Ah, ah, ah! Oo!...” he muttered, recalling everything that hadhappened. And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife was present tohis imagination, all the hopelessness of his position, and worst of all, hisown fault.“Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me. And themost awful thing about it is that it’s all my fault—all my fault,though I’m not to blame. That’s the point of the wholesituation,” he reflected. “Oh, oh, oh!” he kept repeating indespair, as he remembered the acutely painful sensations caused him by thisquarrel.Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy andgood-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for his wife, hehad not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise had not found herin the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroom with the unlucky letterthat revealed everything in her hand.She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details, andlimited in her ideas, as he considered, was sitting perfectly still with theletter in her hand, looking at him with an expression of horror, despair, andindignation.“What’s this? this?” she asked, pointing to the letter.And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case, was notso much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he had met hiswife’s words.There happened to him at that instant what does happen to people when they areunexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. He did not succeed inadapting his face to the position in which he was placed towards his wife bythe discovery of his fault. Instead of being hurt, denying, defending himself,begging forgiveness, instead of remaining indifferent even—anything wouldhave been better than what he did do—his face utterly involuntarily(reflex spinal action, reflected Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was fond ofphysiology)—utterly involuntarily assumed its habitual, good-humored, andtherefore idiotic smile.This idiotic smile he could not forgive himself. Catching sight of that smile,Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with her characteristicheat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the room. Since then shehad refused to see her husband.“It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all,”thought Stepan Arkadyevitch.“But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?” he said tohimself in despair, and found no answer.Chapter 2Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself. He wasincapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that he repented of hisconduct. He could not at this date repent of the fact that he, a handsome,susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love with his wife, the mother offive living and two dead children, and only a year younger than himself. All herepented of was that he had not succeeded better in hiding it from his wife.But he felt all the difficulty of his position and was sorry for his wife, hischildren, and himself. Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sinsbetter from his wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of them wouldhave had such an effect on her. He had never clearly thought out the subject,but he had vaguely conceived that his wife must long ago have suspected him ofbeing unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the fact. He had even supposedthat she, a worn-out woman no longer young or good-looking, and in no wayremarkable or interesting, merely a good mother, ought from a sense of fairnessto take an indulgent view. It had turned out quite the other way.“Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!” StepanArkadyevitch kept repeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to bedone. “And how well things were going up till now! how well we got on!She was contented and happy in her children; I never interfered with her inanything; I let her manage the children and the house just as she liked.It’s true it’s bad her having been a governess in our house.That’s bad! There’s something common, vulgar, in flirting withone’s governess. But what a governess!” (He vividly recalled theroguish black eyes of Mlle. Roland and her smile.) “But after all, whileshe was in the house, I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is thatshe’s already ... it seems as if ill-luck would have it so! Oh, oh! Butwhat, what is to be done?”There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to allquestions, even the most complex and insoluble. That answer is: one must livein the needs of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forget himself insleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he could not go back now tothe music sung by the decanter-women; so he must forget himself in the dream ofdaily life.“Then we shall see,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, andgetting up he put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied thetassels in a knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into his broad, barechest, he walked to the window with his usual confident step, turning out hisfeet that carried his full frame so easily. He pulled up the blind and rang thebell loudly. It was at once answered by the appearance of an old friend, hisvalet, Matvey, carrying his clothes, his boots, and a telegram. Matvey wasfollowed by the barber with all the necessaries for shaving.“Are there any papers from the office?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,taking the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.“On the table,” replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy athis master; and, after a short pause, he added with a sly smile,“They’ve sent from the carriage-jobbers.”Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in thelooking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in the looking-glass, itwas clear that they understood one another. Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyesasked: “Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?”Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and gazedsilently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.“I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you orthemselves for nothing,” he said. He had obviously prepared the sentencebeforehand.Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attract attention tohimself. Tearing open the telegram, he read it through, guessing at the words,misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and his face brightened.“Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow,” he said,checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a pink paththrough his long, curly whiskers.“Thank God!” said Matvey, showing by this response that he, likehis master, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that AnnaArkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about a reconciliationbetween husband and wife.“Alone, or with her husband?” inquired Matvey.Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on his upperlip, and he raised one finger. Matvey nodded at the looking-glass.“Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?”“Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders.”“Darya Alexandrovna?” Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.“Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then dowhat she tells you.”“You want to try it on,” Matvey understood, but he only said,“Yes, sir.”Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be dressed, whenMatvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, came back into the room withthe telegram in his hand. The barber had gone.“Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away. Let himdo—that is you—as he likes,” he said, laughing only with hiseyes, and putting his hands in his pockets, he watched his master with his headon one side. Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then a good-humored andrather pitiful smile showed itself on his handsome face.“Eh, Matvey?” he said, shaking his head.“It’s all right, sir; she will come round,” said Matvey.“Come round?”“Yes, sir.”“Do you think so? Who’s there?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,hearing the rustle of a woman’s dress at the door.“It’s I,” said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and thestern, pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at thedoorway.“Well, what is it, Matrona?” queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going upto her at the door.Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards his wife,and was conscious of this himself, almost everyone in the house (even thenurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.“Well, what now?” he asked disconsolately.“Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. She issuffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the houseis topsy-turvy. You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg her forgiveness,sir. There’s no help for it! One must take the consequences....”“But she won’t see me.”“You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God.”“Come, that’ll do, you can go,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,blushing suddenly. “Well now, do dress me.” He turned to Matvey andthrew off his dressing-gown decisively.Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and,blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasure over thewell-groomed body of his master.Chapter 3When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent on himself,pulled down his shirt-cuffs, distributed into his pockets his cigarettes,pocketbook, matches, and watch with its double chain and seals, and shaking outhis handkerchief, feeling himself clean, fragrant, healthy, and physically atease, in spite of his unhappiness, he walked with a slight swing on each leginto the dining-room, where coffee was already waiting for him, and beside thecoffee, letters and papers from the office.He read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was buying aforest on his wife’s property. To sell this forest was absolutelyessential; but at present, until he was reconciled with his wife, the subjectcould not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing of all was that his pecuniaryinterests should in this way enter into the question of his reconciliation withhis wife. And the idea that he might be led on by his interests, that he mightseek a reconciliation with his wife on account of the sale of theforest—that idea hurt him.When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the office-papersclose to him, rapidly looked through two pieces of business, made a few noteswith a big pencil, and pushing away the papers, turned to his coffee. As hesipped his coffee, he opened a still damp morning paper, and began reading it.Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme one, butone advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite of the fact thatscience, art, and politics had no special interest for him, he firmly heldthose views on all these subjects which were held by the majority and by hispaper, and he only changed them when the majority changed them—or, morestrictly speaking, he did not change them, but they imperceptibly changed ofthemselves within him.Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views; thesepolitical opinions and views had come to him of themselves, just as he did notchoose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took those that were beingworn. And for him, living in a certain society—owing to the need,ordinarily developed at years of discretion, for some degree of mentalactivity—to have views was just as indispensable as to have a hat. Ifthere was a reason for his preferring liberal to conservative views, which wereheld also by many of his circle, it arose not from his considering liberalismmore rational, but from its being in closer accordance with his manner of life.The liberal party said that in Russia everything is wrong, and certainly StepanArkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of money. The liberal partysaid that marriage is an institution quite out of date, and that it needsreconstruction; and family life certainly afforded Stepan Arkadyevitch littlegratification, and forced him into lying and hypocrisy, which was so repulsiveto his nature. The liberal party said, or rather allowed it to be understood,that religion is only a curb to keep in check the barbarous classes of thepeople; and Stepan Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short servicewithout his legs aching from standing up, and could never make out what was theobject of all the terrible and high-flown language about another world whenlife might be so very amusing in this world. And with all this, StepanArkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man by saying thatif he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop at Rurik and disownthe first founder of his family—the monkey. And so Liberalism had becomea habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked his newspaper, as he didhis cigar after dinner, for the slight fog it diffused in his brain. He readthe leading article, in which it was maintained that it was quite senseless inour day to raise an outcry that radicalism was threatening to swallow up allconservative elements, and that the government ought to take measures to crushthe revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, “in our opinion thedanger lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy oftraditionalism clogging progress,” etc., etc. He read another article,too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped someinnuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With his characteristic quickwittednesshe caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence it came, at whom and onwhat ground it was aimed, and that afforded him, as it always did, a certainsatisfaction. But today that satisfaction was embittered by MatronaPhilimonovna’s advice and the unsatisfactory state of the household. Heread, too, that Count Beist was rumored to have left for Wiesbaden, and thatone need have no more gray hair, and of the sale of a light carriage, and of ayoung person seeking a situation; but these items of information did not givehim, as usual, a quiet, ironical gratification. Having finished the paper, asecond cup of coffee and a roll and butter, he got up, shaking the crumbs ofthe roll off his waistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled joyously:not because there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—thejoyous smile was evoked by a good digestion.But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grewthoughtful.Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of Grisha, hisyoungest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard outside the door. Theywere carrying something, and dropped it.“I told you not to sit passengers on the roof,” said the littlegirl in English; “there, pick them up!”“Everything’s in confusion,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch;“there are the children running about by themselves.” And going tothe door, he called them. They threw down the box, that represented a train,and came in to their father.The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him, andhung laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell of scent thatcame from his whiskers. At last the little girl kissed his face, which wasflushed from his stooping posture and beaming with tenderness, loosed herhands, and was about to run away again; but her father held her back.“How is mamma?” he asked, passing his hand over hisdaughter’s smooth, soft little neck. “Good morning,” he said,smiling to the boy, who had come up to greet him. He was conscious that heloved the boy less, and always tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and didnot respond with a smile to his father’s chilly smile.“Mamma? She is up,” answered the girl.Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. “That means that she’s not slept againall night,” he thought.“Well, is she cheerful?”The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father and mother,and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her father must be aware ofthis, and that he was pretending when he asked about it so lightly. And sheblushed for her father. He at once perceived it, and blushed too.“I don’t know,” she said. “She did not say we must doour lessons, but she said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole tograndmamma’s.”“Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though,” he said,still holding her and stroking her soft little hand.He took off the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a little box ofsweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate and a fondant.“For Grisha?” said the little girl, pointing to the chocolate.“Yes, yes.” And still stroking her little shoulder, he kissed heron the roots of her hair and neck, and let her go.“The carriage is ready,” said Matvey; “but there’ssomeone to see you with a petition.”“Been here long?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Half an hour.”“How many times have I told you to tell me at once?”“One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least,” saidMatvey, in the affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to beangry.“Well, show the person up at once,” said Oblonsky, frowning withvexation.The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin, came with a requestimpossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he generally did, madeher sit down, heard her to the end attentively without interrupting her, andgave her detailed advice as to how and to whom to apply, and even wrote her, inhis large, sprawling, good and legible hand, a confident and fluent little noteto a personage who might be of use to her. Having got rid of the staffcaptain’s widow, Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped torecollect whether he had forgotten anything. It appeared that he had forgottennothing except what he wanted to forget—his wife.“Ah, yes!” He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed aharassed expression. “To go, or not to go!” he said to himself; andan inner voice told him he must not go, that nothing could come of it butfalsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible, because itwas impossible to make her attractive again and able to inspire love, or tomake him an old man, not susceptible to love. Except deceit and lying nothingcould come of it now; and deceit and lying were opposed to his nature.“It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this,” hesaid, trying to give himself courage. He squared his chest, took out acigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearl ashtray, andwith rapid steps walked through the drawing-room, and opened the other doorinto his wife’s bedroom.Chapter 4Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her now scanty, onceluxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape of her neck,with a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, which looked prominent fromthe thinness of her face, was standing among a litter of all sorts of thingsscattered all over the room, before an open bureau, from which she was takingsomething. Hearing her husband’s steps, she stopped, looking towards thedoor, and trying assiduously to give her features a severe and contemptuousexpression. She felt she was afraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview.She was just attempting to do what she had attempted to do ten times already inthese last three days—to sort out the children’s things and herown, so as to take them to her mother’s—and again she could notbring herself to do this; but now again, as each time before, she kept sayingto herself, “that things cannot go on like this, that she must take somestep” to punish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some little part atleast of the suffering he had caused her. She still continued to tell herselfthat she should leave him, but she was conscious that this was impossible; itwas impossible because she could not get out of the habit of regarding him asher husband and loving him. Besides this, she realized that if even here in herown house she could hardly manage to look after her five children properly,they would be still worse off where she was going with them all. As it was,even in the course of these three days, the youngest was unwell from beinggiven unwholesome soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner theday before. She was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but, cheatingherself, she went on all the same sorting out her things and pretending she wasgoing.Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureau asthough looking for something, and only looked round at him when he had comequite up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give a severe and resoluteexpression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.“Dolly!” he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent his headtowards his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that hewas radiant with freshness and health. In a rapid glance she scanned his figurethat beamed with health and freshness. “Yes, he is happy andcontent!” she thought; “while I.... And that disgusting goodnature, which everyone likes him for and praises—I hate that good natureof his,” she thought. Her mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheekcontracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.“What do you want?” she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.“Dolly!” he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. “Anna iscoming today.”“Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!” she cried.“But you must, really, Dolly....”“Go away, go away, go away!” she shrieked, not looking at him, asthough this shriek were called up by physical pain.Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought of his wife, he could hopethat she would come round, as Matvey expressed it, and could quietly goon reading his paper and drinking his coffee; but when he saw her tortured,suffering face, heard the tone of her voice, submissive to fate and full ofdespair, there was a catch in his breath and a lump in his throat, and his eyesbegan to shine with tears.“My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!... Youknow....” He could not go on; there was a sob in his throat.She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.“Dolly, what can I say?... One thing: forgive.... Remember, cannot nineyears of my life atone for an instant....”She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as it werebeseeching him in some way or other to make her believe differently.“—instant of passion?” he said, and would have gone on, butat that word, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiffened again, andagain the muscles of her right cheek worked.“Go away, go out of the room!” she shrieked still more shrilly,“and don’t talk to me of your passion and yourloathsomeness.”She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair to supportherself. His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes were swimming with tears.“Dolly!” he said, sobbing now; “for mercy’s sake, thinkof the children; they are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make meexpiate my fault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to blame,no words can express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive me!”She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he was unutterablysorry for her. She tried several times to begin to speak, but could not. Hewaited.“You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I rememberthem, and know that this means their ruin,” she said—obviously oneof the phrases she had more than once repeated to herself in the course of thelast few days.She had called him “Stiva,” and he glanced at her with gratitude,and moved to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.“I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in theworld to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them. By takingthem away from their father, or by leaving them with a viciousfather—yes, a vicious father.... Tell me, after what ... has happened,can we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it possible?” sherepeated, raising her voice, “after my husband, the father of mychildren, enters into a love affair with his own children’sgoverness?”“But what could I do? what could I do?” he kept saying in a pitifulvoice, not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and lower.“You are loathsome to me, repulsive!” she shrieked, getting moreand more heated. “Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; youhave neither heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me, disgusting, astranger—yes, a complete stranger!” With pain and wrath she utteredthe word so terrible to herself—stranger.He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazed him. Hedid not understand how his pity for her exasperated her. She saw in himsympathy for her, but not love. “No, she hates me. She will not forgiveme,” he thought.“It is awful! awful!” he said.At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had fallendown. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenly softened.She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as though she didnot know where she was, and what she was doing, and getting up rapidly, shemoved towards the door.“Well, she loves my child,” he thought, noticing the change of herface at the child’s cry, “my child: how can she hate me?”“Dolly, one word more,” he said, following her.“If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! They mayall know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you may live herewith your mistress!”And she went out, slamming the door.Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued tread walked outof the room. “Matvey says she will come round; but how? I don’t seethe least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how vulgarly sheshouted,” he said to himself, remembering her shriek and thewords—“scoundrel” and “mistress.” “And verylikely the maids were listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!” StepanArkadyevitch stood a few seconds alone, wiped his face, squared his chest, andwalked out of the room.It was Friday, and in the dining-room the German watchmaker was winding up theclock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this punctual, baldwatchmaker, “that the German was wound up for a whole lifetime himself,to wind up watches,” and he smiled. Stepan Arkadyevitch was fond of ajoke: “And maybe she will come round! That’s a good expression,‘come round,’” he thought. “I must repeatthat.”“Matvey!” he shouted. “Arrange everything with Darya in thesitting room for Anna Arkadyevna,” he said to Matvey when he came in.“Yes, sir.”Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.“You won’t dine at home?” said Matvey, seeing him off.“That’s as it happens. But here’s for thehousekeeping,” he said, taking ten roubles from his pocketbook.“That’ll be enough.”“Enough or not enough, we must make it do,” said Matvey, slammingthe carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing from thesound of the carriage that he had gone off, went back again to her bedroom. Itwas her solitary refuge from the household cares which crowded upon herdirectly she went out from it. Even now, in the short time she had been in thenursery, the English governess and Matrona Philimonovna had succeeded inputting several questions to her, which did not admit of delay, and which onlyshe could answer: “What were the children to put on for their walk?Should they have any milk? Should not a new cook be sent for?”“Ah, let me alone, let me alone!” she said, and going back to herbedroom she sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking to herhusband, clasping tightly her thin hands with the rings that slipped down onher bony fingers, and fell to going over in her memory all the conversation.“He has gone! But has he broken it off with her?” she thought.“Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask him! No, no,reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house, we arestrangers—strangers forever!” She repeated again with specialsignificance the word so dreadful to her. “And how I loved him! my God,how I loved him!... How I loved him! And now don’t I love him?Don’t I love him more than before? The most horrible thing is,” shebegan, but did not finish her thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put herhead in at the door.“Let us send for my brother,” she said; “he can get a dinneranyway, or we shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again,like yesterday.”“Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send forsome new milk?”And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned hergrief in them for a time.Chapter 5Stepan Arkadyevitch had learned easily at school, thanks to his excellentabilities, but he had been idle and mischievous, and therefore was one of thelowest in his class. But in spite of his habitually dissipated mode of life,his inferior grade in the service, and his comparative youth, he occupied thehonorable and lucrative position of president of one of the government boardsat Moscow. This post he had received through his sister Anna’s husband,Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin, who held one of the most important positions inthe ministry to whose department the Moscow office belonged. But if Karenin hadnot got his brother-in-law this berth, then through a hundred otherpersonages—brothers, sisters, cousins, uncles, and aunts—StivaOblonsky would have received this post, or some other similar one, togetherwith the salary of six thousand absolutely needful for him, as his affairs, inspite of his wife’s considerable property, were in an embarrassedcondition.Half Moscow and Petersburg were friends and relations of Stepan Arkadyevitch.He was born in the midst of those who had been and are the powerful ones ofthis world. One-third of the men in the government, the older men, had beenfriends of his father’s, and had known him in petticoats; another thirdwere his intimate chums, and the remainder were friendly acquaintances.Consequently the distributors of earthly blessings in the shape of places,rents, shares, and such, were all his friends, and could not overlook one oftheir own set; and Oblonsky had no need to make any special exertion to get alucrative post. He had only not to refuse things, not to show jealousy, not tobe quarrelsome or take offense, all of which from his characteristic goodnature he never did. It would have struck him as absurd if he had been toldthat he would not get a position with the salary he required, especially as heexpected nothing out of the way; he only wanted what the men of his own age andstanding did get, and he was no worse qualified for performing duties of thekind than any other man.Stepan Arkadyevitch was not merely liked by all who knew him for his goodhumor, but for his bright disposition, and his unquestionable honesty. In him,in his handsome, radiant figure, his sparkling eyes, black hair and eyebrows,and the white and red of his face, there was something which produced aphysical effect of kindliness and good humor on the people who met him.“Aha! Stiva! Oblonsky! Here he is!” was almost always said with asmile of delight on meeting him. Even though it happened at times that after aconversation with him it seemed that nothing particularly delightful hadhappened, the next day, and the next, everyone was just as delighted at meetinghim again.After filling for three years the post of president of one of the governmentboards at Moscow, Stepan Arkadyevitch had won the respect, as well as theliking, of his fellow-officials, subordinates, and superiors, and all who hadhad business with him. The principal qualities in Stepan Arkadyevitch which hadgained him this universal respect in the service consisted, in the first place,of his extreme indulgence for others, founded on a consciousness of his ownshortcomings; secondly, of his perfect liberalism—not the liberalism heread of in the papers, but the liberalism that was in his blood, in virtue ofwhich he treated all men perfectly equally and exactly the same, whatever theirfortune or calling might be; and thirdly—the most importantpoint—his complete indifference to the business in which he was engaged,in consequence of which he was never carried away, and never made mistakes.On reaching the offices of the board, Stepan Arkadyevitch, escorted by adeferential porter with a portfolio, went into his little private room, put onhis uniform, and went into the boardroom. The clerks and copyists all rose,greeting him with good-humored deference. Stepan Arkadyevitch moved quickly, asever, to his place, shook hands with his colleagues, and sat down. He made ajoke or two, and talked just as much as was consistent with due decorum, andbegan work. No one knew better than Stepan Arkadyevitch how to hit on the exactline between freedom, simplicity, and official stiffness necessary for theagreeable conduct of business. A secretary, with the good-humored deferencecommon to everyone in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s office, came up with papers,and began to speak in the familiar and easy tone which had been introduced byStepan Arkadyevitch.“We have succeeded in getting the information from the governmentdepartment of Penza. Here, would you care?...”“You’ve got them at last?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, layinghis finger on the paper. “Now, gentlemen....”And the sitting of the board began.“If they knew,” he thought, bending his head with a significant airas he listened to the report, “what a guilty little boy their presidentwas half an hour ago.” And his eyes were laughing during the reading ofthe report. Till two o’clock the sitting would go on without a break, andat two o’clock there would be an interval and luncheon.It was not yet two, when the large glass doors of the boardroom suddenly openedand someone came in.All the officials sitting on the further side under the portrait of the Tsarand the eagle, delighted at any distraction, looked round at the door; but thedoorkeeper standing at the door at once drove out the intruder, and closed theglass door after him.When the case had been read through, Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and stretched,and by way of tribute to the liberalism of the times took out a cigarette inthe boardroom and went into his private room. Two of the members of the board,the old veteran in the service, Nikitin, and the KammerjunkerGrinevitch, went in with him.“We shall have time to finish after lunch,” said StepanArkadyevitch.“To be sure we shall!” said Nikitin.“A pretty sharp fellow this Fomin must be,” said Grinevitch of oneof the persons taking part in the case they were examining.Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned at Grinevitch’s words, giving him thereby tounderstand that it was improper to pass judgment prematurely, and made him noreply.“Who was that came in?” he asked the doorkeeper.“Someone, your excellency, crept in without permission directly my backwas turned. He was asking for you. I told him: when the members come out,then....”“Where is he?”“Maybe he’s gone into the passage, but here he comes anyway. Thatis he,” said the doorkeeper, pointing to a strongly built,broad-shouldered man with a curly beard, who, without taking off his sheepskincap, was running lightly and rapidly up the worn steps of the stone staircase.One of the members going down—a lean official with aportfolio—stood out of his way and looked disapprovingly at the legs ofthe stranger, then glanced inquiringly at Oblonsky.Stepan Arkadyevitch was standing at the top of the stairs. His good-naturedlybeaming face above the embroidered collar of his uniform beamed more than everwhen he recognized the man coming up.“Why, it’s actually you, Levin, at last!” he said with afriendly mocking smile, scanning Levin as he approached. “How is it youhave deigned to look me up in this den?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, andnot content with shaking hands, he kissed his friend. “Have you been herelong?”“I have just come, and very much wanted to see you,” said Levin,looking shyly and at the same time angrily and uneasily around.“Well, let’s go into my room,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, whoknew his friend’s sensitive and irritable shyness, and, taking his arm,he drew him along, as though guiding him through dangers.Stepan Arkadyevitch was on familiar terms with almost all his acquaintances,and called almost all of them by their Christian names: old men of sixty, boysof twenty, actors, ministers, merchants, and adjutant-generals, so that many ofhis intimate chums were to be found at the extreme ends of the social ladder,and would have been very much surprised to learn that they had, through themedium of Oblonsky, something in common. He was the familiar friend of everyonewith whom he took a glass of champagne, and he took a glass of champagne witheveryone, and when in consequence he met any of his disreputable chums, as heused in joke to call many of his friends, in the presence of his subordinates,he well knew how, with his characteristic tact, to diminish the disagreeableimpression made on them. Levin was not a disreputable chum, but Oblonsky, withhis ready tact, felt that Levin fancied he might not care to show his intimacywith him before his subordinates, and so he made haste to take him off into hisroom.Levin was almost of the same age as Oblonsky; their intimacy did not restmerely on champagne. Levin had been the friend and companion of his earlyyouth. They were fond of one another in spite of the difference of theircharacters and tastes, as friends are fond of one another who have beentogether in early youth. But in spite of this, each of them—as is oftenthe way with men who have selected careers of different kinds—though indiscussion he would even justify the other’s career, in his heartdespised it. It seemed to each of them that the life he led himself was theonly real life, and the life led by his friend was a mere phantasm. Oblonskycould not restrain a slight mocking smile at the sight of Levin. How often hehad seen him come up to Moscow from the country where he was doing something,but what precisely Stepan Arkadyevitch could never quite make out, and indeedhe took no interest in the matter. Levin arrived in Moscow always excited andin a hurry, rather ill at ease and irritated by his own want of ease, and forthe most part with a perfectly new, unexpected view of things. StepanArkadyevitch laughed at this, and liked it. In the same way Levin in his heartdespised the town mode of life of his friend, and his official duties, which helaughed at, and regarded as trifling. But the difference was that Oblonsky, ashe was doing the same as everyone did, laughed complacently and good-humoredly,while Levin laughed without complacency and sometimes angrily.“We have long been expecting you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, goinginto his room and letting Levin’s hand go as though to show that here alldanger was over. “I am very, very glad to see you,” he went on.“Well, how are you? Eh? When did you come?”Levin was silent, looking at the unknown faces of Oblonsky’s twocompanions, and especially at the hand of the elegant Grinevitch, which hadsuch long white fingers, such long yellow filbert-shaped nails, and such hugeshining studs on the shirt-cuff, that apparently they absorbed all hisattention, and allowed him no freedom of thought. Oblonsky noticed this atonce, and smiled.“Ah, to be sure, let me introduce you,” he said. “Mycolleagues: Philip Ivanitch Nikitin, Mihail StanislavitchGrinevitch”—and turning to Levin—“a district councilor,a modern district councilman, a gymnast who lifts thirteen stone with one hand,a cattle-breeder and sportsman, and my friend, Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin,the brother of Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev.”“Delighted,” said the veteran.“I have the honor of knowing your brother, Sergey Ivanovitch,” saidGrinevitch, holding out his slender hand with its long nails.Levin frowned, shook hands coldly, and at once turned to Oblonsky. Though hehad a great respect for his half-brother, an author well known to all Russia,he could not endure it when people treated him not as Konstantin Levin, but asthe brother of the celebrated Koznishev.“No, I am no longer a district councilor. I have quarreled with them all,and don’t go to the meetings any more,” he said, turning toOblonsky.“You’ve been quick about it!” said Oblonsky with a smile.“But how? why?”“It’s a long story. I will tell you some time,” said Levin,but he began telling him at once. “Well, to put it shortly, I wasconvinced that nothing was really done by the district councils, or ever couldbe,” he began, as though someone had just insulted him. “On oneside it’s a plaything; they play at being a parliament, and I’mneither young enough nor old enough to find amusement in playthings; and on theother side” (he stammered) “it’s a means for the coterie ofthe district to make money. Formerly they had wardships, courts of justice, nowthey have the district council—not in the form of bribes, but in the formof unearned salary,” he said, as hotly as though someone of those presenthad opposed his opinion.“Aha! You’re in a new phase again, I see—aconservative,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “However, we can go intothat later.”“Yes, later. But I wanted to see you,” said Levin, looking withhatred at Grinevitch’s hand.Stepan Arkadyevitch gave a scarcely perceptible smile.“How was it you used to say you would never wear European dressagain?” he said, scanning his new suit, obviously cut by a French tailor.“Ah! I see: a new phase.”Levin suddenly blushed, not as grown men blush, slightly, without beingthemselves aware of it, but as boys blush, feeling that they are ridiculousthrough their shyness, and consequently ashamed of it and blushing still more,almost to the point of tears. And it was so strange to see this sensible, manlyface in such a childish plight, that Oblonsky left off looking at him.“Oh, where shall we meet? You know I want very much to talk toyou,” said Levin.Oblonsky seemed to ponder.“I’ll tell you what: let’s go to Gurin’s to lunch, andthere we can talk. I am free till three.”“No,” answered Levin, after an instant’s thought, “Ihave got to go on somewhere else.”“All right, then, let’s dine together.”“Dine together? But I have nothing very particular, only a few words tosay, and a question I want to ask you, and we can have a talkafterwards.”“Well, say the few words, then, at once, and we’ll gossip afterdinner.”“Well, it’s this,” said Levin; “but it’s of noimportance, though.”His face all at once took an expression of anger from the effort he was makingto surmount his shyness.“What are the Shtcherbatskys doing? Everything as it used to be?”he said.Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had long known that Levin was in love with hissister-in-law, Kitty, gave a hardly perceptible smile, and his eyes sparkledmerrily.“You said a few words, but I can’t answer in a few words,because.... Excuse me a minute....”A secretary came in, with respectful familiarity and the modest consciousness,characteristic of every secretary, of superiority to his chief in the knowledgeof their business; he went up to Oblonsky with some papers, and began, underpretense of asking a question, to explain some objection. Stepan Arkadyevitch,without hearing him out, laid his hand genially on the secretary’ssleeve.“No, you do as I told you,” he said, softening his words with asmile, and with a brief explanation of his view of the matter he turned awayfrom the papers, and said: “So do it that way, if you please, ZaharNikititch.”The secretary retired in confusion. During the consultation with the secretaryLevin had completely recovered from his embarrassment. He was standing with hiselbows on the back of a chair, and on his face was a look of ironicalattention.“I don’t understand it, I don’t understand it,” hesaid.“What don’t you understand?” said Oblonsky, smiling asbrightly as ever, and picking up a cigarette. He expected some queer outburstfrom Levin.“I don’t understand what you are doing,” said Levin,shrugging his shoulders. “How can you do it seriously?”“Why not?”“Why, because there’s nothing in it.”“You think so, but we’re overwhelmed with work.”“On paper. But, there, you’ve a gift for it,” added Levin.“That’s to say, you think there’s a lack of something inme?”“Perhaps so,” said Levin. “But all the same I admire yourgrandeur, and am proud that I’ve a friend in such a great person.You’ve not answered my question, though,” he went on, with adesperate effort looking Oblonsky straight in the face.“Oh, that’s all very well. You wait a bit, and you’ll come tothis yourself. It’s very nice for you to have over six thousand acres inthe Karazinsky district, and such muscles, and the freshness of a girl oftwelve; still you’ll be one of us one day. Yes, as to your question,there is no change, but it’s a pity you’ve been away solong.”“Oh, why so?” Levin queried, panic-stricken.“Oh, nothing,” responded Oblonsky. “We’ll talk it over.But what’s brought you up to town?”“Oh, we’ll talk about that, too, later on,” said Levin,reddening again up to his ears.“All right. I see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I should askyou to come to us, you know, but my wife’s not quite the thing. But Itell you what; if you want to see them, they’re sure now to be at theZoological Gardens from four to five. Kitty skates. You drive along there, andI’ll come and fetch you, and we’ll go and dine somewheretogether.”“Capital. So good-bye till then.”“Now mind, you’ll forget, I know you, or rush off home to thecountry!” Stepan Arkadyevitch called out laughing.“No, truly!”And Levin went out of the room, only when he was in the doorway rememberingthat he had forgotten to take leave of Oblonsky’s colleagues.“That gentleman must be a man of great energy,” said Grinevitch,when Levin had gone away.“Yes, my dear boy,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, nodding his head,“he’s a lucky fellow! Over six thousand acres in the Karazinskydistrict; everything before him; and what youth and vigor! Not like some ofus.”“You have a great deal to complain of, haven’t you, StepanArkadyevitch?”“Ah, yes, I’m in a poor way, a bad way,” said StepanArkadyevitch with a heavy sigh.Chapter 6When Oblonsky asked Levin what had brought him to town, Levin blushed, and wasfurious with himself for blushing, because he could not answer, “I havecome to make your sister-in-law an offer,” though that was precisely whathe had come for.The families of the Levins and the Shtcherbatskys were old, noble Moscowfamilies, and had always been on intimate and friendly terms. This intimacy hadgrown still closer during Levin’s student days. He had both prepared forthe university with the young Prince Shtcherbatsky, the brother of Kitty andDolly, and had entered at the same time with him. In those days Levin usedoften to be in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, and he was in love with theShtcherbatsky household. Strange as it may appear, it was with the household,the family, that Konstantin Levin was in love, especially with the femininehalf of the household. Levin did not remember his own mother, and his onlysister was older than he was, so that it was in the Shtcherbatskys’ housethat he saw for the first time that inner life of an old, noble, cultivated,and honorable family of which he had been deprived by the death of his fatherand mother. All the members of that family, especially the feminine half, werepictured by him, as it were, wrapped about with a mysterious poetical veil, andhe not only perceived no defects whatever in them, but under the poetical veilthat shrouded them he assumed the existence of the loftiest sentiments andevery possible perfection. Why it was the three young ladies had one day tospeak French, and the next English; why it was that at certain hours theyplayed by turns on the piano, the sounds of which were audible in theirbrother’s room above, where the students used to work; why they werevisited by those professors of French literature, of music, of drawing, ofdancing; why at certain hours all the three young ladies, with MademoiselleLinon, drove in the coach to the Tversky boulevard, dressed in their satincloaks, Dolly in a long one, Natalia in a half-long one, and Kitty in one soshort that her shapely legs in tightly-drawn red stockings were visible to allbeholders; why it was they had to walk about the Tversky boulevard escorted bya footman with a gold cockade in his hat—all this and much more that wasdone in their mysterious world he did not understand, but he was sure thateverything that was done there was very good, and he was in love precisely withthe mystery of the proceedings.In his student days he had all but been in love with the eldest, Dolly, but shewas soon married to Oblonsky. Then he began being in love with the second. Hefelt, as it were, that he had to be in love with one of the sisters, only hecould not quite make out which. But Natalia, too, had hardly made herappearance in the world when she married the diplomat Lvov. Kitty was still achild when Levin left the university. Young Shtcherbatsky went into the navy,was drowned in the Baltic, and Levin’s relations with the Shtcherbatskys,in spite of his friendship with Oblonsky, became less intimate. But when earlyin the winter of this year Levin came to Moscow, after a year in the country,and saw the Shtcherbatskys, he realized which of the three sisters he wasindeed destined to love.One would have thought that nothing could be simpler than for him, a man ofgood family, rather rich than poor, and thirty-two years old, to make the youngPrincess Shtcherbatskaya an offer of marriage; in all likelihood he would atonce have been looked upon as a good match. But Levin was in love, and so itseemed to him that Kitty was so perfect in every respect that she was acreature far above everything earthly; and that he was a creature so low and soearthly that it could not even be conceived that other people and she herselfcould regard him as worthy of her.After spending two months in Moscow in a state of enchantment, seeing Kittyalmost every day in society, into which he went so as to meet her, he abruptlydecided that it could not be, and went back to the country.Levin’s conviction that it could not be was founded on the idea that inthe eyes of her family he was a disadvantageous and worthless match for thecharming Kitty, and that Kitty herself could not love him. In herfamily’s eyes he had no ordinary, definite career and position insociety, while his contemporaries by this time, when he was thirty-two, werealready, one a colonel, and another a professor, another director of a bank andrailways, or president of a board like Oblonsky. But he (he knew very well howhe must appear to others) was a country gentleman, occupied in breeding cattle,shooting game, and building barns; in other words, a fellow of no ability, whohad not turned out well, and who was doing just what, according to the ideas ofthe world, is done by people fit for nothing else.The mysterious, enchanting Kitty herself could not love such an ugly person ashe conceived himself to be, and, above all, such an ordinary, in no waystriking person. Moreover, his attitude to Kitty in the past—the attitudeof a grown-up person to a child, arising from his friendship with herbrother—seemed to him yet another obstacle to love. An ugly, good-naturedman, as he considered himself, might, he supposed, be liked as a friend; but tobe loved with such a love as that with which he loved Kitty, one would need tobe a handsome and, still more, a distinguished man.He had heard that women often did care for ugly and ordinary men, but he didnot believe it, for he judged by himself, and he could not himself have lovedany but beautiful, mysterious, and exceptional women.But after spending two months alone in the country, he was convinced that thiswas not one of those passions of which he had had experience in his earlyyouth; that this feeling gave him not an instant’s rest; that he couldnot live without deciding the question, would she or would she not be his wife,and that his despair had arisen only from his own imaginings, that he had nosort of proof that he would be rejected. And he had now come to Moscow with afirm determination to make an offer, and get married if he were accepted. Or... he could not conceive what would become of him if he were rejected.Chapter 7On arriving in Moscow by a morning train, Levin had put up at the house of hiselder half-brother, Koznishev. After changing his clothes he went down to hisbrother’s study, intending to talk to him at once about the object of hisvisit, and to ask his advice; but his brother was not alone. With him there wasa well-known professor of philosophy, who had come from Harkov expressly toclear up a difference that had arisen between them on a very importantphilosophical question. The professor was carrying on a hot crusade againstmaterialists. Sergey Koznishev had been following this crusade with interest,and after reading the professor’s last article, he had written him aletter stating his objections. He accused the professor of making too greatconcessions to the materialists. And the professor had promptly appeared toargue the matter out. The point in discussion was the question then in vogue:Is there a line to be drawn between psychological and physiological phenomenain man? and if so, where?Sergey Ivanovitch met his brother with the smile of chilly friendliness healways had for everyone, and introducing him to the professor, went on with theconversation.A little man in spectacles, with a narrow forehead, tore himself from thediscussion for an instant to greet Levin, and then went on talking withoutpaying any further attention to him. Levin sat down to wait till the professorshould go, but he soon began to get interested in the subject under discussion.Levin had come across the magazine articles about which they were disputing,and had read them, interested in them as a development of the first principlesof science, familiar to him as a natural science student at the university. Buthe had never connected these scientific deductions as to the origin of man asan animal, as to reflex action, biology, and sociology, with those questions asto the meaning of life and death to himself, which had of late been more andmore often in his mind.As he listened to his brother’s argument with the professor, he noticedthat they connected these scientific questions with those spiritual problems,that at times they almost touched on the latter; but every time they were closeupon what seemed to him the chief point, they promptly beat a hasty retreat,and plunged again into a sea of subtle distinctions, reservations, quotations,allusions, and appeals to authorities, and it was with difficulty that heunderstood what they were talking about.“I cannot admit it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, with his habitualclearness, precision of expression, and elegance of phrase. “I cannot inany case agree with Keiss that my whole conception of the external world hasbeen derived from perceptions. The most fundamental idea, the idea ofexistence, has not been received by me through sensation; indeed, there is nospecial sense-organ for the transmission of such an idea.”“Yes, but they—Wurt, and Knaust, and Pripasov—would answerthat your consciousness of existence is derived from the conjunction of allyour sensations, that that consciousness of existence is the result of yoursensations. Wurt, indeed, says plainly that, assuming there are no sensations,it follows that there is no idea of existence.”“I maintain the contrary,” began Sergey Ivanovitch.But here it seemed to Levin that just as they were close upon the real point ofthe matter, they were again retreating, and he made up his mind to put aquestion to the professor.“According to that, if my senses are annihilated, if my body is dead, Ican have no existence of any sort?” he queried.The professor, in annoyance, and, as it were, mental suffering at theinterruption, looked round at the strange inquirer, more like a bargeman than aphilosopher, and turned his eyes upon Sergey Ivanovitch, as though to ask:What’s one to say to him? But Sergey Ivanovitch, who had been talkingwith far less heat and one-sidedness than the professor, and who had sufficientbreadth of mind to answer the professor, and at the same time to comprehend thesimple and natural point of view from which the question was put, smiled andsaid:“That question we have no right to answer as yet.”“We have not the requisite data,” chimed in the professor, and hewent back to his argument. “No,” he said; “I would point outthe fact that if, as Pripasov directly asserts, perception is based onsensation, then we are bound to distinguish sharply between these twoconceptions.”Levin listened no more, and simply waited for the professor to go.Chapter 8When the professor had gone, Sergey Ivanovitch turned to his brother.“Delighted that you’ve come. For some time, is it? How’s yourfarming getting on?”Levin knew that his elder brother took little interest in farming, and only putthe question in deference to him, and so he only told him about the sale of hiswheat and money matters.Levin had meant to tell his brother of his determination to get married, and toask his advice; he had indeed firmly resolved to do so. But after seeing hisbrother, listening to his conversation with the professor, hearing afterwardsthe unconsciously patronizing tone in which his brother questioned him aboutagricultural matters (their mother’s property had not been divided, andLevin took charge of both their shares), Levin felt that he could not for somereason begin to talk to him of his intention of marrying. He felt that hisbrother would not look at it as he would have wished him to.“Well, how is your district council doing?” asked SergeyIvanovitch, who was greatly interested in these local boards and attached greatimportance to them.“I really don’t know.”“What! Why, surely you’re a member of the board?”“No, I’m not a member now; I’ve resigned,” answeredLevin, “and I no longer attend the meetings.”“What a pity!” commented Sergey Ivanovitch, frowning.Levin in self-defense began to describe what took place in the meetings in hisdistrict.“That’s how it always is!” Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.“We Russians are always like that. Perhaps it’s our strong point,really, the faculty of seeing our own shortcomings; but we overdo it, wecomfort ourselves with irony which we always have on the tip of our tongues.All I say is, give such rights as our local self-government to any otherEuropean people—why, the Germans or the English would have worked theirway to freedom from them, while we simply turn them into ridicule.”“But how can it be helped?” said Levin penitently. “It was mylast effort. And I did try with all my soul. I can’t. I’m no goodat it.”“It’s not that you’re no good at it,” said SergeyIvanovitch; “it is that you don’t look at it as you should.”“Perhaps not,” Levin answered dejectedly.“Oh! do you know brother Nikolay’s turned up again?”This brother Nikolay was the elder brother of Konstantin Levin, andhalf-brother of Sergey Ivanovitch; a man utterly ruined, who had dissipated thegreater part of his fortune, was living in the strangest and lowest company,and had quarreled with his brothers.“What did you say?” Levin cried with horror. “How do youknow?”“Prokofy saw him in the street.”“Here in Moscow? Where is he? Do you know?” Levin got up from hischair, as though on the point of starting off at once.“I am sorry I told you,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his headat his younger brother’s excitement. “I sent to find out where heis living, and sent him his IOU to Trubin, which I paid. This is the answer hesent me.”And Sergey Ivanovitch took a note from under a paper-weight and handed it tohis brother.Levin read in the queer, familiar handwriting: “I humbly beg you to leaveme in peace. That’s the only favor I ask of my graciousbrothers.—Nikolay Levin.”Levin read it, and without raising his head stood with the note in his handsopposite Sergey Ivanovitch.There was a struggle in his heart between the desire to forget his unhappybrother for the time, and the consciousness that it would be base to do so.“He obviously wants to offend me,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch;“but he cannot offend me, and I should have wished with all my heart toassist him, but I know it’s impossible to do that.”“Yes, yes,” repeated Levin. “I understand and appreciate yourattitude to him; but I shall go and see him.”“If you want to, do; but I shouldn’t advise it,” said SergeyIvanovitch. “As regards myself, I have no fear of your doing so; he willnot make you quarrel with me; but for your own sake, I should say you would dobetter not to go. You can’t do him any good; still, do as youplease.”“Very likely I can’t do any good, but I feel—especially atsuch a moment—but that’s another thing—I feel I could not beat peace.”“Well, that I don’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.“One thing I do understand,” he added; “it’s a lessonin humility. I have come to look very differently and more charitably on whatis called infamous since brother Nikolay has become what he is ... you knowwhat he did....”“Oh, it’s awful, awful!” repeated Levin.After obtaining his brother’s address from Sergey Ivanovitch’sfootman, Levin was on the point of setting off at once to see him, but onsecond thought he decided to put off his visit till the evening. The firstthing to do to set his heart at rest was to accomplish what he had come toMoscow for. From his brother’s Levin went to Oblonsky’s office, andon getting news of the Shtcherbatskys from him, he drove to the place where hehad been told he might find Kitty.Chapter 9At four o’clock, conscious of his throbbing heart, Levin stepped out of ahired sledge at the Zoological Gardens, and turned along the path to the frozenmounds and the skating ground, knowing that he would certainly find her there,as he had seen the Shtcherbatskys’ carriage at the entrance.It was a bright, frosty day. Rows of carriages, sledges, drivers, and policemenwere standing in the approach. Crowds of well-dressed people, with hats brightin the sun, swarmed about the entrance and along the well-swept little pathsbetween the little houses adorned with carving in the Russian style. The oldcurly birches of the gardens, all their twigs laden with snow, looked as thoughfreshly decked in sacred vestments.He walked along the path towards the skating-ground, and kept saying tohimself—“You mustn’t be excited, you must be calm.What’s the matter with you? What do you want? Be quiet, stupid,” heconjured his heart. And the more he tried to compose himself, the morebreathless he found himself. An acquaintance met him and called him by hisname, but Levin did not even recognize him. He went towards the mounds, whencecame the clank of the chains of sledges as they slipped down or were draggedup, the rumble of the sliding sledges, and the sounds of merry voices. Hewalked on a few steps, and the skating-ground lay open before his eyes, and atonce, amidst all the skaters, he knew her.He knew she was there by the rapture and the terror that seized on his heart.She was standing talking to a lady at the opposite end of the ground. There wasapparently nothing striking either in her dress or her attitude. But for Levinshe was as easy to find in that crowd as a rose among nettles. Everything wasmade bright by her. She was the smile that shed light on all round her.“Is it possible I can go over there on the ice, go up to her?” hethought. The place where she stood seemed to him a holy shrine, unapproachable,and there was one moment when he was almost retreating, so overwhelmed was hewith terror. He had to make an effort to master himself, and to remind himselfthat people of all sorts were moving about her, and that he too might comethere to skate. He walked down, for a long while avoiding looking at her as atthe sun, but seeing her, as one does the sun, without looking.On that day of the week and at that time of day people of one set, allacquainted with one another, used to meet on the ice. There were crack skatersthere, showing off their skill, and learners clinging to chairs with timid,awkward movements, boys, and elderly people skating with hygienic motives. Theyseemed to Levin an elect band of blissful beings because they were here, nearher. All the skaters, it seemed, with perfect self-possession, skated towardsher, skated by her, even spoke to her, and were happy, quite apart from her,enjoying the capital ice and the fine weather.Nikolay Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in a short jacket and tighttrousers, was sitting on a garden seat with his skates on. Seeing Levin, heshouted to him:“Ah, the first skater in Russia! Been here long? First-rate ice—doput your skates on.”“I haven’t got my skates,” Levin answered, marveling at thisboldness and ease in her presence, and not for one second losing sight of her,though he did not look at her. He felt as though the sun were coming near him.She was in a corner, and turning out her slender feet in their high boots withobvious timidity, she skated towards him. A boy in Russian dress, desperatelywaving his arms and bowed down to the ground, overtook her. She skated a littleuncertainly; taking her hands out of the little muff that hung on a cord, sheheld them ready for emergency, and looking towards Levin, whom she hadrecognized, she smiled at him, and at her own fears. When she had got round theturn, she gave herself a push off with one foot, and skated straight up toShtcherbatsky. Clutching at his arm, she nodded smiling to Levin. She was moresplendid than he had imagined her.When he thought of her, he could call up a vivid picture of her to himself,especially the charm of that little fair head, so freely set on the shapelygirlish shoulders, and so full of childish brightness and good humor. Thechildishness of her expression, together with the delicate beauty of herfigure, made up her special charm, and that he fully realized. But what alwaysstruck him in her as something unlooked for, was the expression of her eyes,soft, serene, and truthful, and above all, her smile, which always transportedLevin to an enchanted world, where he felt himself softened and tender, as heremembered himself in some days of his early childhood.“Have you been here long?” she said, giving him her hand.“Thank you,” she added, as he picked up the handkerchief that hadfallen out of her muff.“I? I’ve not long ... yesterday ... I mean today ... Iarrived,” answered Levin, in his emotion not at once understanding herquestion. “I was meaning to come and see you,” he said; and then,recollecting with what intention he was trying to see her, he was promptlyovercome with confusion and blushed.“I didn’t know you could skate, and skate so well.”She looked at him earnestly, as though wishing to make out the cause of hisconfusion.“Your praise is worth having. The tradition is kept up here that you arethe best of skaters,” she said, with her little black-gloved handbrushing a grain of hoarfrost off her muff.“Yes, I used once to skate with passion; I wanted to reachperfection.”“You do everything with passion, I think,” she said smiling.“I should so like to see how you skate. Put on skates, and let us skatetogether.”“Skate together! Can that be possible?” thought Levin, gazing ather.“I’ll put them on directly,” he said.And he went off to get skates.“It’s a long while since we’ve seen you here, sir,”said the attendant, supporting his foot, and screwing on the heel of the skate.“Except you, there’s none of the gentlemen first-rate skaters. Willthat be all right?” said he, tightening the strap.“Oh, yes, yes; make haste, please,” answered Levin, with difficultyrestraining the smile of rapture which would overspread his face.“Yes,” he thought, “this now is life, this is happiness!Together, she said; let us skate together! Speak to her now? Butthat’s just why I’m afraid to speak—because I’m happynow, happy in hope, anyway.... And then?... But I must! I must! I must! Awaywith weakness!”Levin rose to his feet, took off his overcoat, and scurrying over the rough iceround the hut, came out on the smooth ice and skated without effort, as itwere, by simple exercise of will, increasing and slackening speed and turninghis course. He approached with timidity, but again her smile reassured him.She gave him her hand, and they set off side by side, going faster and faster,and the more rapidly they moved the more tightly she grasped his hand.“With you I should soon learn; I somehow feel confidence in you,”she said to him.“And I have confidence in myself when you are leaning on me,” hesaid, but was at once panic-stricken at what he had said, and blushed. Andindeed, no sooner had he uttered these words, when all at once, like the sungoing behind a cloud, her face lost all its friendliness, and Levin detectedthe familiar change in her expression that denoted the working of thought; acrease showed on her smooth brow.“Is there anything troubling you?—though I’ve no right to asksuch a question,” he added hurriedly.“Oh, why so?... No, I have nothing to trouble me,” she respondedcoldly; and she added immediately: “You haven’t seen Mlle. Linon,have you?”“Not yet.”“Go and speak to her, she likes you so much.”“What’s wrong? I have offended her. Lord help me!” thoughtLevin, and he flew towards the old Frenchwoman with the gray ringlets, who wassitting on a bench. Smiling and showing her false teeth, she greeted him as anold friend.“Yes, you see we’re growing up,” she said to him, glancingtowards Kitty, “and growing old. Tiny bear has grown bignow!” pursued the Frenchwoman, laughing, and she reminded him of his jokeabout the three young ladies whom he had compared to the three bears in theEnglish nursery tale. “Do you remember that’s what you used to callthem?”He remembered absolutely nothing, but she had been laughing at the joke for tenyears now, and was fond of it.“Now, go and skate, go and skate. Our Kitty has learned to skate nicely,hasn’t she?”When Levin darted up to Kitty her face was no longer stern; her eyes looked athim with the same sincerity and friendliness, but Levin fancied that in herfriendliness there was a certain note of deliberate composure. And he feltdepressed. After talking a little of her old governess and her peculiarities,she questioned him about his life.“Surely you must be dull in the country in the winter, aren’tyou?” she said.“No, I’m not dull, I am very busy,” he said, feeling that shewas holding him in check by her composed tone, which he would not have theforce to break through, just as it had been at the beginning of the winter.“Are you going to stay in town long?” Kitty questioned him.“I don’t know,” he answered, not thinking of what he wassaying. The thought that if he were held in check by her tone of quietfriendliness he would end by going back again without deciding anything cameinto his mind, and he resolved to make a struggle against it.“How is it you don’t know?”“I don’t know. It depends upon you,” he said, and wasimmediately horror-stricken at his own words.Whether it was that she had heard his words, or that she did not want to hearthem, she made a sort of stumble, twice struck out, and hurriedly skated awayfrom him. She skated up to Mlle. Linon, said something to her, and went towardsthe pavilion where the ladies took off their skates.“My God! what have I done! Merciful God! help me, guide me,” saidLevin, praying inwardly, and at the same time, feeling a need of violentexercise, he skated about describing inner and outer circles.At that moment one of the young men, the best of the skaters of the day, cameout of the coffee-house in his skates, with a cigarette in his mouth. Taking arun, he dashed down the steps in his skates, crashing and bounding up and down.He flew down, and without even changing the position of his hands, skated awayover the ice.“Ah, that’s a new trick!” said Levin, and he promptly ran upto the top to do this new trick.“Don’t break your neck! it needs practice!” NikolayShtcherbatsky shouted after him.Levin went to the steps, took a run from above as best he could, and dasheddown, preserving his balance in this unwonted movement with his hands. On thelast step he stumbled, but barely touching the ice with his hand, with aviolent effort recovered himself, and skated off, laughing.“How splendid, how nice he is!” Kitty was thinking at that time, asshe came out of the pavilion with Mlle. Linon, and looked towards him with asmile of quiet affection, as though he were a favorite brother. “And canit be my fault, can I have done anything wrong? They talk of flirtation. I knowit’s not he that I love; but still I am happy with him, and he’s sojolly. Only, why did he say that?...” she mused.Catching sight of Kitty going away, and her mother meeting her at the steps,Levin, flushed from his rapid exercise, stood still and pondered a minute. Hetook off his skates, and overtook the mother and daughter at the entrance ofthe gardens.“Delighted to see you,” said Princess Shtcherbatskaya. “OnThursdays we are home, as always.”“Today, then?”“We shall be pleased to see you,” the princess said stiffly.This stiffness hurt Kitty, and she could not resist the desire to smooth overher mother’s coldness. She turned her head, and with a smile said:“Good-bye till this evening.”At that moment Stepan Arkadyevitch, his hat cocked on one side, with beamingface and eyes, strode into the garden like a conquering hero. But as heapproached his mother-in-law, he responded in a mournful and crestfallen toneto her inquiries about Dolly’s health. After a little subdued anddejected conversation with his mother-in-law, he threw out his chest again, andput his arm in Levin’s.“Well, shall we set off?” he asked. “I’ve been thinkingabout you all this time, and I’m very, very glad you’vecome,” he said, looking him in the face with a significant air.“Yes, come along,” answered Levin in ecstasy, hearing unceasinglythe sound of that voice saying, “Good-bye till this evening,” andseeing the smile with which it was said.“To the England or the Hermitage?”“I don’t mind which.”“All right, then, the England,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, selectingthat restaurant because he owed more there than at the Hermitage, andconsequently considered it mean to avoid it. “Have you got a sledge?That’s first-rate, for I sent my carriage home.”The friends hardly spoke all the way. Levin was wondering what that change inKitty’s expression had meant, and alternately assuring himself that therewas hope, and falling into despair, seeing clearly that his hopes were insane,and yet all the while he felt himself quite another man, utterly unlike what hehad been before her smile and those words, “Good-bye till thisevening.”Stepan Arkadyevitch was absorbed during the drive in composing the menu of thedinner.“You like turbot, don’t you?” he said to Levin as they werearriving.“Eh?” responded Levin. “Turbot? Yes, I’m awfullyfond of turbot.”Chapter 10When Levin went into the restaurant with Oblonsky, he could not help noticing acertain peculiarity of expression, as it were, a restrained radiance, about theface and whole figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch. Oblonsky took off his overcoat,and with his hat over one ear walked into the dining-room, giving directions tothe Tatar waiters, who were clustered about him in evening coats, bearingnapkins. Bowing to right and left to the people he met, and here as everywherejoyously greeting acquaintances, he went up to the sideboard for a preliminaryappetizer of fish and vodka, and said to the painted Frenchwoman decked inribbons, lace, and ringlets, behind the counter, something so amusing that eventhat Frenchwoman was moved to genuine laughter. Levin for his part refrainedfrom taking any vodka simply because he felt such a loathing of thatFrenchwoman, all made up, it seemed, of false hair, poudre de riz, andvinaigre de toilette. He made haste to move away from her, as from adirty place. His whole soul was filled with memories of Kitty, and there was asmile of triumph and happiness shining in his eyes.“This way, your excellency, please. Your excellency won’t bedisturbed here,” said a particularly pertinacious, white-headed old Tatarwith immense hips and coat-tails gaping widely behind. “Walk in, yourexcellency,” he said to Levin; by way of showing his respect to StepanArkadyevitch, being attentive to his guest as well.Instantly flinging a fresh cloth over the round table under the bronzechandelier, though it already had a table cloth on it, he pushed up velvetchairs, and came to a standstill before Stepan Arkadyevitch with a napkin and abill of fare in his hands, awaiting his commands.“If you prefer it, your excellency, a private room will be free directly;Prince Golistin with a lady. Fresh oysters have come in.”“Ah! oysters.”Stepan Arkadyevitch became thoughtful.“How if we were to change our program, Levin?” he said, keeping hisfinger on the bill of fare. And his face expressed serious hesitation.“Are the oysters good? Mind now.”“They’re Flensburg, your excellency. We’ve no Ostend.”“Flensburg will do, but are they fresh?”“Only arrived yesterday.”“Well, then, how if we were to begin with oysters, and so change thewhole program? Eh?”“It’s all the same to me. I should like cabbage soup and porridgebetter than anything; but of course there’s nothing like thathere.”“Porridge à la Russe, your honor would like?” said theTatar, bending down to Levin, like a nurse speaking to a child.“No, joking apart, whatever you choose is sure to be good. I’vebeen skating, and I’m hungry. And don’t imagine,” he added,detecting a look of dissatisfaction on Oblonsky’s face, “that Ishan’t appreciate your choice. I am fond of good things.”“I should hope so! After all, it’s one of the pleasures oflife,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Well, then, my friend, you giveus two—or better say three—dozen oysters, clear soup withvegetables....”“Printanière,” prompted the Tatar. But Stepan Arkadyevitchapparently did not care to allow him the satisfaction of giving the Frenchnames of the dishes.“With vegetables in it, you know. Then turbot with thick sauce, then ...roast beef; and mind it’s good. Yes, and capons, perhaps, and thensweets.”The Tatar, recollecting that it was Stepan Arkadyevitch’s way not to callthe dishes by the names in the French bill of fare, did not repeat them afterhim, but could not resist rehearsing the whole menu to himself according to thebill:—“Soupe printanière, turbot, sauce Beaumarchais, poulard àl’estragon, macédoine de fruits ... etc.,” and then instantly,as though worked by springs, laying down one bound bill of fare, he took upanother, the list of wines, and submitted it to Stepan Arkadyevitch.“What shall we drink?”“What you like, only not too much. Champagne,” said Levin.“What! to start with? You’re right though, I dare say. Do you likethe white seal?”“Cachet blanc,” prompted the Tatar.“Very well, then, give us that brand with the oysters, and thenwe’ll see.”“Yes, sir. And what table wine?”“You can give us Nuits. Oh, no, better the classic Chablis.”“Yes, sir. And your cheese, your excellency?”“Oh, yes, Parmesan. Or would you like another?”“No, it’s all the same to me,” said Levin, unable to suppressa smile.And the Tatar ran off with flying coat-tails, and in five minutes darted inwith a dish of opened oysters on mother-of-pearl shells, and a bottle betweenhis fingers.Stepan Arkadyevitch crushed the starchy napkin, tucked it into his waistcoat,and settling his arms comfortably, started on the oysters.“Not bad,” he said, stripping the oysters from the pearly shellwith a silver fork, and swallowing them one after another. “Notbad,” he repeated, turning his dewy, brilliant eyes from Levin to theTatar.Levin ate the oysters indeed, though white bread and cheese would have pleasedhim better. But he was admiring Oblonsky. Even the Tatar, uncorking the bottleand pouring the sparkling wine into the delicate glasses, glanced at StepanArkadyevitch, and settled his white cravat with a perceptible smile ofsatisfaction.“You don’t care much for oysters, do you?” said StepanArkadyevitch, emptying his wine-glass, “or you’re worried aboutsomething. Eh?”He wanted Levin to be in good spirits. But it was not that Levin was not ingood spirits; he was ill at ease. With what he had in his soul, he felt soreand uncomfortable in the restaurant, in the midst of private rooms where menwere dining with ladies, in all this fuss and bustle; the surroundings ofbronzes, looking-glasses, gas, and waiters—all of it was offensive tohim. He was afraid of sullying what his soul was brimful of.“I? Yes, I am; but besides, all this bothers me,” he said.“You can’t conceive how queer it all seems to a country person likeme, as queer as that gentleman’s nails I saw at your place....”“Yes, I saw how much interested you were in poor Grinevitch’snails,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing.“It’s too much for me,” responded Levin. “Do try, now,and put yourself in my place, take the point of view of a country person. We inthe country try to bring our hands into such a state as will be most convenientfor working with. So we cut our nails; sometimes we turn up our sleeves. Andhere people purposely let their nails grow as long as they will, and link onsmall saucers by way of studs, so that they can do nothing with theirhands.”Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled gaily.“Oh, yes, that’s just a sign that he has no need to do coarse work.His work is with the mind....”“Maybe. But still it’s queer to me, just as at this moment it seemsqueer to me that we country folks try to get our meals over as soon as we can,so as to be ready for our work, while here are we trying to drag out our mealas long as possible, and with that object eating oysters....”“Why, of course,” objected Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Butthat’s just the aim of civilization—to make everything a source ofenjoyment.”“Well, if that’s its aim, I’d rather be a savage.”“And so you are a savage. All you Levins are savages.”Levin sighed. He remembered his brother Nikolay, and felt ashamed and sore, andhe scowled; but Oblonsky began speaking of a subject which at once drew hisattention.“Oh, I say, are you going tonight to our people, theShtcherbatskys’, I mean?” he said, his eyes sparkling significantlyas he pushed away the empty rough shells, and drew the cheese towards him.“Yes, I shall certainly go,” replied Levin; “though I fanciedthe princess was not very warm in her invitation.”“What nonsense! That’s her manner.... Come, boy, the soup!...That’s her manner—grande dame,” said StepanArkadyevitch. “I’m coming, too, but I have to go to the CountessBonina’s rehearsal. Come, isn’t it true that you’re a savage?How do you explain the sudden way in which you vanished from Moscow? TheShtcherbatskys were continually asking me about you, as though I ought to know.The only thing I know is that you always do what no one else does.”“Yes,” said Levin, slowly and with emotion, “you’reright. I am a savage. Only, my savageness is not in having gone away, but incoming now. Now I have come....”“Oh, what a lucky fellow you are!” broke in Stepan Arkadyevitch,looking into Levin’s eyes.“Why?”“‘I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,And by his eyes I know a youth in love,’”declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Everything is before you.”“Why, is it over for you already?”“No; not over exactly, but the future is yours, and the present is mine,and the present—well, it’s not all that it might be.”“How so?”“Oh, things go wrong. But I don’t want to talk of myself, andbesides I can’t explain it all,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Well, why have you come to Moscow, then?... Hi! take away!” hecalled to the Tatar.“You guess?” responded Levin, his eyes like deep wells of lightfixed on Stepan Arkadyevitch.“I guess, but I can’t be the first to talk about it. You can see bythat whether I guess right or wrong,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gazing atLevin with a subtle smile.“Well, and what have you to say to me?” said Levin in a quiveringvoice, feeling that all the muscles of his face were quivering too. “Howdo you look at the question?”Stepan Arkadyevitch slowly emptied his glass of Chablis, never taking his eyesoff Levin.“I?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “there’s nothing Idesire so much as that—nothing! It would be the best thing that couldbe.”“But you’re not making a mistake? You know what we’respeaking of?” said Levin, piercing him with his eyes. “You thinkit’s possible?”“I think it’s possible. Why not possible?”“No! do you really think it’s possible? No, tell me all you think!Oh, but if ... if refusal’s in store for me!... Indeed I feelsure....”“Why should you think that?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling athis excitement.“It seems so to me sometimes. That will be awful for me, and for hertoo.”“Oh, well, anyway there’s nothing awful in it for a girl. Everygirl’s proud of an offer.”“Yes, every girl, but not she.”Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He so well knew that feeling of Levin’s, thatfor him all the girls in the world were divided into two classes: oneclass—all the girls in the world except her, and those girls with allsorts of human weaknesses, and very ordinary girls: the other class—shealone, having no weaknesses of any sort and higher than all humanity.“Stay, take some sauce,” he said, holding back Levin’s handas it pushed away the sauce.Levin obediently helped himself to sauce, but would not let Stepan Arkadyevitchgo on with his dinner.“No, stop a minute, stop a minute,” he said. “You mustunderstand that it’s a question of life and death for me. I have neverspoken to anyone of this. And there’s no one I could speak of it to,except you. You know we’re utterly unlike each other, different tastesand views and everything; but I know you’re fond of me and understand me,and that’s why I like you awfully. But for God’s sake, be quitestraightforward with me.”“I tell you what I think,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.“But I’ll say more: my wife is a wonderful woman....” StepanArkadyevitch sighed, remembering his position with his wife, and, after amoment’s silence, resumed—“She has a gift of foreseeingthings. She sees right through people; but that’s not all; she knows whatwill come to pass, especially in the way of marriages. She foretold, forinstance, that Princess Shahovskaya would marry Brenteln. No one would believeit, but it came to pass. And she’s on your side.”“How do you mean?”“It’s not only that she likes you—she says that Kitty iscertain to be your wife.”At these words Levin’s face suddenly lighted up with a smile, a smile notfar from tears of emotion.“She says that!” cried Levin. “I always said she wasexquisite, your wife. There, that’s enough, enough said about it,”he said, getting up from his seat.“All right, but do sit down.”But Levin could not sit down. He walked with his firm tread twice up and downthe little cage of a room, blinked his eyelids that his tears might not fall,and only then sat down to the table.“You must understand,” said he, “it’s not love.I’ve been in love, but it’s not that. It’s not my feeling,but a sort of force outside me has taken possession of me. I went away, yousee, because I made up my mind that it could never be, you understand, as ahappiness that does not come on earth; but I’ve struggled with myself, Isee there’s no living without it. And it must be settled.”“What did you go away for?”“Ah, stop a minute! Ah, the thoughts that come crowding on one! Thequestions one must ask oneself! Listen. You can’t imagine whatyou’ve done for me by what you said. I’m so happy that I’vebecome positively hateful; I’ve forgotten everything. I heard today thatmy brother Nikolay ... you know, he’s here ... I had even forgotten him.It seems to me that he’s happy too. It’s a sort of madness. But onething’s awful.... Here, you’ve been married, you know the feeling... it’s awful that we—old—with a past ... not of love, butof sins ... are brought all at once so near to a creature pure and innocent;it’s loathsome, and that’s why one can’t help feeling oneselfunworthy.”“Oh, well, you’ve not many sins on your conscience.”“Alas! all the same,” said Levin, “when with loathing I goover my life, I shudder and curse and bitterly regret it.... Yes.”“What would you have? The world’s made so,” said StepanArkadyevitch.“The one comfort is like that prayer, which I always liked:‘Forgive me not according to my unworthiness, but according to Thyloving-kindness.’ That’s the only way she can forgive me.”Chapter 11Levin emptied his glass, and they were silent for a while.“There’s one other thing I ought to tell you. Do you knowVronsky?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Levin.“No, I don’t. Why do you ask?”“Give us another bottle,” Stepan Arkadyevitch directed the Tatar,who was filling up their glasses and fidgeting round them just when he was notwanted.“Why you ought to know Vronsky is that he’s one of yourrivals.”“Who’s Vronsky?” said Levin, and his face was suddenlytransformed from the look of childlike ecstasy which Oblonsky had just beenadmiring to an angry and unpleasant expression.“Vronsky is one of the sons of Count Kirill Ivanovitch Vronsky, and oneof the finest specimens of the gilded youth of Petersburg. I made hisacquaintance in Tver when I was there on official business, and he came therefor the levy of recruits. Fearfully rich, handsome, great connections, anaide-de-camp, and with all that a very nice, good-natured fellow. Buthe’s more than simply a good-natured fellow, as I’ve found outhere—he’s a cultivated man, too, and very intelligent; he’s aman who’ll make his mark.”Levin scowled and was dumb.“Well, he turned up here soon after you’d gone, and as I can see,he’s over head and ears in love with Kitty, and you know that hermother....”“Excuse me, but I know nothing,” said Levin, frowning gloomily. Andimmediately he recollected his brother Nikolay and how hateful he was to havebeen able to forget him.“You wait a bit, wait a bit,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling andtouching his hand. “I’ve told you what I know, and I repeat that inthis delicate and tender matter, as far as one can conjecture, I believe thechances are in your favor.”Levin dropped back in his chair; his face was pale.“But I would advise you to settle the thing as soon as may be,”pursued Oblonsky, filling up his glass.“No, thanks, I can’t drink any more,” said Levin, pushingaway his glass. “I shall be drunk.... Come, tell me how are you gettingon?” he went on, obviously anxious to change the conversation.“One word more: in any case I advise you to settle the question soon.Tonight I don’t advise you to speak,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Go round tomorrow morning, make an offer in due form, and God blessyou....”“Oh, do you still think of coming to me for some shooting? Come nextspring, do,” said Levin.Now his whole soul was full of remorse that he had begun this conversation withStepan Arkadyevitch. A feeling such as his was profaned by talk of the rivalryof some Petersburg officer, of the suppositions and the counsels of StepanArkadyevitch.Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. He knew what was passing in Levin’s soul.“I’ll come some day,” he said. “But women, my boy,they’re the pivot everything turns upon. Things are in a bad way with me,very bad. And it’s all through women. Tell me frankly now,” hepursued, picking up a cigar and keeping one hand on his glass; “give meyour advice.”“Why, what is it?”“I’ll tell you. Suppose you’re married, you love your wife,but you’re fascinated by another woman....”“Excuse me, but I’m absolutely unable to comprehend how ... just asI can’t comprehend how I could now, after my dinner, go straight to abaker’s shop and steal a roll.”Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled more than usual.“Why not? A roll will sometimes smell so good one can’t resistit.”“Himmlisch ist’s, wenn ich bezwungen    Meine irdische Begier;Aber doch wenn’s nich gelungen    Hatt’ ich auch recht hübsch Plaisir!”As he said this, Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled subtly. Levin, too, could not helpsmiling.“Yes, but joking apart,” resumed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “youmust understand that the woman is a sweet, gentle loving creature, poor andlonely, and has sacrificed everything. Now, when the thing’s done,don’t you see, can one possibly cast her off? Even supposing one partsfrom her, so as not to break up one’s family life, still, can one helpfeeling for her, setting her on her feet, softening her lot?”“Well, you must excuse me there. You know to me all women are dividedinto two classes ... at least no ... truer to say: there are women and thereare ... I’ve never seen exquisite fallen beings, and I never shall seethem, but such creatures as that painted Frenchwoman at the counter with theringlets are vermin to my mind, and all fallen women are the same.”“But the Magdalen?”“Ah, drop that! Christ would never have said those words if He had knownhow they would be abused. Of all the Gospel those words are the only onesremembered. However, I’m not saying so much what I think, as what I feel.I have a loathing for fallen women. You’re afraid of spiders, and I ofthese vermin. Most likely you’ve not made a study of spiders anddon’t know their character; and so it is with me.”“It’s very well for you to talk like that; it’s very muchlike that gentleman in Dickens who used to fling all difficult questions overhis right shoulder. But to deny the facts is no answer. What’s to bedone—you tell me that, what’s to be done? Your wife gets older,while you’re full of life. Before you’ve time to look round, youfeel that you can’t love your wife with love, however much you may esteemher. And then all at once love turns up, and you’re done for, donefor,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said with weary despair.Levin half smiled.“Yes, you’re done for,” resumed Oblonsky. “Butwhat’s to be done?”“Don’t steal rolls.”Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed outright.“Oh, moralist! But you must understand, there are two women; one insistsonly on her rights, and those rights are your love, which you can’t giveher; and the other sacrifices everything for you and asks for nothing. What areyou to do? How are you to act? There’s a fearful tragedy in it.”“If you care for my profession of faith as regards that, I’ll tellyou that I don’t believe there was any tragedy about it. And this is why.To my mind, love ... both the sorts of love, which you remember Plato definesin his Banquet, served as the test of men. Some men only understand one sort,and some only the other. And those who only know the non-platonic love have noneed to talk of tragedy. In such love there can be no sort of tragedy.‘I’m much obliged for the gratification, my humblerespects’—that’s all the tragedy. And in platonic love therecan be no tragedy, because in that love all is clear and pure,because....”At that instant Levin recollected his own sins and the inner conflict he hadlived through. And he added unexpectedly:“But perhaps you are right. Very likely ... I don’t know, Idon’t know.”“It’s this, don’t you see,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,“you’re very much all of a piece. That’s your strong pointand your failing. You have a character that’s all of a piece, and youwant the whole of life to be of a piece too—but that’s not how itis. You despise public official work because you want the reality to beinvariably corresponding all the while with the aim—and that’s nothow it is. You want a man’s work, too, always to have a defined aim, andlove and family life always to be undivided—and that’s not how itis. All the variety, all the charm, all the beauty of life is made up of lightand shadow.”Levin sighed and made no reply. He was thinking of his own affairs, and did nothear Oblonsky.And suddenly both of them felt that though they were friends, though they hadbeen dining and drinking together, which should have drawn them closer, yeteach was thinking only of his own affairs, and they had nothing to do with oneanother. Oblonsky had more than once experienced this extreme sense ofaloofness, instead of intimacy, coming on after dinner, and he knew what to doin such cases.“Bill!” he called, and he went into the next room where he promptlycame across an aide-de-camp of his acquaintance and dropped into conversationwith him about an actress and her protector. And at once in the conversationwith the aide-de-camp Oblonsky had a sense of relaxation and relief after theconversation with Levin, which always put him to too great a mental andspiritual strain.When the Tatar appeared with a bill for twenty-six roubles and odd kopecks,besides a tip for himself, Levin, who would another time have been horrified,like anyone from the country, at his share of fourteen roubles, did not noticeit, paid, and set off homewards to dress and go to the Shtcherbatskys’there to decide his fate.Chapter 12The young Princess Kitty Shtcherbatskaya was eighteen. It was the first winterthat she had been out in the world. Her success in society had been greaterthan that of either of her elder sisters, and greater even than her mother hadanticipated. To say nothing of the young men who danced at the Moscow ballsbeing almost all in love with Kitty, two serious suitors had already this firstwinter made their appearance: Levin, and immediately after his departure, CountVronsky.Levin’s appearance at the beginning of the winter, his frequent visits,and evident love for Kitty, had led to the first serious conversations betweenKitty’s parents as to her future, and to disputes between them. Theprince was on Levin’s side; he said he wished for nothing better forKitty. The princess for her part, going round the question in the mannerpeculiar to women, maintained that Kitty was too young, that Levin had donenothing to prove that he had serious intentions, that Kitty felt no greatattraction to him, and other side issues; but she did not state the principalpoint, which was that she looked for a better match for her daughter, and thatLevin was not to her liking, and she did not understand him. When Levin hadabruptly departed, the princess was delighted, and said to her husbandtriumphantly: “You see I was right.” When Vronsky appeared on thescene, she was still more delighted, confirmed in her opinion that Kitty was tomake not simply a good, but a brilliant match.In the mother’s eyes there could be no comparison between Vronsky andLevin. She disliked in Levin his strange and uncompromising opinions and hisshyness in society, founded, as she supposed, on his pride and his queer sortof life, as she considered it, absorbed in cattle and peasants. She did notvery much like it that he, who was in love with her daughter, had kept comingto the house for six weeks, as though he were waiting for something,inspecting, as though he were afraid he might be doing them too great an honorby making an offer, and did not realize that a man, who continually visits at ahouse where there is a young unmarried girl, is bound to make his intentionsclear. And suddenly, without doing so, he disappeared. “It’s aswell he’s not attractive enough for Kitty to have fallen in love withhim,” thought the mother.Vronsky satisfied all the mother’s desires. Very wealthy, clever, ofaristocratic family, on the highroad to a brilliant career in the army and atcourt, and a fascinating man. Nothing better could be wished for.Vronsky openly flirted with Kitty at balls, danced with her, and camecontinually to the house, consequently there could be no doubt of theseriousness of his intentions. But, in spite of that, the mother had spent thewhole of that winter in a state of terrible anxiety and agitation.Princess Shtcherbatskaya had herself been married thirty years ago, her auntarranging the match. Her husband, about whom everything was well knownbeforehand, had come, looked at his future bride, and been looked at. Thematchmaking aunt had ascertained and communicated their mutual impression.That impression had been favorable. Afterwards, on a day fixed beforehand, theexpected offer was made to her parents, and accepted. All had passed verysimply and easily. So it seemed, at least, to the princess. But over her owndaughters she had felt how far from simple and easy is the business, apparentlyso commonplace, of marrying off one’s daughters. The panics that had beenlived through, the thoughts that had been brooded over, the money that had beenwasted, and the disputes with her husband over marrying the two elder girls,Darya and Natalia! Now, since the youngest had come out, she was going throughthe same terrors, the same doubts, and still more violent quarrels with herhusband than she had over the elder girls. The old prince, like all fathersindeed, was exceedingly punctilious on the score of the honor and reputation ofhis daughters. He was irrationally jealous over his daughters, especially overKitty, who was his favorite. At every turn he had scenes with the princess forcompromising her daughter. The princess had grown accustomed to this alreadywith her other daughters, but now she felt that there was more ground for theprince’s touchiness. She saw that of late years much was changed in themanners of society, that a mother’s duties had become still moredifficult. She saw that girls of Kitty’s age formed some sort of clubs,went to some sort of lectures, mixed freely in men’s society; drove aboutthe streets alone, many of them did not curtsey, and, what was the mostimportant thing, all the girls were firmly convinced that to choose theirhusbands was their own affair, and not their parents’. “Marriagesaren’t made nowadays as they used to be,” was thought and said byall these young girls, and even by their elders. But how marriages were madenow, the princess could not learn from anyone. The French fashion—of theparents arranging their children’s future—was not accepted; it wascondemned. The English fashion of the complete independence of girls was alsonot accepted, and not possible in Russian society. The Russian fashion ofmatchmaking by the offices of intermediate persons was for some reasonconsidered unseemly; it was ridiculed by everyone, and by the princess herself.But how girls were to be married, and how parents were to marry them, no oneknew. Everyone with whom the princess had chanced to discuss the matter saidthe same thing: “Mercy on us, it’s high time in our day to cast offall that old-fashioned business. It’s the young people have to marry; andnot their parents; and so we ought to leave the young people to arrange it asthey choose.” It was very easy for anyone to say that who had nodaughters, but the princess realized that in the process of getting to knoweach other, her daughter might fall in love, and fall in love with someone whodid not care to marry her or who was quite unfit to be her husband. And,however much it was instilled into the princess that in our times young peopleought to arrange their lives for themselves, she was unable to believe it, justas she would have been unable to believe that, at any time whatever, the mostsuitable playthings for children five years old ought to be loaded pistols. Andso the princess was more uneasy over Kitty than she had been over her eldersisters.Now she was afraid that Vronsky might confine himself to simply flirting withher daughter. She saw that her daughter was in love with him, but tried tocomfort herself with the thought that he was an honorable man, and would not dothis. But at the same time she knew how easy it is, with the freedom of mannersof today, to turn a girl’s head, and how lightly men generally regardsuch a crime. The week before, Kitty had told her mother of a conversation shehad with Vronsky during a mazurka. This conversation had partly reassured theprincess; but perfectly at ease she could not be. Vronsky had told Kitty thatboth he and his brother were so used to obeying their mother that they nevermade up their minds to any important undertaking without consulting her.“And just now, I am impatiently awaiting my mother’s arrival fromPetersburg, as peculiarly fortunate,” he told her.Kitty had repeated this without attaching any significance to the words. Buther mother saw them in a different light. She knew that the old lady wasexpected from day to day, that she would be pleased at her son’s choice,and she felt it strange that he should not make his offer through fear ofvexing his mother. However, she was so anxious for the marriage itself, andstill more for relief from her fears, that she believed it was so. Bitter as itwas for the princess to see the unhappiness of her eldest daughter, Dolly, onthe point of leaving her husband, her anxiety over the decision of her youngestdaughter’s fate engrossed all her feelings. Today, with Levin’sreappearance, a fresh source of anxiety arose. She was afraid that herdaughter, who had at one time, as she fancied, a feeling for Levin, might, fromextreme sense of honor, refuse Vronsky, and that Levin’s arrival mightgenerally complicate and delay the affair so near being concluded.“Why, has he been here long?” the princess asked about Levin, asthey returned home.“He came today, mamma.”“There’s one thing I want to say....” began the princess, andfrom her serious and alert face, Kitty guessed what it would be.“Mamma,” she said, flushing hotly and turning quickly to her,“please, please don’t say anything about that. I know, I know allabout it.”She wished for what her mother wished for, but the motives of hermother’s wishes wounded her.“I only want to say that to raise hopes....”“Mamma, darling, for goodness’ sake, don’t talk about it.It’s so horrible to talk about it.”“I won’t,” said her mother, seeing the tears in herdaughter’s eyes; “but one thing, my love; you promised me you wouldhave no secrets from me. You won’t?”“Never, mamma, none,” answered Kitty, flushing a little, andlooking her mother straight in the face, “but there’s no use in mytelling you anything, and I ... I ... if I wanted to, I don’t know whatto say or how.... I don’t know....”“No, she could not tell an untruth with those eyes,” thought themother, smiling at her agitation and happiness. The princess smiled that whatwas taking place just now in her soul seemed to the poor child so immense andso important.Chapter 13After dinner, and till the beginning of the evening, Kitty was feeling asensation akin to the sensation of a young man before a battle. Her heartthrobbed violently, and her thoughts would not rest on anything.She felt that this evening, when they would both meet for the first time, wouldbe a turning point in her life. And she was continually picturing them toherself, at one moment each separately, and then both together. When she musedon the past, she dwelt with pleasure, with tenderness, on the memories of herrelations with Levin. The memories of childhood and of Levin’s friendshipwith her dead brother gave a special poetic charm to her relations with him.His love for her, of which she felt certain, was flattering and delightful toher; and it was pleasant for her to think of Levin. In her memories of Vronskythere always entered a certain element of awkwardness, though he was in thehighest degree well-bred and at ease, as though there were some falsenote—not in Vronsky, he was very simple and nice, but in herself, whilewith Levin she felt perfectly simple and clear. But, on the other hand,directly she thought of the future with Vronsky, there arose before her aperspective of brilliant happiness; with Levin the future seemed misty.When she went upstairs to dress, and looked into the looking-glass, she noticedwith joy that it was one of her good days, and that she was in completepossession of all her forces,—she needed this so for what lay before her:she was conscious of external composure and free grace in her movements.At half-past seven she had only just gone down into the drawing-room, when thefootman announced, “Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin.” The princesswas still in her room, and the prince had not come in. “So it is tobe,” thought Kitty, and all the blood seemed to rush to her heart. Shewas horrified at her paleness, as she glanced into the looking-glass. At thatmoment she knew beyond doubt that he had come early on purpose to find heralone and to make her an offer. And only then for the first time the wholething presented itself in a new, different aspect; only then she realized thatthe question did not affect her only—with whom she would be happy, andwhom she loved—but that she would have that moment to wound a man whomshe liked. And to wound him cruelly. What for? Because he, dear fellow, lovedher, was in love with her. But there was no help for it, so it must be, so itwould have to be.“My God! shall I myself really have to say it to him?” she thought.“Can I tell him I don’t love him? That will be a lie. What am I tosay to him? That I love someone else? No, that’s impossible. I’mgoing away, I’m going away.”She had reached the door, when she heard his step. “No! it’s nothonest. What have I to be afraid of? I have done nothing wrong. What is to be,will be! I’ll tell the truth. And with him one can’t be ill atease. Here he is,” she said to herself, seeing his powerful, shy figure,with his shining eyes fixed on her. She looked straight into his face, asthough imploring him to spare her, and gave her hand.“It’s not time yet; I think I’m too early,” he saidglancing round the empty drawing-room. When he saw that his expectations wererealized, that there was nothing to prevent him from speaking, his face becamegloomy.“Oh, no,” said Kitty, and sat down at the table.“But this was just what I wanted, to find you alone,” he began, notsitting down, and not looking at her, so as not to lose courage.“Mamma will be down directly. She was very much tired....Yesterday....”She talked on, not knowing what her lips were uttering, and not taking hersupplicating and caressing eyes off him.He glanced at her; she blushed, and ceased speaking.“I told you I did not know whether I should be here long ... that itdepended on you....”She dropped her head lower and lower, not knowing herself what answer sheshould make to what was coming.“That it depended on you,” he repeated. “I meant to say ... Imeant to say ... I came for this ... to be my wife!” he brought out, notknowing what he was saying; but feeling that the most terrible thing was said,he stopped short and looked at her....She was breathing heavily, not looking at him. She was feeling ecstasy. Hersoul was flooded with happiness. She had never anticipated that the utteranceof love would produce such a powerful effect on her. But it lasted only aninstant. She remembered Vronsky. She lifted her clear, truthful eyes, andseeing his desperate face, she answered hastily:“That cannot be ... forgive me.”A moment ago, and how close she had been to him, of what importance in hislife! And how aloof and remote from him she had become now!“It was bound to be so,” he said, not looking at her.He bowed, and was meaning to retreat.Chapter 14But at that very moment the princess came in. There was a look of horror on herface when she saw them alone, and their disturbed faces. Levin bowed to her,and said nothing. Kitty did not speak nor lift her eyes. “Thank God, shehas refused him,” thought the mother, and her face lighted up with thehabitual smile with which she greeted her guests on Thursdays. She sat down andbegan questioning Levin about his life in the country. He sat down again,waiting for other visitors to arrive, in order to retreat unnoticed.Five minutes later there came in a friend of Kitty’s, married thepreceding winter, Countess Nordston.She was a thin, sallow, sickly, and nervous woman, with brilliant black eyes.She was fond of Kitty, and her affection for her showed itself, as theaffection of married women for girls always does, in the desire to make a matchfor Kitty after her own ideal of married happiness; she wanted her to marryVronsky. Levin she had often met at the Shtcherbatskys’ early in thewinter, and she had always disliked him. Her invariable and favorite pursuit,when they met, consisted in making fun of him.“I do like it when he looks down at me from the height of his grandeur,or breaks off his learned conversation with me because I’m a fool, or iscondescending to me. I like that so; to see him condescending! I am so glad hecan’t bear me,” she used to say of him.She was right, for Levin actually could not bear her, and despised her for whatshe was proud of and regarded as a fine characteristic—her nervousness,her delicate contempt and indifference for everything coarse and earthly.The Countess Nordston and Levin got into that relation with one another notseldom seen in society, when two persons, who remain externally on friendlyterms, despise each other to such a degree that they cannot even take eachother seriously, and cannot even be offended by each other.The Countess Nordston pounced upon Levin at once.“Ah, Konstantin Dmitrievitch! So you’ve come back to our corruptBabylon,” she said, giving him her tiny, yellow hand, and recalling whathe had chanced to say early in the winter, that Moscow was a Babylon.“Come, is Babylon reformed, or have you degenerated?” she added,glancing with a simper at Kitty.“It’s very flattering for me, countess, that you remember my wordsso well,” responded Levin, who had succeeded in recovering his composure,and at once from habit dropped into his tone of joking hostility to theCountess Nordston. “They must certainly make a great impression onyou.”“Oh, I should think so! I always note them all down. Well, Kitty, haveyou been skating again?...”And she began talking to Kitty. Awkward as it was for Levin to withdraw now, itwould still have been easier for him to perpetrate this awkwardness than toremain all the evening and see Kitty, who glanced at him now and then andavoided his eyes. He was on the point of getting up, when the princess,noticing that he was silent, addressed him.“Shall you be long in Moscow? You’re busy with the districtcouncil, though, aren’t you, and can’t be away for long?”“No, princess, I’m no longer a member of the council,” hesaid. “I have come up for a few days.”“There’s something the matter with him,” thought CountessNordston, glancing at his stern, serious face. “He isn’t in his oldargumentative mood. But I’ll draw him out. I do love making a fool of himbefore Kitty, and I’ll do it.”“Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” she said to him, “do explain tome, please, what’s the meaning of it. You know all about such things. Athome in our village of Kaluga all the peasants and all the women have drunk upall they possessed, and now they can’t pay us any rent. What’s themeaning of that? You always praise the peasants so.”At that instant another lady came into the room, and Levin got up.“Excuse me, countess, but I really know nothing about it, and can’ttell you anything,” he said, and looked round at the officer who came inbehind the lady.“That must be Vronsky,” thought Levin, and, to be sure of it,glanced at Kitty. She had already had time to look at Vronsky, and looked roundat Levin. And simply from the look in her eyes, that grew unconsciouslybrighter, Levin knew that she loved that man, knew it as surely as if she hadtold him so in words. But what sort of a man was he? Now, whether for good orfor ill, Levin could not choose but remain; he must find out what the man waslike whom she loved.There are people who, on meeting a successful rival, no matter in what, are atonce disposed to turn their backs on everything good in him, and to see onlywhat is bad. There are people, on the other hand, who desire above all to findin that lucky rival the qualities by which he has outstripped them, and seekwith a throbbing ache at heart only what is good. Levin belonged to the secondclass. But he had no difficulty in finding what was good and attractive inVronsky. It was apparent at the first glance. Vronsky was a squarely built,dark man, not very tall, with a good-humored, handsome, and exceedingly calmand resolute face. Everything about his face and figure, from his short-croppedblack hair and freshly shaven chin down to his loosely fitting, brand-newuniform, was simple and at the same time elegant. Making way for the lady whohad come in, Vronsky went up to the princess and then to Kitty.As he approached her, his beautiful eyes shone with a specially tender light,and with a faint, happy, and modestly triumphant smile (so it seemed to Levin),bowing carefully and respectfully over her, he held out his small broad hand toher.Greeting and saying a few words to everyone, he sat down without once glancingat Levin, who had never taken his eyes off him.“Let me introduce you,” said the princess, indicating Levin.“Konstantin Dmitrievitch Levin, Count Alexey Kirillovitch Vronsky.”Vronsky got up and, looking cordially at Levin, shook hands with him.“I believe I was to have dined with you this winter,” he said,smiling his simple and open smile; “but you had unexpectedly left for thecountry.”“Konstantin Dmitrievitch despises and hates town and ustownspeople,” said Countess Nordston.“My words must make a deep impression on you, since you remember them sowell,” said Levin, and, suddenly conscious that he had said just the samething before, he reddened.Vronsky looked at Levin and Countess Nordston, and smiled.“Are you always in the country?” he inquired. “I should thinkit must be dull in the winter.”“It’s not dull if one has work to do; besides, one’s not dullby oneself,” Levin replied abruptly.“I am fond of the country,” said Vronsky, noticing, and affectingnot to notice, Levin’s tone.“But I hope, count, you would not consent to live in the countryalways,” said Countess Nordston.“I don’t know; I have never tried for long. I experienced a queerfeeling once,” he went on. “I never longed so for the country,Russian country, with bast shoes and peasants, as when I was spending a winterwith my mother in Nice. Nice itself is dull enough, you know. And indeed,Naples and Sorrento are only pleasant for a short time. And it’s justthere that Russia comes back to me most vividly, and especially the country.It’s as though....”He talked on, addressing both Kitty and Levin, turning his serene, friendlyeyes from one to the other, and saying obviously just what came into his head.Noticing that Countess Nordston wanted to say something, he stopped shortwithout finishing what he had begun, and listened attentively to her.The conversation did not flag for an instant, so that the princess, who alwayskept in reserve, in case a subject should be lacking, two heavy guns—therelative advantages of classical and of modern education, and universalmilitary service—had not to move out either of them, while CountessNordston had not a chance of chaffing Levin.Levin wanted to, and could not, take part in the general conversation; sayingto himself every instant, “Now go,” he still did not go, as thoughwaiting for something.The conversation fell upon table-turning and spirits, and Countess Nordston,who believed in spiritualism, began to describe the marvels she had seen.“Ah, countess, you really must take me, for pity’s sake do take meto see them! I have never seen anything extraordinary, though I am always onthe lookout for it everywhere,” said Vronsky, smiling.“Very well, next Saturday,” answered Countess Nordston. “Butyou, Konstantin Dmitrievitch, do you believe in it?” she asked Levin.“Why do you ask me? You know what I shall say.”“But I want to hear your opinion.”“My opinion,” answered Levin, “is only that thistable-turning simply proves that educated society—so called—is nohigher than the peasants. They believe in the evil eye, and in witchcraft andomens, while we....”“Oh, then you don’t believe in it?”“I can’t believe in it, countess.”“But if I’ve seen it myself?”“The peasant women too tell us they have seen goblins.”“Then you think I tell a lie?”And she laughed a mirthless laugh.“Oh, no, Masha, Konstantin Dmitrievitch said he could not believe init,” said Kitty, blushing for Levin, and Levin saw this, and, still moreexasperated, would have answered, but Vronsky with his bright frank smilerushed to the support of the conversation, which was threatening to becomedisagreeable.“You do not admit the conceivability at all?” he queried.“But why not? We admit the existence of electricity, of which we knownothing. Why should there not be some new force, still unknown to us,which....”“When electricity was discovered,” Levin interrupted hurriedly,“it was only the phenomenon that was discovered, and it was unknown fromwhat it proceeded and what were its effects, and ages passed before itsapplications were conceived. But the spiritualists have begun with tableswriting for them, and spirits appearing to them, and have only later startedsaying that it is an unknown force.”Vronsky listened attentively to Levin, as he always did listen, obviouslyinterested in his words.“Yes, but the spiritualists say we don’t know at present what thisforce is, but there is a force, and these are the conditions in which it acts.Let the scientific men find out what the force consists in. No, I don’tsee why there should not be a new force, if it....”“Why, because with electricity,” Levin interrupted again,“every time you rub tar against wool, a recognized phenomenon ismanifested, but in this case it does not happen every time, and so it followsit is not a natural phenomenon.”Feeling probably that the conversation was taking a tone too serious for adrawing-room, Vronsky made no rejoinder, but by way of trying to change theconversation, he smiled brightly, and turned to the ladies.“Do let us try at once, countess,” he said; but Levin would finishsaying what he thought.“I think,” he went on, “that this attempt of thespiritualists to explain their marvels as some sort of new natural force ismost futile. They boldly talk of spiritual force, and then try to subject it tomaterial experiment.”Everyone was waiting for him to finish, and he felt it.“And I think you would be a first-rate medium,” said CountessNordston; “there’s something enthusiastic in you.”Levin opened his mouth, was about to say something, reddened, and said nothing.“Do let us try table-turning at once, please,” said Vronsky.“Princess, will you allow it?”And Vronsky stood up, looking for a little table.Kitty got up to fetch a table, and as she passed, her eyes met Levin’s.She felt for him with her whole heart, the more because she was pitying him forsuffering of which she was herself the cause. “If you can forgive me,forgive me,” said her eyes, “I am so happy.”“I hate them all, and you, and myself,” his eyes responded, and hetook up his hat. But he was not destined to escape. Just as they were arrangingthemselves round the table, and Levin was on the point of retiring, the oldprince came in, and after greeting the ladies, addressed Levin.“Ah!” he began joyously. “Been here long, my boy? Ididn’t even know you were in town. Very glad to see you.” The oldprince embraced Levin, and talking to him did not observe Vronsky, who hadrisen, and was serenely waiting till the prince should turn to him.Kitty felt how distasteful her father’s warmth was to Levin after whathad happened. She saw, too, how coldly her father responded at last toVronsky’s bow, and how Vronsky looked with amiable perplexity at herfather, as though trying and failing to understand how and why anyone could behostilely disposed towards him, and she flushed.“Prince, let us have Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said CountessNordston; “we want to try an experiment.”“What experiment? Table-turning? Well, you must excuse me, ladies andgentlemen, but to my mind it is better fun to play the ring game,” saidthe old prince, looking at Vronsky, and guessing that it had been hissuggestion. “There’s some sense in that, anyway.”Vronsky looked wonderingly at the prince with his resolute eyes, and, with afaint smile, began immediately talking to Countess Nordston of the great ballthat was to come off next week.“I hope you will be there?” he said to Kitty. As soon as the oldprince turned away from him, Levin went out unnoticed, and the last impressionhe carried away with him of that evening was the smiling, happy face of Kittyanswering Vronsky’s inquiry about the ball.Chapter 15At the end of the evening Kitty told her mother of her conversation with Levin,and in spite of all the pity she felt for Levin, she was glad at the thoughtthat she had received an offer. She had no doubt that she had actedrightly. But after she had gone to bed, for a long while she could not sleep.One impression pursued her relentlessly. It was Levin’s face, with hisscowling brows, and his kind eyes looking out in dark dejection below them, ashe stood listening to her father, and glancing at her and at Vronsky. And shefelt so sorry for him that tears came into her eyes. But immediately shethought of the man for whom she had given him up. She vividly recalled hismanly, resolute face, his noble self-possession, and the good natureconspicuous in everything towards everyone. She remembered the love for her ofthe man she loved, and once more all was gladness in her soul, and she lay onthe pillow, smiling with happiness. “I’m sorry, I’m sorry;but what could I do? It’s not my fault,” she said to herself; butan inner voice told her something else. Whether she felt remorse at having wonLevin’s love, or at having refused him, she did not know. But herhappiness was poisoned by doubts. “Lord, have pity on us; Lord, have pityon us; Lord, have pity on us!” she repeated to herself, till she fellasleep.Meanwhile there took place below, in the prince’s little library, one ofthe scenes so often repeated between the parents on account of their favoritedaughter.“What? I’ll tell you what!” shouted the prince, waving hisarms, and at once wrapping his squirrel-lined dressing-gown round him again.“That you’ve no pride, no dignity; that you’re disgracing,ruining your daughter by this vulgar, stupid matchmaking!”“But, really, for mercy’s sake, prince, what have I done?”said the princess, almost crying.She, pleased and happy after her conversation with her daughter, had gone tothe prince to say good-night as usual, and though she had no intention oftelling him of Levin’s offer and Kitty’s refusal, still she hintedto her husband that she fancied things were practically settled with Vronsky,and that he would declare himself so soon as his mother arrived. And thereupon,at those words, the prince had all at once flown into a passion, and began touse unseemly language.“What have you done? I’ll tell you what. First of all, you’retrying to catch an eligible gentleman, and all Moscow will be talking of it,and with good reason. If you have evening parties, invite everyone, don’tpick out the possible suitors. Invite all the young bucks. Engage a pianoplayer, and let them dance, and not as you do things nowadays, hunting up goodmatches. It makes me sick, sick to see it, and you’ve gone on tillyou’ve turned the poor wench’s head. Levin’s a thousand timesthe better man. As for this little Petersburg swell, they’re turned outby machinery, all on one pattern, and all precious rubbish. But if he were aprince of the blood, my daughter need not run after anyone.”“But what have I done?”“Why, you’ve....” The prince was crying wrathfully.“I know if one were to listen to you,” interrupted the princess,“we should never marry our daughter. If it’s to be so, we’dbetter go into the country.”“Well, and we had better.”“But do wait a minute. Do I try and catch them? I don’t try tocatch them in the least. A young man, and a very nice one, has fallen in lovewith her, and she, I fancy....”“Oh, yes, you fancy! And how if she really is in love, and he’s nomore thinking of marriage than I am!... Oh, that I should live to see it! Ah!spiritualism! Ah! Nice! Ah! the ball!” And the prince, imagining that hewas mimicking his wife, made a mincing curtsey at each word. “And this ishow we’re preparing wretchedness for Kitty; and she’s really gotthe notion into her head....”“But what makes you suppose so?”“I don’t suppose; I know. We have eyes for such things, thoughwomen-folk haven’t. I see a man who has serious intentions, that’sLevin: and I see a peacock, like this feather-head, who’s only amusinghimself.”“Oh, well, when once you get an idea into your head!...”“Well, you’ll remember my words, but too late, just as withDolly.”“Well, well, we won’t talk of it,” the princess stopped him,recollecting her unlucky Dolly.“By all means, and good-night!”And signing each other with the cross, the husband and wife parted with a kiss,feeling that they each remained of their own opinion.The princess had at first been quite certain that that evening had settledKitty’s future, and that there could be no doubt of Vronsky’sintentions, but her husband’s words had disturbed her. And returning toher own room, in terror before the unknown future, she, too, like Kitty,repeated several times in her heart, “Lord, have pity; Lord, have pity;Lord, have pity.”Chapter 16Vronsky had never had a real home life. His mother had been in her youth abrilliant society woman, who had had during her married life, and still moreafterwards, many love affairs notorious in the whole fashionable world. Hisfather he scarcely remembered, and he had been educated in the Corps of Pages.Leaving the school very young as a brilliant officer, he had at once got intothe circle of wealthy Petersburg army men. Although he did go more or less intoPetersburg society, his love affairs had always hitherto been outside it.In Moscow he had for the first time felt, after his luxurious and coarse lifeat Petersburg, all the charm of intimacy with a sweet and innocent girl of hisown rank, who cared for him. It never even entered his head that there could beany harm in his relations with Kitty. At balls he danced principally with her.He was a constant visitor at their house. He talked to her as people commonlydo talk in society—all sorts of nonsense, but nonsense to which he couldnot help attaching a special meaning in her case. Although he said nothing toher that he could not have said before everybody, he felt that she was becomingmore and more dependent upon him, and the more he felt this, the better heliked it, and the tenderer was his feeling for her. He did not know that hismode of behavior in relation to Kitty had a definite character, that it iscourting young girls with no intention of marriage, and that such courting isone of the evil actions common among brilliant young men such as he was. Itseemed to him that he was the first who had discovered this pleasure, and hewas enjoying his discovery.If he could have heard what her parents were saying that evening, if he couldhave put himself at the point of view of the family and have heard that Kittywould be unhappy if he did not marry her, he would have been greatlyastonished, and would not have believed it. He could not believe that what gavesuch great and delicate pleasure to him, and above all to her, could be wrong.Still less could he have believed that he ought to marry.Marriage had never presented itself to him as a possibility. He not onlydisliked family life, but a family, and especially a husband was, in accordancewith the views general in the bachelor world in which he lived, conceived assomething alien, repellant, and, above all, ridiculous.But though Vronsky had not the least suspicion what the parents were saying, hefelt on coming away from the Shtcherbatskys’ that the secret spiritualbond which existed between him and Kitty had grown so much stronger thatevening that some step must be taken. But what step could and ought to be takenhe could not imagine.“What is so exquisite,” he thought, as he returned from theShtcherbatskys’, carrying away with him, as he always did, a deliciousfeeling of purity and freshness, arising partly from the fact that he had notbeen smoking for a whole evening, and with it a new feeling of tenderness ather love for him—“what is so exquisite is that not a word has beensaid by me or by her, but we understand each other so well in this unseenlanguage of looks and tones, that this evening more clearly than ever she toldme she loves me. And how secretly, simply, and most of all, how trustfully! Ifeel myself better, purer. I feel that I have a heart, and that there is agreat deal of good in me. Those sweet, loving eyes! When she said:‘Indeed I do....’“Well, what then? Oh, nothing. It’s good for me, and good forher.” And he began wondering where to finish the evening.He passed in review of the places he might go to. “Club? a game ofbezique, champagne with Ignatov? No, I’m not going. Château desFleurs; there I shall find Oblonsky, songs, the cancan. No, I’m sickof it. That’s why I like the Shtcherbatskys’, that I’mgrowing better. I’ll go home.” He went straight to his room atDussots’ Hotel, ordered supper, and then undressed, and as soon as hishead touched the pillow, fell into a sound sleep.Chapter 17Next day at eleven o’clock in the morning Vronsky drove to the station ofthe Petersburg railway to meet his mother, and the first person he came acrosson the great flight of steps was Oblonsky, who was expecting his sister by thesame train.“Ah! your excellency!” cried Oblonsky, “whom are youmeeting?”“My mother,” Vronsky responded, smiling, as everyone did who metOblonsky. He shook hands with him, and together they ascended the steps.“She is to be here from Petersburg today.”“I was looking out for you till two o’clock last night. Where didyou go after the Shtcherbatskys’?”“Home,” answered Vronsky. “I must own I felt so well contentyesterday after the Shtcherbatskys’ that I didn’t care to goanywhere.”“I know a gallant steed by tokens sure,And by his eyes I know a youth in love,”declaimed Stepan Arkadyevitch, just as he had done before to Levin.Vronsky smiled with a look that seemed to say that he did not deny it, but hepromptly changed the subject.“And whom are you meeting?” he asked.“I? I’ve come to meet a pretty woman,” said Oblonsky.“You don’t say so!”“Honi soit qui mal y pense! My sister Anna.”“Ah! that’s Madame Karenina,” said Vronsky.“You know her, no doubt?”“I think I do. Or perhaps not ... I really am not sure,” Vronskyanswered heedlessly, with a vague recollection of something stiff and tediousevoked by the name Karenina.“But Alexey Alexandrovitch, my celebrated brother-in-law, you surely mustknow. All the world knows him.”“I know him by reputation and by sight. I know that he’s clever,learned, religious somewhat.... But you know that’s not ... not in myline,” said Vronsky in English.“Yes, he’s a very remarkable man; rather a conservative, but asplendid man,” observed Stepan Arkadyevitch, “a splendidman.”“Oh, well, so much the better for him,” said Vronsky smiling.“Oh, you’ve come,” he said, addressing a tall old footman ofhis mother’s, standing at the door; “come here.”Besides the charm Oblonsky had in general for everyone, Vronsky had felt oflate specially drawn to him by the fact that in his imagination he wasassociated with Kitty.“Well, what do you say? Shall we give a supper on Sunday for thediva?” he said to him with a smile, taking his arm.“Of course. I’m collecting subscriptions. Oh, did you make theacquaintance of my friend Levin?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Yes; but he left rather early.”“He’s a capital fellow,” pursued Oblonsky. “Isn’the?”“I don’t know why it is,” responded Vronsky, “in allMoscow people—present company of course excepted,” he put injestingly, “there’s something uncompromising. They are all on thedefensive, lose their tempers, as though they all want to make one feelsomething....”“Yes, that’s true, it is so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,laughing good-humoredly.“Will the train soon be in?” Vronsky asked a railway official.“The train’s signaled,” answered the man.The approach of the train was more and more evident by the preparatory bustlein the station, the rush of porters, the movement of policemen and attendants,and people meeting the train. Through the frosty vapor could be seen workmen inshort sheepskins and soft felt boots crossing the rails of the curving line.The hiss of the boiler could be heard on the distant rails, and the rumble ofsomething heavy.“No,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, who felt a great inclination totell Vronsky of Levin’s intentions in regard to Kitty. “No,you’ve not got a true impression of Levin. He’s a very nervous man,and is sometimes out of humor, it’s true, but then he is often very nice.He’s such a true, honest nature, and a heart of gold. But yesterday therewere special reasons,” pursued Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a meaning smile,totally oblivious of the genuine sympathy he had felt the day before for hisfriend, and feeling the same sympathy now, only for Vronsky. “Yes, therewere reasons why he could not help being either particularly happy orparticularly unhappy.”Vronsky stood still and asked directly: “How so? Do you mean he made yourbelle-sœur an offer yesterday?”“Maybe,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I fancied something ofthe sort yesterday. Yes, if he went away early, and was out of humor too, itmust mean it.... He’s been so long in love, and I’m very sorry forhim.”“So that’s it! I should imagine, though, she might reckon on abetter match,” said Vronsky, drawing himself up and walking about again,“though I don’t know him, of course,” he added. “Yes,that is a hateful position! That’s why most fellows prefer to have to dowith Klaras. If you don’t succeed with them it only proves thatyou’ve not enough cash, but in this case one’s dignity’s atstake. But here’s the train.”The engine had already whistled in the distance. A few instants later theplatform was quivering, and with puffs of steam hanging low in the air from thefrost, the engine rolled up, with the lever of the middle wheel rhythmicallymoving up and down, and the stooping figure of the engine-driver covered withfrost. Behind the tender, setting the platform more and more slowly swaying,came the luggage van with a dog whining in it. At last the passenger carriagesrolled in, oscillating before coming to a standstill.A smart guard jumped out, giving a whistle, and after him one by one theimpatient passengers began to get down: an officer of the guards, holdinghimself erect, and looking severely about him; a nimble little merchant with asatchel, smiling gaily; a peasant with a sack over his shoulder.Vronsky, standing beside Oblonsky, watched the carriages and the passengers,totally oblivious of his mother. What he had just heard about Kitty excited anddelighted him. Unconsciously he arched his chest, and his eyes flashed. He felthimself a conqueror.“Countess Vronskaya is in that compartment,” said the smart guard,going up to Vronsky.The guard’s words roused him, and forced him to think of his mother andhis approaching meeting with her. He did not in his heart respect his mother,and without acknowledging it to himself, he did not love her, though inaccordance with the ideas of the set in which he lived, and with his owneducation, he could not have conceived of any behavior to his mother not in thehighest degree respectful and obedient, and the more externally obedient andrespectful his behavior, the less in his heart he respected and loved her.Chapter 18Vronsky followed the guard to the carriage, and at the door of the compartmenthe stopped short to make room for a lady who was getting out.With the insight of a man of the world, from one glance at this lady’sappearance Vronsky classified her as belonging to the best society. He beggedpardon, and was getting into the carriage, but felt he must glance at her oncemore; not that she was very beautiful, not on account of the elegance andmodest grace which were apparent in her whole figure, but because in theexpression of her charming face, as she passed close by him, there wassomething peculiarly caressing and soft. As he looked round, she too turned herhead. Her shining gray eyes, that looked dark from the thick lashes, restedwith friendly attention on his face, as though she were recognizing him, andthen promptly turned away to the passing crowd, as though seeking someone. Inthat brief look Vronsky had time to notice the suppressed eagerness whichplayed over her face, and flitted between the brilliant eyes and the faintsmile that curved her red lips. It was as though her nature were so brimmingover with something that against her will it showed itself now in the flash ofher eyes, and now in her smile. Deliberately she shrouded the light in hereyes, but it shone against her will in the faintly perceptible smile.Vronsky stepped into the carriage. His mother, a dried-up old lady with blackeyes and ringlets, screwed up her eyes, scanning her son, and smiled slightlywith her thin lips. Getting up from the seat and handing her maid a bag, shegave her little wrinkled hand to her son to kiss, and lifting his head from herhand, kissed him on the cheek.“You got my telegram? Quite well? Thank God.”“You had a good journey?” said her son, sitting down beside her,and involuntarily listening to a woman’s voice outside the door. He knewit was the voice of the lady he had met at the door.“All the same I don’t agree with you,” said the lady’svoice.“It’s the Petersburg view, madame.”“Not Petersburg, but simply feminine,” she responded.“Well, well, allow me to kiss your hand.”“Good-bye, Ivan Petrovitch. And could you see if my brother is here, andsend him to me?” said the lady in the doorway, and stepped back againinto the compartment.“Well, have you found your brother?” said Countess Vronskaya,addressing the lady.Vronsky understood now that this was Madame Karenina.“Your brother is here,” he said, standing up. “Excuse me, Idid not know you, and, indeed, our acquaintance was so slight,” saidVronsky, bowing, “that no doubt you do not remember me.”“Oh, no,” said she, “I should have known you because yourmother and I have been talking, I think, of nothing but you all the way.”As she spoke she let the eagerness that would insist on coming out show itselfin her smile. “And still no sign of my brother.”“Do call him, Alexey,” said the old countess. Vronsky stepped outonto the platform and shouted:“Oblonsky! Here!”Madame Karenina, however, did not wait for her brother, but catching sight ofhim she stepped out with her light, resolute step. And as soon as her brotherhad reached her, with a gesture that struck Vronsky by its decision and itsgrace, she flung her left arm around his neck, drew him rapidly to her, andkissed him warmly. Vronsky gazed, never taking his eyes from her, and smiled,he could not have said why. But recollecting that his mother was waiting forhim, he went back again into the carriage.“She’s very sweet, isn’t she?” said the countess ofMadame Karenina. “Her husband put her with me, and I was delighted tohave her. We’ve been talking all the way. And so you, I hear ... vousfilez le parfait amour. Tant mieux, mon cher, tant mieux.”“I don’t know what you are referring to, maman,” he answeredcoldly. “Come, maman, let us go.”Madame Karenina entered the carriage again to say good-bye to the countess.“Well, countess, you have met your son, and I my brother,” shesaid. “And all my gossip is exhausted. I should have nothing more to tellyou.”“Oh, no,” said the countess, taking her hand. “I could go allaround the world with you and never be dull. You are one of those delightfulwomen in whose company it’s sweet to be silent as well as to talk. Nowplease don’t fret over your son; you can’t expect never to beparted.”Madame Karenina stood quite still, holding herself very erect, and her eyeswere smiling.“Anna Arkadyevna,” the countess said in explanation to her son,“has a little son eight years old, I believe, and she has never beenparted from him before, and she keeps fretting over leaving him.”“Yes, the countess and I have been talking all the time, I of my son andshe of hers,” said Madame Karenina, and again a smile lighted up herface, a caressing smile intended for him.“I am afraid that you must have been dreadfully bored,” he said,promptly catching the ball of coquetry she had flung him. But apparently shedid not care to pursue the conversation in that strain, and she turned to theold countess.“Thank you so much. The time has passed so quickly. Good-bye,countess.”“Good-bye, my love,” answered the countess. “Let me have akiss of your pretty face. I speak plainly, at my age, and I tell you simplythat I’ve lost my heart to you.”Stereotyped as the phrase was, Madame Karenina obviously believed it and wasdelighted by it. She flushed, bent down slightly, and put her cheek to thecountess’s lips, drew herself up again, and with the same smilefluttering between her lips and her eyes, she gave her hand to Vronsky. Hepressed the little hand she gave him, and was delighted, as though at somethingspecial, by the energetic squeeze with which she freely and vigorously shookhis hand. She went out with the rapid step which bore her ratherfully-developed figure with such strange lightness.“Very charming,” said the countess.That was just what her son was thinking. His eyes followed her till hergraceful figure was out of sight, and then the smile remained on his face. Hesaw out of the window how she went up to her brother, put her arm in his, andbegan telling him something eagerly, obviously something that had nothing to dowith him, Vronsky, and at that he felt annoyed.“Well, maman, are you perfectly well?” he repeated, turning to hismother.“Everything has been delightful. Alexander has been very good, and Mariehas grown very pretty. She’s very interesting.”And she began telling him again of what interested her most—thechristening of her grandson, for which she had been staying in Petersburg, andthe special favor shown her elder son by the Tsar.“Here’s Lavrenty,” said Vronsky, looking out of the window;“now we can go, if you like.”The old butler, who had traveled with the countess, came to the carriage toannounce that everything was ready, and the countess got up to go.“Come; there’s not such a crowd now,” said Vronsky.The maid took a handbag and the lap dog, the butler and a porter the otherbaggage. Vronsky gave his mother his arm; but just as they were getting out ofthe carriage several men ran suddenly by with panic-stricken faces. Thestation-master, too, ran by in his extraordinary colored cap. Obviouslysomething unusual had happened. The crowd who had left the train were runningback again.“What?... What?... Where?... Flung himself!... Crushed!...” washeard among the crowd. Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his sister on his arm, turnedback. They too looked scared, and stopped at the carriage door to avoid thecrowd.The ladies got in, while Vronsky and Stepan Arkadyevitch followed the crowd tofind out details of the disaster.A guard, either drunk or too much muffled up in the bitter frost, had not heardthe train moving back, and had been crushed.Before Vronsky and Oblonsky came back the ladies heard the facts from thebutler.Oblonsky and Vronsky had both seen the mutilated corpse. Oblonsky was evidentlyupset. He frowned and seemed ready to cry.“Ah, how awful! Ah, Anna, if you had seen it! Ah, how awful!” hesaid.Vronsky did not speak; his handsome face was serious, but perfectly composed.“Oh, if you had seen it, countess,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“And his wife was there.... It was awful to see her!... She flungherself on the body. They say he was the only support of an immense family. Howawful!”“Couldn’t one do anything for her?” said Madame Karenina inan agitated whisper.Vronsky glanced at her, and immediately got out of the carriage.“I’ll be back directly, maman,” he remarked, turning round inthe doorway.When he came back a few minutes later, Stepan Arkadyevitch was already inconversation with the countess about the new singer, while the countess wasimpatiently looking towards the door, waiting for her son.“Now let us be off,” said Vronsky, coming in. They went outtogether. Vronsky was in front with his mother. Behind walked Madame Kareninawith her brother. Just as they were going out of the station the station-masterovertook Vronsky.“You gave my assistant two hundred roubles. Would you kindly explain forwhose benefit you intend them?”“For the widow,” said Vronsky, shrugging his shoulders. “Ishould have thought there was no need to ask.”“You gave that?” cried Oblonsky, behind, and, pressing hissister’s hand, he added: “Very nice, very nice! Isn’t he asplendid fellow? Good-bye, countess.”And he and his sister stood still, looking for her maid.When they went out the Vronsky’s carriage had already driven away. Peoplecoming in were still talking of what happened.“What a horrible death!” said a gentleman, passing by. “Theysay he was cut in two pieces.”“On the contrary, I think it’s theeasiest—instantaneous,” observed another.“How is it they don’t take proper precautions?” said a third.Madame Karenina seated herself in the carriage, and Stepan Arkadyevitch sawwith surprise that her lips were quivering, and she was with difficultyrestraining her tears.“What is it, Anna?” he asked, when they had driven a few hundredyards.“It’s an omen of evil,” she said.“What nonsense!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “You’vecome, that’s the chief thing. You can’t conceive how I’mresting my hopes on you.”“Have you known Vronsky long?” she asked.“Yes. You know we’re hoping he will marry Kitty.”“Yes?” said Anna softly. “Come now, let us talk ofyou,” she added, tossing her head, as though she would physically shakeoff something superfluous oppressing her. “Let us talk of your affairs. Igot your letter, and here I am.”“Yes, all my hopes are in you,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Well, tell me all about it.”And Stepan Arkadyevitch began to tell his story.On reaching home Oblonsky helped his sister out, sighed, pressed her hand, andset off to his office.Chapter 19When Anna went into the room, Dolly was sitting in the little drawing-room witha white-headed fat little boy, already like his father, giving him a lesson inFrench reading. As the boy read, he kept twisting and trying to tear off abutton that was nearly off his jacket. His mother had several times taken hishand from it, but the fat little hand went back to the button again. His motherpulled the button off and put it in her pocket.“Keep your hands still, Grisha,” she said, and she took up herwork, a coverlet she had long been making. She always set to work on it atdepressed moments, and now she knitted at it nervously, twitching her fingersand counting the stitches. Though she had sent word the day before to herhusband that it was nothing to her whether his sister came or not, she had madeeverything ready for her arrival, and was expecting her sister-in-law withemotion.Dolly was crushed by her sorrow, utterly swallowed up by it. Still she did notforget that Anna, her sister-in-law, was the wife of one of the most importantpersonages in Petersburg, and was a Petersburg grande dame. And, thanksto this circumstance, she did not carry out her threat to herhusband—that is to say, she remembered that her sister-in-law was coming.“And, after all, Anna is in no wise to blame,” thought Dolly.“I know nothing of her except the very best, and I have seen nothing butkindness and affection from her towards myself.” It was true that as faras she could recall her impressions at Petersburg at the Karenins’, shedid not like their household itself; there was something artificial in thewhole framework of their family life. “But why should I not receive her?If only she doesn’t take it into her head to console me!” thoughtDolly. “All consolation and counsel and Christian forgiveness, all that Ihave thought over a thousand times, and it’s all no use.”All these days Dolly had been alone with her children. She did not want to talkof her sorrow, but with that sorrow in her heart she could not talk of outsidematters. She knew that in one way or another she would tell Anna everything,and she was alternately glad at the thought of speaking freely, and angry atthe necessity of speaking of her humiliation with her, his sister, and ofhearing her ready-made phrases of good advice and comfort. She had been on thelookout for her, glancing at her watch every minute, and, as so often happens,let slip just that minute when her visitor arrived, so that she did not hearthe bell.Catching a sound of skirts and light steps at the door, she looked round, andher care-worn face unconsciously expressed not gladness, but wonder. She got upand embraced her sister-in-law.“What, here already!” she said as she kissed her.“Dolly, how glad I am to see you!”“I am glad, too,” said Dolly, faintly smiling, and trying by theexpression of Anna’s face to find out whether she knew. “Mostlikely she knows,” she thought, noticing the sympathy in Anna’sface. “Well, come along, I’ll take you to your room,” shewent on, trying to defer as long as possible the moment of confidences.“Is this Grisha? Heavens, how he’s grown!” said Anna; andkissing him, never taking her eyes off Dolly, she stood still and flushed alittle. “No, please, let us stay here.”She took off her kerchief and her hat, and catching it in a lock of her blackhair, which was a mass of curls, she tossed her head and shook her hair down.“You are radiant with health and happiness!” said Dolly, almostwith envy.“I?... Yes,” said Anna. “Merciful heavens, Tanya!You’re the same age as my Seryozha,” she added, addressing thelittle girl as she ran in. She took her in her arms and kissed her.“Delightful child, delightful! Show me them all.”She mentioned them, not only remembering the names, but the years, months,characters, illnesses of all the children, and Dolly could not but appreciatethat.“Very well, we will go to them,” she said. “It’s a pityVassya’s asleep.”After seeing the children, they sat down, alone now, in the drawing-room, tocoffee. Anna took the tray, and then pushed it away from her.“Dolly,” she said, “he has told me.”Dolly looked coldly at Anna; she was waiting now for phrases of conventionalsympathy, but Anna said nothing of the sort.“Dolly, dear,” she said, “I don’t want to speak for himto you, nor to try to comfort you; that’s impossible. But, darling,I’m simply sorry, sorry from my heart for you!”Under the thick lashes of her shining eyes tears suddenly glittered. She movednearer to her sister-in-law and took her hand in her vigorous little hand.Dolly did not shrink away, but her face did not lose its frigid expression. Shesaid:“To comfort me’s impossible. Everything’s lost after what hashappened, everything’s over!”And directly she had said this, her face suddenly softened. Anna lifted thewasted, thin hand of Dolly, kissed it and said:“But, Dolly, what’s to be done, what’s to be done? How is itbest to act in this awful position—that’s what you must thinkof.”“All’s over, and there’s nothing more,” said Dolly.“And the worst of all is, you see, that I can’t cast him off: thereare the children, I am tied. And I can’t live with him! it’s atorture to me to see him.”“Dolly, darling, he has spoken to me, but I want to hear it from you:tell me about it.”Dolly looked at her inquiringly.Sympathy and love unfeigned were visible on Anna’s face.“Very well,” she said all at once. “But I will tell you itfrom the beginning. You know how I was married. With the education mamma gaveus I was more than innocent, I was stupid. I knew nothing. I know they say mentell their wives of their former lives, but Stiva”—she correctedherself—“Stepan Arkadyevitch told me nothing. You’ll hardlybelieve it, but till now I imagined that I was the only woman he had known. SoI lived eight years. You must understand that I was so far from suspectinginfidelity, I regarded it as impossible, and then—try to imagineit—with such ideas, to find out suddenly all the horror, all theloathsomeness.... You must try and understand me. To be fully convinced ofone’s happiness, and all at once....” continued Dolly, holding backher sobs, “to get a letter ... his letter to his mistress, my governess.No, it’s too awful!” She hastily pulled out her handkerchief andhid her face in it. “I can understand being carried away byfeeling,” she went on after a brief silence, “but deliberately,slyly deceiving me ... and with whom?... To go on being my husband togetherwith her ... it’s awful! You can’t understand....”“Oh, yes, I understand! I understand! Dolly, dearest, I dounderstand,” said Anna, pressing her hand.“And do you imagine he realizes all the awfulness of my position?”Dolly resumed. “Not the slightest! He’s happy and contented.”“Oh, no!” Anna interposed quickly. “He’s to be pitied,he’s weighed down by remorse....”“Is he capable of remorse?” Dolly interrupted, gazing intently intoher sister-in-law’s face.“Yes. I know him. I could not look at him without feeling sorry for him.We both know him. He’s good-hearted, but he’s proud, and nowhe’s so humiliated. What touched me most....” (and here Anna guessedwhat would touch Dolly most) “he’s tortured by two things: thathe’s ashamed for the children’s sake, and that, lovingyou—yes, yes, loving you beyond everything on earth,” she hurriedlyinterrupted Dolly, who would have answered—“he has hurt you,pierced you to the heart. ‘No, no, she cannot forgive me,’ he keepssaying.”Dolly looked dreamily away beyond her sister-in-law as she listened to herwords.“Yes, I can see that his position is awful; it’s worse for theguilty than the innocent,” she said, “if he feels that all themisery comes from his fault. But how am I to forgive him, how am I to be hiswife again after her? For me to live with him now would be torture, justbecause I love my past love for him....”And sobs cut short her words. But as though of set design, each time she wassoftened she began to speak again of what exasperated her.“She’s young, you see, she’s pretty,” she went on.“Do you know, Anna, my youth and my beauty are gone, taken by whom? Byhim and his children. I have worked for him, and all I had has gone in hisservice, and now of course any fresh, vulgar creature has more charm for him.No doubt they talked of me together, or, worse still, they were silent. Do youunderstand?”Again her eyes glowed with hatred.“And after that he will tell me.... What! can I believe him? Never! No,everything is over, everything that once made my comfort, the reward of mywork, and my sufferings.... Would you believe it, I was teaching Grisha justnow: once this was a joy to me, now it is a torture. What have I to strive andtoil for? Why are the children here? What’s so awful is that all at oncemy heart’s turned, and instead of love and tenderness, I have nothing buthatred for him; yes, hatred. I could kill him.”“Darling Dolly, I understand, but don’t torture yourself. You areso distressed, so overwrought, that you look at many things mistakenly.”Dolly grew calmer, and for two minutes both were silent.“What’s to be done? Think for me, Anna, help me. I have thoughtover everything, and I see nothing.”Anna could think of nothing, but her heart responded instantly to each word, toeach change of expression of her sister-in-law.“One thing I would say,” began Anna. “I am his sister, I knowhis character, that faculty of forgetting everything, everything” (shewaved her hand before her forehead), “that faculty for being completelycarried away, but for completely repenting too. He cannot believe it, he cannotcomprehend now how he can have acted as he did.”“No; he understands, he understood!” Dolly broke in. “But I... you are forgetting me ... does it make it easier for me?”“Wait a minute. When he told me, I will own I did not realize all theawfulness of your position. I saw nothing but him, and that the family wasbroken up. I felt sorry for him, but after talking to you, I see it, as awoman, quite differently. I see your agony, and I can’t tell you howsorry I am for you! But, Dolly, darling, I fully realize your sufferings, onlythere is one thing I don’t know; I don’t know ... I don’tknow how much love there is still in your heart for him. That youknow—whether there is enough for you to be able to forgive him. If thereis, forgive him!”“No,” Dolly was beginning, but Anna cut her short, kissing her handonce more.“I know more of the world than you do,” she said. “I know howmen like Stiva look at it. You speak of his talking of you with her. That neverhappened. Such men are unfaithful, but their home and wife are sacred to them.Somehow or other these women are still looked on with contempt by them, and donot touch on their feeling for their family. They draw a sort of line thatcan’t be crossed between them and their families. I don’tunderstand it, but it is so.”“Yes, but he has kissed her....”“Dolly, hush, darling. I saw Stiva when he was in love with you. Iremember the time when he came to me and cried, talking of you, and all thepoetry and loftiness of his feeling for you, and I know that the longer he haslived with you the loftier you have been in his eyes. You know we havesometimes laughed at him for putting in at every word: ‘Dolly’s amarvelous woman.’ You have always been a divinity for him, and you arethat still, and this has not been an infidelity of the heart....”“But if it is repeated?”“It cannot be, as I understand it....”“Yes, but could you forgive it?”“I don’t know, I can’t judge.... Yes, I can,” saidAnna, thinking a moment; and grasping the position in her thought and weighingit in her inner balance, she added: “Yes, I can, I can, I can. Yes, Icould forgive it. I could not be the same, no; but I could forgive it, andforgive it as though it had never been, never been at all....”“Oh, of course,” Dolly interposed quickly, as though saying whatshe had more than once thought, “else it would not be forgiveness. If oneforgives, it must be completely, completely. Come, let us go; I’ll takeyou to your room,” she said, getting up, and on the way she embracedAnna. “My dear, how glad I am you came. It has made things better, everso much better.”Chapter 20The whole of that day Anna spent at home, that’s to say at theOblonskys’, and received no one, though some of her acquaintances hadalready heard of her arrival, and came to call the same day. Anna spent thewhole morning with Dolly and the children. She merely sent a brief note to herbrother to tell him that he must not fail to dine at home. “Come, God ismerciful,” she wrote.Oblonsky did dine at home: the conversation was general, and his wife, speakingto him, addressed him as “Stiva,” as she had not done before. Inthe relations of the husband and wife the same estrangement still remained, butthere was no talk now of separation, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw thepossibility of explanation and reconciliation.Immediately after dinner Kitty came in. She knew Anna Arkadyevna, but only veryslightly, and she came now to her sister’s with some trepidation, at theprospect of meeting this fashionable Petersburg lady, whom everyone spoke sohighly of. But she made a favorable impression on Anna Arkadyevna—she sawthat at once. Anna was unmistakably admiring her loveliness and her youth:before Kitty knew where she was she found herself not merely under Anna’ssway, but in love with her, as young girls do fall in love with older andmarried women. Anna was not like a fashionable lady, nor the mother of a boy ofeight years old. In the elasticity of her movements, the freshness and theunflagging eagerness which persisted in her face, and broke out in her smileand her glance, she would rather have passed for a girl of twenty, had it notbeen for a serious and at times mournful look in her eyes, which struck andattracted Kitty. Kitty felt that Anna was perfectly simple and was concealingnothing, but that she had another higher world of interests inaccessible toher, complex and poetic.After dinner, when Dolly went away to her own room, Anna rose quickly and wentup to her brother, who was just lighting a cigar.“Stiva,” she said to him, winking gaily, crossing him and glancingtowards the door, “go, and God help you.”He threw down the cigar, understanding her, and departed through the doorway.When Stepan Arkadyevitch had disappeared, she went back to the sofa where shehad been sitting, surrounded by the children. Either because the children sawthat their mother was fond of this aunt, or that they felt a special charm inher themselves, the two elder ones, and the younger following their lead, aschildren so often do, had clung about their new aunt since before dinner, andwould not leave her side. And it had become a sort of game among them to sit asclose as possible to their aunt, to touch her, hold her little hand, kiss it,play with her ring, or even touch the flounce of her skirt.“Come, come, as we were sitting before,” said Anna Arkadyevna,sitting down in her place.And again Grisha poked his little face under her arm, and nestled with his headon her gown, beaming with pride and happiness.“And when is your next ball?” she asked Kitty.“Next week, and a splendid ball. One of those balls where one alwaysenjoys oneself.”“Why, are there balls where one always enjoys oneself?” Anna said,with tender irony.“It’s strange, but there are. At the Bobrishtchevs’ onealways enjoys oneself, and at the Nikitins’ too, while at theMezhkovs’ it’s always dull. Haven’t you noticed it?”“No, my dear, for me there are no balls now where one enjoysoneself,” said Anna, and Kitty detected in her eyes that mysterious worldwhich was not open to her. “For me there are some less dull andtiresome.”“How can you be dull at a ball?”“Why should not I be dull at a ball?” inquired Anna.Kitty perceived that Anna knew what answer would follow.“Because you always look nicer than anyone.”Anna had the faculty of blushing. She blushed a little, and said:“In the first place it’s never so; and secondly, if it were, whatdifference would it make to me?”“Are you coming to this ball?” asked Kitty.“I imagine it won’t be possible to avoid going. Here, takeit,” she said to Tanya, who was pulling the loosely-fitting ring off herwhite, slender-tipped finger.“I shall be so glad if you go. I should so like to see you at aball.”“Anyway, if I do go, I shall comfort myself with the thought thatit’s a pleasure to you ... Grisha, don’t pull my hair. It’suntidy enough without that,” she said, putting up a straying lock, whichGrisha had been playing with.“I imagine you at the ball in lilac.”“And why in lilac precisely?” asked Anna, smiling. “Now,children, run along, run along. Do you hear? Miss Hoole is calling you totea,” she said, tearing the children from her, and sending them off tothe dining-room.“I know why you press me to come to the ball. You expect a great deal ofthis ball, and you want everyone to be there to take part in it.”“How do you know? Yes.”“Oh! what a happy time you are at,” pursued Anna. “Iremember, and I know that blue haze like the mist on the mountains inSwitzerland. That mist which covers everything in that blissful time whenchildhood is just ending, and out of that vast circle, happy and gay, there isa path growing narrower and narrower, and it is delightful and alarming toenter the ballroom, bright and splendid as it is.... Who has not been throughit?”Kitty smiled without speaking. “But how did she go through it? How Ishould like to know all her love story!” thought Kitty, recalling theunromantic appearance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her husband.“I know something. Stiva told me, and I congratulate you. I liked him somuch,” Anna continued. “I met Vronsky at the railwaystation.”“Oh, was he there?” asked Kitty, blushing. “What was it Stivatold you?”“Stiva gossiped about it all. And I should be so glad ... I traveledyesterday with Vronsky’s mother,” she went on; “and hismother talked without a pause of him, he’s her favorite. I know mothersare partial, but....”“What did his mother tell you?”“Oh, a great deal! And I know that he’s her favorite; still one cansee how chivalrous he is.... Well, for instance, she told me that he had wantedto give up all his property to his brother, that he had done somethingextraordinary when he was quite a child, saved a woman out of the water.He’s a hero, in fact,” said Anna, smiling and recollecting the twohundred roubles he had given at the station.But she did not tell Kitty about the two hundred roubles. For some reason itwas disagreeable to her to think of it. She felt that there was something thathad to do with her in it, and something that ought not to have been.“She pressed me very much to go and see her,” Anna went on;“and I shall be glad to go to see her tomorrow. Stiva is staying a longwhile in Dolly’s room, thank God,” Anna added, changing thesubject, and getting up, Kitty fancied, displeased with something.“No, I’m first! No, I!” screamed the children, who hadfinished tea, running up to their Aunt Anna.“All together,” said Anna, and she ran laughing to meet them, andembraced and swung round all the throng of swarming children, shrieking withdelight.Chapter 21Dolly came out of her room to the tea of the grown-up people. StepanArkadyevitch did not come out. He must have left his wife’s room by theother door.“I am afraid you’ll be cold upstairs,” observed Dolly,addressing Anna; “I want to move you downstairs, and we shall benearer.”“Oh, please, don’t trouble about me,” answered Anna, lookingintently into Dolly’s face, trying to make out whether there had been areconciliation or not.“It will be lighter for you here,” answered her sister-in-law.“I assure you that I sleep everywhere, and always like a marmot.”“What’s the question?” inquired Stepan Arkadyevitch, comingout of his room and addressing his wife.From his tone both Kitty and Anna knew that a reconciliation had taken place.“I want to move Anna downstairs, but we must hang up blinds. No one knowshow to do it; I must see to it myself,” answered Dolly addressing him.“God knows whether they are fully reconciled,” thought Anna,hearing her tone, cold and composed.“Oh, nonsense, Dolly, always making difficulties,” answered herhusband. “Come, I’ll do it all, if you like....”“Yes, they must be reconciled,” thought Anna.“I know how you do everything,” answered Dolly. “You tellMatvey to do what can’t be done, and go away yourself, leaving him tomake a muddle of everything,” and her habitual, mocking smile curved thecorners of Dolly’s lips as she spoke.“Full, full reconciliation, full,” thought Anna; “thankGod!” and rejoicing that she was the cause of it, she went up to Dollyand kissed her.“Not at all. Why do you always look down on me and Matvey?” saidStepan Arkadyevitch, smiling hardly perceptibly, and addressing his wife.The whole evening Dolly was, as always, a little mocking in her tone to herhusband, while Stepan Arkadyevitch was happy and cheerful, but not so as toseem as though, having been forgiven, he had forgotten his offense.At half-past nine o’clock a particularly joyful and pleasant familyconversation over the tea-table at the Oblonskys’ was broken up by anapparently simple incident. But this simple incident for some reason struckeveryone as strange. Talking about common acquaintances in Petersburg, Anna gotup quickly.“She is in my album,” she said; “and, by the way, I’llshow you my Seryozha,” she added, with a mother’s smile of pride.Towards ten o’clock, when she usually said good-night to her son, andoften before going to a ball put him to bed herself, she felt depressed atbeing so far from him; and whatever she was talking about, she kept coming backin thought to her curly-headed Seryozha. She longed to look at his photographand talk of him. Seizing the first pretext, she got up, and with her light,resolute step went for her album. The stairs up to her room came out on thelanding of the great warm main staircase.Just as she was leaving the drawing-room, a ring was heard in the hall.“Who can that be?” said Dolly.“It’s early for me to be fetched, and for anyone else it’slate,” observed Kitty.“Sure to be someone with papers for me,” put in StepanArkadyevitch. When Anna was passing the top of the staircase, a servant wasrunning up to announce the visitor, while the visitor himself was standingunder a lamp. Anna glancing down at once recognized Vronsky, and a strangefeeling of pleasure and at the same time of dread of something stirred in herheart. He was standing still, not taking off his coat, pulling something out ofhis pocket. At the instant when she was just facing the stairs, he raised hiseyes, caught sight of her, and into the expression of his face there passed ashade of embarrassment and dismay. With a slight inclination of her head shepassed, hearing behind her Stepan Arkadyevitch’s loud voice calling himto come up, and the quiet, soft, and composed voice of Vronsky refusing.When Anna returned with the album, he was already gone, and Stepan Arkadyevitchwas telling them that he had called to inquire about the dinner they weregiving next day to a celebrity who had just arrived. “And nothing wouldinduce him to come up. What a queer fellow he is!” added StepanArkadyevitch.Kitty blushed. She thought that she was the only person who knew why he hadcome, and why he would not come up. “He has been at home,” shethought, “and didn’t find me, and thought I should be here, but hedid not come up because he thought it late, and Anna’s here.”All of them looked at each other, saying nothing, and began to look atAnna’s album.There was nothing either exceptional or strange in a man’s calling athalf-past nine on a friend to inquire details of a proposed dinner party andnot coming in, but it seemed strange to all of them. Above all, it seemedstrange and not right to Anna.Chapter 22The ball was only just beginning as Kitty and her mother walked up the greatstaircase, flooded with light, and lined with flowers and footmen in powder andred coats. From the rooms came a constant, steady hum, as from a hive, and therustle of movement; and while on the landing between trees they gave lasttouches to their hair and dresses before the mirror, they heard from theballroom the careful, distinct notes of the fiddles of the orchestra beginningthe first waltz. A little old man in civilian dress, arranging his gray curlsbefore another mirror, and diffusing an odor of scent, stumbled against them onthe stairs, and stood aside, evidently admiring Kitty, whom he did not know. Abeardless youth, one of those society youths whom the old Prince Shtcherbatskycalled “young bucks,” in an exceedingly open waistcoat,straightening his white tie as he went, bowed to them, and after running by,came back to ask Kitty for a quadrille. As the first quadrille had already beengiven to Vronsky, she had to promise this youth the second. An officer,buttoning his glove, stood aside in the doorway, and stroking his mustache,admired rosy Kitty.Although her dress, her coiffure, and all the preparations for the ball hadcost Kitty great trouble and consideration, at this moment she walked into theballroom in her elaborate tulle dress over a pink slip as easily and simply asthough all the rosettes and lace, all the minute details of her attire, had notcost her or her family a moment’s attention, as though she had been bornin that tulle and lace, with her hair done up high on her head, and a rose andtwo leaves on the top of it.When, just before entering the ballroom, the princess, her mother, tried toturn right side out of the ribbon of her sash, Kitty had drawn back a little.She felt that everything must be right of itself, and graceful, and nothingcould need setting straight.It was one of Kitty’s best days. Her dress was not uncomfortableanywhere; her lace berthe did not droop anywhere; her rosettes were not crushednor torn off; her pink slippers with high, hollowed-out heels did not pinch,but gladdened her feet; and the thick rolls of fair chignon kept up on her headas if they were her own hair. All the three buttons buttoned up without tearingon the long glove that covered her hand without concealing its lines. The blackvelvet of her locket nestled with special softness round her neck. That velvetwas delicious; at home, looking at her neck in the looking-glass, Kitty hadfelt that that velvet was speaking. About all the rest there might be a doubt,but the velvet was delicious. Kitty smiled here too, at the ball, when sheglanced at it in the glass. Her bare shoulders and arms gave Kitty a sense ofchill marble, a feeling she particularly liked. Her eyes sparkled, and her rosylips could not keep from smiling from the consciousness of her ownattractiveness. She had scarcely entered the ballroom and reached the throng ofladies, all tulle, ribbons, lace, and flowers, waiting to be asked todance—Kitty was never one of that throng—when she was asked for awaltz, and asked by the best partner, the first star in the hierarchy of theballroom, a renowned director of dances, a married man, handsome andwell-built, Yegorushka Korsunsky. He had only just left the Countess Bonina,with whom he had danced the first half of the waltz, and, scanning hiskingdom—that is to say, a few couples who had started dancing—hecaught sight of Kitty, entering, and flew up to her with that peculiar, easyamble which is confined to directors of balls. Without even asking her if shecared to dance, he put out his arm to encircle her slender waist. She lookedround for someone to give her fan to, and their hostess, smiling to her, tookit.“How nice you’ve come in good time,” he said to her,embracing her waist; “such a bad habit to be late.” Bending herleft hand, she laid it on his shoulder, and her little feet in their pinkslippers began swiftly, lightly, and rhythmically moving over the slipperyfloor in time to the music.“It’s a rest to waltz with you,” he said to her, as they fellinto the first slow steps of the waltz. “It’s exquisite—suchlightness, precision.” He said to her the same thing he said to almostall his partners whom he knew well.She smiled at his praise, and continued to look about the room over hisshoulder. She was not like a girl at her first ball, for whom all faces in theballroom melt into one vision of fairyland. And she was not a girl who had gonethe stale round of balls till every face in the ballroom was familiar andtiresome. But she was in the middle stage between these two; she was excited,and at the same time she had sufficient self-possession to be able to observe.In the left corner of the ballroom she saw the cream of society gatheredtogether. There—incredibly naked—was the beauty Lidi,Korsunsky’s wife; there was the lady of the house; there shone the baldhead of Krivin, always to be found where the best people were. In thatdirection gazed the young men, not venturing to approach. There, too, shedescried Stiva, and there she saw the exquisite figure and head of Anna in ablack velvet gown. And he was there. Kitty had not seen him since theevening she refused Levin. With her long-sighted eyes, she knew him at once,and was even aware that he was looking at her.“Another turn, eh? You’re not tired?” said Korsunsky, alittle out of breath.“No, thank you!”“Where shall I take you?”“Madame Karenina’s here, I think ... take me to her.”“Wherever you command.”And Korsunsky began waltzing with measured steps straight towards the group inthe left corner, continually saying, “Pardon, mesdames, pardon, pardon,mesdames”; and steering his course through the sea of lace, tulle, andribbon, and not disarranging a feather, he turned his partner sharply round, sothat her slim ankles, in light transparent stockings, were exposed to view, andher train floated out in fan shape and covered Krivin’s knees. Korsunskybowed, set straight his open shirt front, and gave her his arm to conduct herto Anna Arkadyevna. Kitty, flushed, took her train from Krivin’s knees,and, a little giddy, looked round, seeking Anna. Anna was not in lilac, asKitty had so urgently wished, but in a black, low-cut, velvet gown, showing herfull throat and shoulders, that looked as though carved in old ivory, and herrounded arms, with tiny, slender wrists. The whole gown was trimmed withVenetian guipure. On her head, among her black hair—her own, with nofalse additions—was a little wreath of pansies, and a bouquet of the samein the black ribbon of her sash among white lace. Her coiffure was notstriking. All that was noticeable was the little wilful tendrils of her curlyhair that would always break free about her neck and temples. Round herwell-cut, strong neck was a thread of pearls.Kitty had been seeing Anna every day; she adored her, and had pictured herinvariably in lilac. But now seeing her in black, she felt that she had notfully seen her charm. She saw her now as someone quite new and surprising toher. Now she understood that Anna could not have been in lilac, and that hercharm was just that she always stood out against her attire, that her dresscould never be noticeable on her. And her black dress, with its sumptuous lace,was not noticeable on her; it was only the frame, and all that was seen wasshe—simple, natural, elegant, and at the same time gay and eager.She was standing holding herself, as always, very erect, and when Kitty drewnear the group she was speaking to the master of the house, her head slightlyturned towards him.“No, I don’t throw stones,” she was saying, in answer tosomething, “though I can’t understand it,” she went on,shrugging her shoulders, and she turned at once with a soft smile of protectiontowards Kitty. With a flying, feminine glance she scanned her attire, and madea movement of her head, hardly perceptible, but understood by Kitty, signifyingapproval of her dress and her looks. “You came into the roomdancing,” she added.“This is one of my most faithful supporters,” said Korsunsky,bowing to Anna Arkadyevna, whom he had not yet seen. “The princess helpsto make balls happy and successful. Anna Arkadyevna, a waltz?” he said,bending down to her.“Why, have you met?” inquired their host.“Is there anyone we have not met? My wife and I are like whitewolves—everyone knows us,” answered Korsunsky. “A waltz, AnnaArkadyevna?”“I don’t dance when it’s possible not to dance,” shesaid.“But tonight it’s impossible,” answered Korsunsky.At that instant Vronsky came up.“Well, since it’s impossible tonight, let us start,” shesaid, not noticing Vronsky’s bow, and she hastily put her hand onKorsunsky’s shoulder.“What is she vexed with him about?” thought Kitty, discerning thatAnna had intentionally not responded to Vronsky’s bow. Vronsky went up toKitty reminding her of the first quadrille, and expressing his regret that hehad not seen her all this time. Kitty gazed in admiration at Anna waltzing, andlistened to him. She expected him to ask her for a waltz, but he did not, andshe glanced wonderingly at him. He flushed slightly, and hurriedly asked her towaltz, but he had only just put his arm round her waist and taken the firststep when the music suddenly stopped. Kitty looked into his face, which was soclose to her own, and long afterwards—for several years after—thatlook, full of love, to which he made no response, cut her to the heart with anagony of shame.“Pardon! pardon! Waltz! waltz!” shouted Korsunsky from theother side of the room, and seizing the first young lady he came across hebegan dancing himself.Chapter 23Vronsky and Kitty waltzed several times round the room. After the first waltzKitty went to her mother, and she had hardly time to say a few words toCountess Nordston when Vronsky came up again for the first quadrille. Duringthe quadrille nothing of any significance was said: there was disjointed talkbetween them of the Korsunskys, husband and wife, whom he described veryamusingly, as delightful children at forty, and of the future town theater; andonly once the conversation touched her to the quick, when he asked her aboutLevin, whether he was here, and added that he liked him so much. But Kitty didnot expect much from the quadrille. She looked forward with a thrill at herheart to the mazurka. She fancied that in the mazurka everything must bedecided. The fact that he did not during the quadrille ask her for the mazurkadid not trouble her. She felt sure she would dance the mazurka with him as shehad done at former balls, and refused five young men, saying she was engagedfor the mazurka. The whole ball up to the last quadrille was for Kitty anenchanted vision of delightful colors, sounds, and motions. She only sat downwhen she felt too tired and begged for a rest. But as she was dancing the lastquadrille with one of the tiresome young men whom she could not refuse, shechanced to be vis-à-vis with Vronsky and Anna. She had not been nearAnna again since the beginning of the evening, and now again she saw hersuddenly quite new and surprising. She saw in her the signs of that excitementof success she knew so well in herself; she saw that she was intoxicated withthe delighted admiration she was exciting. She knew that feeling and knew itssigns, and saw them in Anna; saw the quivering, flashing light in her eyes, andthe smile of happiness and excitement unconsciously playing on her lips, andthe deliberate grace, precision, and lightness of her movements.“Who?” she asked herself. “All or one?” And notassisting the harassed young man she was dancing with in the conversation, thethread of which he had lost and could not pick up again, she obeyed withexternal liveliness the peremptory shouts of Korsunsky starting them all intothe grand rond, and then into the chaîne, and at the same timeshe kept watch with a growing pang at her heart. “No, it’s not theadmiration of the crowd has intoxicated her, but the adoration of one. And thatone? can it be he?” Every time he spoke to Anna the joyous light flashedinto her eyes, and the smile of happiness curved her red lips. She seemed tomake an effort to control herself, to try not to show these signs of delight,but they came out on her face of themselves. “But what of him?”Kitty looked at him and was filled with terror. What was pictured so clearly toKitty in the mirror of Anna’s face she saw in him. What had become of hisalways self-possessed resolute manner, and the carelessly serene expression ofhis face? Now every time he turned to her, he bent his head, as though he wouldhave fallen at her feet, and in his eyes there was nothing but humblesubmission and dread. “I would not offend you,” his eyes seemedevery time to be saying, “but I want to save myself, and I don’tknow how.” On his face was a look such as Kitty had never seen before.They were speaking of common acquaintances, keeping up the most trivialconversation, but to Kitty it seemed that every word they said was determiningtheir fate and hers. And strange it was that they were actually talking of howabsurd Ivan Ivanovitch was with his French, and how the Eletsky girl might havemade a better match, yet these words had all the while consequence for them,and they were feeling just as Kitty did. The whole ball, the whole world,everything seemed lost in fog in Kitty’s soul. Nothing but the sterndiscipline of her bringing-up supported her and forced her to do what wasexpected of her, that is, to dance, to answer questions, to talk, even tosmile. But before the mazurka, when they were beginning to rearrange the chairsand a few couples moved out of the smaller rooms into the big room, a moment ofdespair and horror came for Kitty. She had refused five partners, and now shewas not dancing the mazurka. She had not even a hope of being asked for it,because she was so successful in society that the idea would never occur toanyone that she had remained disengaged till now. She would have to tell hermother she felt ill and go home, but she had not the strength to do this. Shefelt crushed. She went to the furthest end of the little drawing-room and sankinto a low chair. Her light, transparent skirts rose like a cloud about herslender waist; one bare, thin, soft, girlish arm, hanging listlessly, was lostin the folds of her pink tunic; in the other she held her fan, and with rapid,short strokes fanned her burning face. But while she looked like a butterfly,clinging to a blade of grass, and just about to open its rainbow wings forfresh flight, her heart ached with a horrible despair.“But perhaps I am wrong, perhaps it was not so?” And again sherecalled all she had seen.“Kitty, what is it?” said Countess Nordston, stepping noiselesslyover the carpet towards her. “I don’t understand it.”Kitty’s lower lip began to quiver; she got up quickly.“Kitty, you’re not dancing the mazurka?”“No, no,” said Kitty in a voice shaking with tears.“He asked her for the mazurka before me,” said Countess Nordston,knowing Kitty would understand who were “he” and “her.”“She said: ‘Why, aren’t you going to dance it with PrincessShtcherbatskaya?’”“Oh, I don’t care!” answered Kitty.No one but she herself understood her position; no one knew that she had justrefused the man whom perhaps she loved, and refused him because she had put herfaith in another.Countess Nordston found Korsunsky, with whom she was to dance the mazurka, andtold him to ask Kitty.Kitty danced in the first couple, and luckily for her she had not to talk,because Korsunsky was all the time running about directing the figure. Vronskyand Anna sat almost opposite her. She saw them with her long-sighted eyes, andsaw them, too, close by, when they met in the figures, and the more she saw ofthem the more convinced was she that her unhappiness was complete. She saw thatthey felt themselves alone in that crowded room. And on Vronsky’s face,always so firm and independent, she saw that look that had struck her, ofbewilderment and humble submissiveness, like the expression of an intelligentdog when it has done wrong.Anna smiled, and her smile was reflected by him. She grew thoughtful, and hebecame serious. Some supernatural force drew Kitty’s eyes to Anna’sface. She was fascinating in her simple black dress, fascinating were her roundarms with their bracelets, fascinating was her firm neck with its thread ofpearls, fascinating the straying curls of her loose hair, fascinating thegraceful, light movements of her little feet and hands, fascinating was thatlovely face in its eagerness, but there was something terrible and cruel in herfascination.Kitty admired her more than ever, and more and more acute was her suffering.Kitty felt overwhelmed, and her face showed it. When Vronsky saw her, comingacross her in the mazurka, he did not at once recognize her, she was sochanged.“Delightful ball!” he said to her, for the sake of sayingsomething.“Yes,” she answered.In the middle of the mazurka, repeating a complicated figure, newly invented byKorsunsky, Anna came forward into the center of the circle, chose twogentlemen, and summoned a lady and Kitty. Kitty gazed at her in dismay as shewent up. Anna looked at her with drooping eyelids, and smiled, pressing herhand. But, noticing that Kitty only responded to her smile by a look of despairand amazement, she turned away from her, and began gaily talking to the otherlady.“Yes, there is something uncanny, devilish and fascinating in her,”Kitty said to herself.Anna did not mean to stay to supper, but the master of the house began to pressher to do so.“Nonsense, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Korsunsky, drawing her bare armunder the sleeve of his dress coat, “I’ve such an idea for acotillion! Un bijou!”And he moved gradually on, trying to draw her along with him. Their host smiledapprovingly.“No, I am not going to stay,” answered Anna, smiling, but in spiteof her smile, both Korsunsky and the master of the house saw from her resolutetone that she would not stay.“No; why, as it is, I have danced more at your ball in Moscow than I haveall the winter in Petersburg,” said Anna, looking round at Vronsky, whostood near her. “I must rest a little before my journey.”“Are you certainly going tomorrow then?” asked Vronsky.“Yes, I suppose so,” answered Anna, as it were wondering at theboldness of his question; but the irrepressible, quivering brilliance of hereyes and her smile set him on fire as she said it.Anna Arkadyevna did not stay to supper, but went home.Chapter 24“Yes, there is something in me hateful, repulsive,” thought Levin,as he came away from the Shtcherbatskys’, and walked in the direction ofhis brother’s lodgings. “And I don’t get on with otherpeople. Pride, they say. No, I have no pride. If I had any pride, I should nothave put myself in such a position.” And he pictured to himself Vronsky,happy, good-natured, clever, and self-possessed, certainly never placed in theawful position in which he had been that evening. “Yes, she was bound tochoose him. So it had to be, and I cannot complain of anyone or anything. I ammyself to blame. What right had I to imagine she would care to join her life tomine? Who am I and what am I? A nobody, not wanted by anyone, nor of use toanybody.” And he recalled his brother Nikolay, and dwelt with pleasure onthe thought of him. “Isn’t he right that everything in the world isbase and loathsome? And are we fair in our judgment of brother Nikolay? Ofcourse, from the point of view of Prokofy, seeing him in a torn cloak andtipsy, he’s a despicable person. But I know him differently. I know hissoul, and know that we are like him. And I, instead of going to seek him out,went out to dinner, and came here.” Levin walked up to a lamppost, readhis brother’s address, which was in his pocketbook, and called a sledge.All the long way to his brother’s, Levin vividly recalled all the factsfamiliar to him of his brother Nikolay’s life. He remembered how hisbrother, while at the university, and for a year afterwards, had, in spite ofthe jeers of his companions, lived like a monk, strictly observing allreligious rites, services, and fasts, and avoiding every sort of pleasure,especially women. And afterwards, how he had all at once broken out: he hadassociated with the most horrible people, and rushed into the most senselessdebauchery. He remembered later the scandal over a boy, whom he had taken fromthe country to bring up, and, in a fit of rage, had so violently beaten thatproceedings were brought against him for unlawfully wounding. Then he recalledthe scandal with a sharper, to whom he had lost money, and given a promissorynote, and against whom he had himself lodged a complaint, asserting that he hadcheated him. (This was the money Sergey Ivanovitch had paid.) Then heremembered how he had spent a night in the lockup for disorderly conduct in thestreet. He remembered the shameful proceedings he had tried to get up againsthis brother Sergey Ivanovitch, accusing him of not having paid him his share ofhis mother’s fortune, and the last scandal, when he had gone to a westernprovince in an official capacity, and there had got into trouble for assaultinga village elder.... It was all horribly disgusting, yet to Levin it appearednot at all in the same disgusting light as it inevitably would to those who didnot know Nikolay, did not know all his story, did not know his heart.Levin remembered that when Nikolay had been in the devout stage, the period offasts and monks and church services, when he was seeking in religion a supportand a curb for his passionate temperament, everyone, far from encouraging him,had jeered at him, and he, too, with the others. They had teased him, calledhim Noah, and monk; and, when he had broken out, no one had helped him, buteveryone had turned away from him with horror and disgust.Levin felt that, in spite of all the ugliness of his life, his brother Nikolay,in his soul, in the very depths of his soul, was no more in the wrong than thepeople who despised him. He was not to blame for having been born with hisunbridled temperament and his somehow limited intelligence. But he had alwayswanted to be good. “I will tell him everything, without reserve, and Iwill make him speak without reserve, too, and I’ll show him that I lovehim, and so understand him,” Levin resolved to himself, as, towardseleven o’clock, he reached the hotel of which he had the address.“At the top, 12 and 13,” the porter answered Levin’s inquiry.“At home?”“Sure to be at home.”The door of No. 12 was half open, and there came out into the streak of lightthick fumes of cheap, poor tobacco, and the sound of a voice, unknown to Levin;but he knew at once that his brother was there; he heard his cough.As he went in the door, the unknown voice was saying:“It all depends with how much judgment and knowledge the thing’sdone.”Konstantin Levin looked in at the door, and saw that the speaker was a youngman with an immense shock of hair, wearing a Russian jerkin, and that apockmarked woman in a woolen gown, without collar or cuffs, was sitting on thesofa. His brother was not to be seen. Konstantin felt a sharp pang at his heartat the thought of the strange company in which his brother spent his life. Noone had heard him, and Konstantin, taking off his galoshes, listened to whatthe gentleman in the jerkin was saying. He was speaking of some enterprise.“Well, the devil flay them, the privileged classes,” hisbrother’s voice responded, with a cough. “Masha! get us some supperand some wine if there’s any left; or else go and get some.”The woman rose, came out from behind the screen, and saw Konstantin.“There’s some gentleman, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” she said.“Whom do you want?” said the voice of Nikolay Levin, angrily.“It’s I,” answered Konstantin Levin, coming forward into thelight.“Who’s I?” Nikolay’s voice said again, stillmore angrily. He could be heard getting up hurriedly, stumbling againstsomething, and Levin saw, facing him in the doorway, the big, scared eyes, andthe huge, thin, stooping figure of his brother, so familiar, and yetastonishing in its weirdness and sickliness.He was even thinner than three years before, when Konstantin Levin had seen himlast. He was wearing a short coat, and his hands and big bones seemed hugerthan ever. His hair had grown thinner, the same straight mustaches hid hislips, the same eyes gazed strangely and naïvely at his visitor.“Ah, Kostya!” he exclaimed suddenly, recognizing his brother, andhis eyes lit up with joy. But the same second he looked round at the young man,and gave the nervous jerk of his head and neck that Konstantin knew so well, asif his neckband hurt him; and a quite different expression, wild, suffering,and cruel, rested on his emaciated face.“I wrote to you and Sergey Ivanovitch both that I don’t know youand don’t want to know you. What is it you want?”He was not at all the same as Konstantin had been fancying him. The worst andmost tiresome part of his character, what made all relations with him sodifficult, had been forgotten by Konstantin Levin when he thought of him, andnow, when he saw his face, and especially that nervous twitching of his head,he remembered it all.“I didn’t want to see you for anything,” he answered timidly.“I’ve simply come to see you.”His brother’s timidity obviously softened Nikolay. His lips twitched.“Oh, so that’s it?” he said. “Well, come in; sit down.Like some supper? Masha, bring supper for three. No, stop a minute. Do you knowwho this is?” he said, addressing his brother, and indicating thegentleman in the jerkin: “This is Mr. Kritsky, my friend from Kiev, avery remarkable man. He’s persecuted by the police, of course, becausehe’s not a scoundrel.”And he looked round in the way he always did at everyone in the room. Seeingthat the woman standing in the doorway was moving to go, he shouted to her,“Wait a minute, I said.” And with the inability to express himself,the incoherence that Konstantin knew so well, he began, with another look roundat everyone, to tell his brother Kritsky’s story: how he had beenexpelled from the university for starting a benefit society for the poorstudents and Sunday schools; and how he had afterwards been a teacher in apeasant school, and how he had been driven out of that too, and had afterwardsbeen condemned for something.“You’re of the Kiev university?” said Konstantin Levin toKritsky, to break the awkward silence that followed.“Yes, I was of Kiev,” Kritsky replied angrily, his face darkening.“And this woman,” Nikolay Levin interrupted him, pointing to her,“is the partner of my life, Marya Nikolaevna. I took her out of a badhouse,” and he jerked his neck saying this; “but I love her andrespect her, and anyone who wants to know me,” he added, raising hisvoice and knitting his brows, “I beg to love her and respect her.She’s just the same as my wife, just the same. So now you know whomyou’ve to do with. And if you think you’re lowering yourself, well,here’s the floor, there’s the door.”And again his eyes traveled inquiringly over all of them.“Why I should be lowering myself, I don’t understand.”“Then, Masha, tell them to bring supper; three portions, spirits andwine.... No, wait a minute.... No, it doesn’t matter.... Go along.”Chapter 25“So you see,” pursued Nikolay Levin, painfully wrinkling hisforehead and twitching.It was obviously difficult for him to think of what to say and do.“Here, do you see?”... He pointed to some sort of iron bars,fastened together with strings, lying in a corner of the room. “Do yousee that? That’s the beginning of a new thing we’re going into.It’s a productive association....”Konstantin scarcely heard him. He looked into his sickly, consumptive face, andhe was more and more sorry for him, and he could not force himself to listen towhat his brother was telling him about the association. He saw that thisassociation was a mere anchor to save him from self-contempt. Nikolay Levinwent on talking:“You know that capital oppresses the laborer. The laborers with us, thepeasants, bear all the burden of labor, and are so placed that however muchthey work they can’t escape from their position of beasts of burden. Allthe profits of labor, on which they might improve their position, and gainleisure for themselves, and after that education, all the surplus values aretaken from them by the capitalists. And society’s so constituted that theharder they work, the greater the profit of the merchants and landowners, whilethey stay beasts of burden to the end. And that state of things must bechanged,” he finished up, and he looked questioningly at his brother.“Yes, of course,” said Konstantin, looking at the patch of red thathad come out on his brother’s projecting cheekbones.“And so we’re founding a locksmiths’ association, where allthe production and profit and the chief instruments of production will be incommon.”“Where is the association to be?” asked Konstantin Levin.“In the village of Vozdrem, Kazan government.”“But why in a village? In the villages, I think, there is plenty of workas it is. Why a locksmiths’ association in a village?”“Why? Because the peasants are just as much slaves as they ever were, andthat’s why you and Sergey Ivanovitch don’t like people to try andget them out of their slavery,” said Nikolay Levin, exasperated by theobjection.Konstantin Levin sighed, looking meanwhile about the cheerless and dirty room.This sigh seemed to exasperate Nikolay still more.“I know your and Sergey Ivanovitch’s aristocratic views. I knowthat he applies all the power of his intellect to justify existingevils.”“No; and what do you talk of Sergey Ivanovitch for?” said Levin,smiling.“Sergey Ivanovitch? I’ll tell you what for!” Nikolay Levinshrieked suddenly at the name of Sergey Ivanovitch. “I’ll tell youwhat for.... But what’s the use of talking? There’s only onething.... What did you come to me for? You look down on this, and you’rewelcome to,—and go away, in God’s name go away!” he shrieked,getting up from his chair. “And go away, and go away!”“I don’t look down on it at all,” said Konstantin Levintimidly. “I don’t even dispute it.”At that instant Marya Nikolaevna came back. Nikolay Levin looked round angrilyat her. She went quickly to him, and whispered something.“I’m not well; I’ve grown irritable,” said NikolayLevin, getting calmer and breathing painfully; “and then you talk to meof Sergey Ivanovitch and his article. It’s such rubbish, such lying, suchself-deception. What can a man write of justice who knows nothing of it? Haveyou read his article?” he asked Kritsky, sitting down again at the table,and moving back off half of it the scattered cigarettes, so as to clear aspace.“I’ve not read it,” Kritsky responded gloomily, obviously notdesiring to enter into the conversation.“Why not?” said Nikolay Levin, now turning with exasperation uponKritsky.“Because I didn’t see the use of wasting my time over it.”“Oh, but excuse me, how did you know it would be wasting your time? Thatarticle’s too deep for many people—that’s to say it’sover their heads. But with me, it’s another thing; I see through hisideas, and I know where its weakness lies.”Everyone was mute. Kritsky got up deliberately and reached his cap.“Won’t you have supper? All right, good-bye! Come round tomorrowwith the locksmith.”Kritsky had hardly gone out when Nikolay Levin smiled and winked.“He’s no good either,” he said. “I see, ofcourse....”But at that instant Kritsky, at the door, called him....“What do you want now?” he said, and went out to him in thepassage. Left alone with Marya Nikolaevna, Levin turned to her.“Have you been long with my brother?” he said to her.“Yes, more than a year. Nikolay Dmitrievitch’s health has becomevery poor. Nikolay Dmitrievitch drinks a great deal,” she said.“That is ... how does he drink?”“Drinks vodka, and it’s bad for him.”“And a great deal?” whispered Levin.“Yes,” she said, looking timidly towards the doorway, where NikolayLevin had reappeared.“What were you talking about?” he said, knitting his brows, andturning his scared eyes from one to the other. “What was it?”“Oh, nothing,” Konstantin answered in confusion.“Oh, if you don’t want to say, don’t. Only it’s no goodyour talking to her. She’s a wench, and you’re a gentleman,”he said with a jerk of the neck. “You understand everything, I see, andhave taken stock of everything, and look with commiseration on myshortcomings,” he began again, raising his voice.“Nikolay Dmitrievitch, Nikolay Dmitrievitch,” whispered MaryaNikolaevna, again going up to him.“Oh, very well, very well!... But where’s the supper? Ah, here itis,” he said, seeing a waiter with a tray. “Here, set ithere,” he added angrily, and promptly seizing the vodka, he poured out aglassful and drank it greedily. “Like a drink?” he turned to hisbrother, and at once became better humored.“Well, enough of Sergey Ivanovitch. I’m glad to see you, anyway.After all’s said and done, we’re not strangers. Come, have a drink.Tell me what you’re doing,” he went on, greedily munching a pieceof bread, and pouring out another glassful. “How are you living?”“I live alone in the country, as I used to. I’m busy looking afterthe land,” answered Konstantin, watching with horror the greediness withwhich his brother ate and drank, and trying to conceal that he noticed it.“Why don’t you get married?”“It hasn’t happened so,” Konstantin answered, reddening alittle.“Why not? For me now ... everything’s at an end! I’ve made amess of my life. But this I’ve said, and I say still, that if my sharehad been given me when I needed it, my whole life would have beendifferent.”Konstantin made haste to change the conversation.“Do you know your little Vanya’s with me, a clerk in thecountinghouse at Pokrovskoe.”Nikolay jerked his neck, and sank into thought.“Yes, tell me what’s going on at Pokrovskoe. Is the house standingstill, and the birch trees, and our schoolroom? And Philip the gardener, is heliving? How I remember the arbor and the seat! Now mind and don’t alteranything in the house, but make haste and get married, and make everything asit used to be again. Then I’ll come and see you, if your wife isnice.”“But come to me now,” said Levin. “How nicely we wouldarrange it!”“I’d come and see you if I were sure I should not find SergeyIvanovitch.”“You wouldn’t find him there. I live quite independently ofhim.”“Yes, but say what you like, you will have to choose between me andhim,” he said, looking timidly into his brother’s face.This timidity touched Konstantin.“If you want to hear my confession of faith on the subject, I tell youthat in your quarrel with Sergey Ivanovitch I take neither side. You’reboth wrong. You’re more wrong externally, and he inwardly.”“Ah, ah! You see that, you see that!” Nikolay shouted joyfully.“But I personally value friendly relations with you morebecause....”“Why, why?”Konstantin could not say that he valued it more because Nikolay was unhappy,and needed affection. But Nikolay knew that this was just what he meant to say,and scowling he took up the vodka again.“Enough, Nikolay Dmitrievitch!” said Marya Nikolaevna, stretchingout her plump, bare arm towards the decanter.“Let it be! Don’t insist! I’ll beat you!” he shouted.Marya Nikolaevna smiled a sweet and good-humored smile, which was at oncereflected on Nikolay’s face, and she took the bottle.“And do you suppose she understands nothing?” said Nikolay.“She understands it all better than any of us. Isn’t it truethere’s something good and sweet in her?”“Were you never before in Moscow?” Konstantin said to her, for thesake of saying something.“Only you mustn’t be polite and stiff with her. It frightens her.No one ever spoke to her so but the justices of the peace who tried her fortrying to get out of a house of ill-fame. Mercy on us, the senselessness in theworld!” he cried suddenly. “These new institutions, these justicesof the peace, rural councils, what hideousness it all is!”And he began to enlarge on his encounters with the new institutions.Konstantin Levin heard him, and the disbelief in the sense of all publicinstitutions, which he shared with him, and often expressed, was distasteful tohim now from his brother’s lips.“In another world we shall understand it all,” he said lightly.“In another world! Ah, I don’t like that other world! I don’tlike it,” he said, letting his scared eyes rest on his brother’seyes. “Here one would think that to get out of all the baseness and themess, one’s own and other people’s, would be a good thing, and yetI’m afraid of death, awfully afraid of death.” He shuddered.“But do drink something. Would you like some champagne? Or shall we gosomewhere? Let’s go to the Gypsies! Do you know I have got so fond of theGypsies and Russian songs.”His speech had begun to falter, and he passed abruptly from one subject toanother. Konstantin with the help of Masha persuaded him not to go outanywhere, and got him to bed hopelessly drunk.Masha promised to write to Konstantin in case of need, and to persuade NikolayLevin to go and stay with his brother.Chapter 26In the morning Konstantin Levin left Moscow, and towards evening he reachedhome. On the journey in the train he talked to his neighbors about politics andthe new railways, and, just as in Moscow, he was overcome by a sense ofconfusion of ideas, dissatisfaction with himself, shame of something or other.But when he got out at his own station, when he saw his one-eyed coachman,Ignat, with the collar of his coat turned up; when, in the dim light reflectedby the station fires, he saw his own sledge, his own horses with their tailstied up, in their harness trimmed with rings and tassels; when the coachmanIgnat, as he put in his luggage, told him the village news, that the contractorhad arrived, and that Pava had calved,—he felt that little by little theconfusion was clearing up, and the shame and self-dissatisfaction were passingaway. He felt this at the mere sight of Ignat and the horses; but when he hadput on the sheepskin brought for him, had sat down wrapped up in the sledge,and had driven off pondering on the work that lay before him in the village,and staring at the side-horse, that had been his saddle-horse, past his primenow, but a spirited beast from the Don, he began to see what had happened tohim in quite a different light. He felt himself, and did not want to be anyoneelse. All he wanted now was to be better than before. In the first place heresolved that from that day he would give up hoping for any extraordinaryhappiness, such as marriage must have given him, and consequently he would notso disdain what he really had. Secondly, he would never again let himself giveway to low passion, the memory of which had so tortured him when he had beenmaking up his mind to make an offer. Then remembering his brother Nikolay, heresolved to himself that he would never allow himself to forget him, that hewould follow him up, and not lose sight of him, so as to be ready to help whenthings should go ill with him. And that would be soon, he felt. Then, too, hisbrother’s talk of communism, which he had treated so lightly at the time,now made him think. He considered a revolution in economic conditions nonsense.But he always felt the injustice of his own abundance in comparison with thepoverty of the peasants, and now he determined that so as to feel quite in theright, though he had worked hard and lived by no means luxuriously before, hewould now work still harder, and would allow himself even less luxury. And allthis seemed to him so easy a conquest over himself that he spent the wholedrive in the pleasantest daydreams. With a resolute feeling of hope in a new,better life, he reached home before nine o’clock at night.The snow of the little quadrangle before the house was lit up by a light in thebedroom windows of his old nurse, Agafea Mihalovna, who performed the duties ofhousekeeper in his house. She was not yet asleep. Kouzma, waked up by her, camesidling sleepily out onto the steps. A setter bitch, Laska, ran out too, almostupsetting Kouzma, and whining, turned round about Levin’s knees, jumpingup and longing, but not daring, to put her forepaws on his chest.“You’re soon back again, sir,” said Agafea Mihalovna.“I got tired of it, Agafea Mihalovna. With friends, one is well; but athome, one is better,” he answered, and went into his study.The study was slowly lit up as the candle was brought in. The familiar detailscame out: the stag’s horns, the bookshelves, the looking-glass, the stovewith its ventilator, which had long wanted mending, his father’s sofa, alarge table, on the table an open book, a broken ashtray, a manuscript bookwith his handwriting. As he saw all this, there came over him for an instant adoubt of the possibility of arranging the new life, of which he had beendreaming on the road. All these traces of his life seemed to clutch him, and tosay to him: “No, you’re not going to get away from us, andyou’re not going to be different, but you’re going to be the sameas you’ve always been; with doubts, everlasting dissatisfaction withyourself, vain efforts to amend, and falls, and everlasting expectation, of ahappiness which you won’t get, and which isn’t possible foryou.”This the things said to him, but another voice in his heart was telling himthat he must not fall under the sway of the past, and that one can do anythingwith oneself. And hearing that voice, he went into the corner where stood histwo heavy dumbbells, and began brandishing them like a gymnast, trying torestore his confident temper. There was a creak of steps at the door. Hehastily put down the dumbbells.The bailiff came in, and said everything, thank God, was doing well; butinformed him that the buckwheat in the new drying machine had been a littlescorched. This piece of news irritated Levin. The new drying machine had beenconstructed and partly invented by Levin. The bailiff had always been againstthe drying machine, and now it was with suppressed triumph that he announcedthat the buckwheat had been scorched. Levin was firmly convinced that if thebuckwheat had been scorched, it was only because the precautions had not beentaken, for which he had hundreds of times given orders. He was annoyed, andreprimanded the bailiff. But there had been an important and joyful event:Pava, his best cow, an expensive beast, bought at a show, had calved.“Kouzma, give me my sheepskin. And you tell them to take a lantern.I’ll come and look at her,” he said to the bailiff.The cowhouse for the more valuable cows was just behind the house. Walkingacross the yard, passing a snowdrift by the lilac tree, he went into thecowhouse. There was the warm, steamy smell of dung when the frozen door wasopened, and the cows, astonished at the unfamiliar light of the lantern,stirred on the fresh straw. He caught a glimpse of the broad, smooth, black andpiebald back of Hollandka. Berkoot, the bull, was lying down with his ring inhis lip, and seemed about to get up, but thought better of it, and only gavetwo snorts as they passed by him. Pava, a perfect beauty, huge as ahippopotamus, with her back turned to them, prevented their seeing the calf, asshe sniffed her all over.Levin went into the pen, looked Pava over, and lifted the red and spotted calfonto her long, tottering legs. Pava, uneasy, began lowing, but when Levin putthe calf close to her she was soothed, and, sighing heavily, began licking herwith her rough tongue. The calf, fumbling, poked her nose under hermother’s udder, and stiffened her tail out straight.“Here, bring the light, Fyodor, this way,” said Levin, examiningthe calf. “Like the mother! though the color takes after the father; butthat’s nothing. Very good. Long and broad in the haunch. VassilyFedorovitch, isn’t she splendid?” he said to the bailiff, quiteforgiving him for the buckwheat under the influence of his delight in the calf.“How could she fail to be? Oh, Semyon the contractor came the day afteryou left. You must settle with him, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said thebailiff. “I did inform you about the machine.”This question was enough to take Levin back to all the details of his work onthe estate, which was on a large scale, and complicated. He went straight fromthe cowhouse to the counting house, and after a little conversation with thebailiff and Semyon the contractor, he went back to the house and straightupstairs to the drawing-room.Chapter 27The house was big and old-fashioned, and Levin, though he lived alone, had thewhole house heated and used. He knew that this was stupid, he knew that it waspositively not right, and contrary to his present new plans, but this house wasa whole world to Levin. It was the world in which his father and mother hadlived and died. They had lived just the life that to Levin seemed the ideal ofperfection, and that he had dreamed of beginning with his wife, his family.Levin scarcely remembered his mother. His conception of her was for him asacred memory, and his future wife was bound to be in his imagination arepetition of that exquisite, holy ideal of a woman that his mother had been.He was so far from conceiving of love for woman apart from marriage that hepositively pictured to himself first the family, and only secondarily the womanwho would give him a family. His ideas of marriage were, consequently, quiteunlike those of the great majority of his acquaintances, for whom gettingmarried was one of the numerous facts of social life. For Levin it was thechief affair of life, on which its whole happiness turned. And now he had togive up that.When he had gone into the little drawing-room, where he always had tea, and hadsettled himself in his armchair with a book, and Agafea Mihalovna had broughthim tea, and with her usual, “Well, I’ll stay a while, sir,”had taken a chair in the window, he felt that, however strange it might be, hehad not parted from his daydreams, and that he could not live without them.Whether with her, or with another, still it would be. He was reading a book,and thinking of what he was reading, and stopping to listen to AgafeaMihalovna, who gossiped away without flagging, and yet with all that, all sortsof pictures of family life and work in the future rose disconnectedly beforehis imagination. He felt that in the depth of his soul something had been putin its place, settled down, and laid to rest.He heard Agafea Mihalovna talking of how Prohor had forgotten his duty to God,and with the money Levin had given him to buy a horse, had been drinkingwithout stopping, and had beaten his wife till he’d half killed her. Helistened, and read his book, and recalled the whole train of ideas suggested byhis reading. It was Tyndall’s Treatise on Heat. He recalled hisown criticisms of Tyndall of his complacent satisfaction in the cleverness ofhis experiments, and for his lack of philosophic insight. And suddenly therefloated into his mind the joyful thought: “In two years’ time Ishall have two Dutch cows; Pava herself will perhaps still be alive, a dozenyoung daughters of Berkoot and the three others—how lovely!”He took up his book again. “Very good, electricity and heat are the samething; but is it possible to substitute the one quantity for the other in theequation for the solution of any problem? No. Well, then what of it? Theconnection between all the forces of nature is felt instinctively....It’s particulary nice if Pava’s daughter should be a red-spottedcow, and all the herd will take after her, and the other three, too! Splendid!To go out with my wife and visitors to meet the herd.... My wife says,‘Kostya and I looked after that calf like a child.’ ‘How canit interest you so much?’ says a visitor. ‘Everything thatinterests him, interests me.’ But who will she be?” And heremembered what had happened at Moscow.... “Well, there’s nothingto be done.... It’s not my fault. But now everything shall go on in a newway. It’s nonsense to pretend that life won’t let one, that thepast won’t let one. One must struggle to live better, muchbetter.”... He raised his head, and fell to dreaming. Old Laska, who hadnot yet fully digested her delight at his return, and had run out into the yardto bark, came back wagging her tail, and crept up to him, bringing in the scentof fresh air, put her head under his hand, and whined plaintively, asking to bestroked.“There, who’d have thought it?” said Agafea Mihalovna.“The dog now ... why, she understands that her master’s come home,and that he’s low-spirited.”“Why low-spirited?”“Do you suppose I don’t see it, sir? It’s high time I shouldknow the gentry. Why, I’ve grown up from a little thing with them.It’s nothing, sir, so long as there’s health and a clearconscience.”Levin looked intently at her, surprised at how well she knew his thought.“Shall I fetch you another cup?” said she, and taking his cup shewent out.Laska kept poking her head under his hand. He stroked her, and she promptlycurled up at his feet, laying her head on a hindpaw. And in token of all nowbeing well and satisfactory, she opened her mouth a little, smacked her lips,and settling her sticky lips more comfortably about her old teeth, she sankinto blissful repose. Levin watched all her movements attentively.“That’s what I’ll do,” he said to himself;“that’s what I’ll do! Nothing’s amiss.... All’swell.”Chapter 28After the ball, early next morning, Anna Arkadyevna sent her husband a telegramthat she was leaving Moscow the same day.“No, I must go, I must go”; she explained to her sister-in-law thechange in her plans in a tone that suggested that she had to remember so manythings that there was no enumerating them: “no, it had really better betoday!”Stepan Arkadyevitch was not dining at home, but he promised to come and see hissister off at seven o’clock.Kitty, too, did not come, sending a note that she had a headache. Dolly andAnna dined alone with the children and the English governess. Whether it wasthat the children were fickle, or that they had acute senses, and felt thatAnna was quite different that day from what she had been when they had takensuch a fancy to her, that she was not now interested in them,—but theyhad abruptly dropped their play with their aunt, and their love for her, andwere quite indifferent that she was going away. Anna was absorbed the wholemorning in preparations for her departure. She wrote notes to her Moscowacquaintances, put down her accounts, and packed. Altogether Dolly fancied shewas not in a placid state of mind, but in that worried mood, which Dolly knewwell with herself, and which does not come without cause, and for the most partcovers dissatisfaction with self. After dinner, Anna went up to her room todress, and Dolly followed her.“How queer you are today!” Dolly said to her.“I? Do you think so? I’m not queer, but I’m nasty. I am likethat sometimes. I keep feeling as if I could cry. It’s very stupid, butit’ll pass off,” said Anna quickly, and she bent her flushed faceover a tiny bag in which she was packing a nightcap and some cambrichandkerchiefs. Her eyes were particularly bright, and were continually swimmingwith tears. “In the same way I didn’t want to leave Petersburg, andnow I don’t want to go away from here.”“You came here and did a good deed,” said Dolly, looking intentlyat her.Anna looked at her with eyes wet with tears.“Don’t say that, Dolly. I’ve done nothing, and could donothing. I often wonder why people are all in league to spoil me. What have Idone, and what could I do? In your heart there was found love enough toforgive....”“If it had not been for you, God knows what would have happened! Howhappy you are, Anna!” said Dolly. “Everything is clear and good inyour heart.”“Every heart has its own skeletons, as the English say.”“You have no sort of skeleton, have you? Everything is so clear inyou.”“I have!” said Anna suddenly, and, unexpectedly after her tears, asly, ironical smile curved her lips.“Come, he’s amusing, anyway, your skeleton, and notdepressing,” said Dolly, smiling.“No, he’s depressing. Do you know why I’m going today insteadof tomorrow? It’s a confession that weighs on me; I want to make it toyou,” said Anna, letting herself drop definitely into an armchair, andlooking straight into Dolly’s face.And to her surprise Dolly saw that Anna was blushing up to her ears, up to thecurly black ringlets on her neck.“Yes,” Anna went on. “Do you know why Kitty didn’t cometo dinner? She’s jealous of me. I have spoiled ... I’ve been thecause of that ball being a torture to her instead of a pleasure. But truly,truly, it’s not my fault, or only my fault a little bit,” she said,daintily drawling the words “a little bit.”“Oh, how like Stiva you said that!” said Dolly, laughing.Anna was hurt.“Oh no, oh no! I’m not Stiva,” she said, knitting her brows.“That’s why I’m telling you, just because I could never letmyself doubt myself for an instant,” said Anna.But at the very moment she was uttering the words, she felt that they were nottrue. She was not merely doubting herself, she felt emotion at the thought ofVronsky, and was going away sooner than she had meant, simply to avoid meetinghim.“Yes, Stiva told me you danced the mazurka with him, and thathe....”“You can’t imagine how absurdly it all came about. I only meant tobe matchmaking, and all at once it turned out quite differently. Possiblyagainst my own will....”She crimsoned and stopped.“Oh, they feel it directly?” said Dolly.“But I should be in despair if there were anything serious in it on hisside,” Anna interrupted her. “And I am certain it will all beforgotten, and Kitty will leave off hating me.”“All the same, Anna, to tell you the truth, I’m not very anxiousfor this marriage for Kitty. And it’s better it should come to nothing,if he, Vronsky, is capable of falling in love with you in a single day.”“Oh, heavens, that would be too silly!” said Anna, and again a deepflush of pleasure came out on her face, when she heard the idea, that absorbedher, put into words. “And so here I am going away, having made an enemyof Kitty, whom I liked so much! Ah, how sweet she is! But you’ll make itright, Dolly? Eh?”Dolly could scarcely suppress a smile. She loved Anna, but she enjoyed seeingthat she too had her weaknesses.“An enemy? That can’t be.”“I did so want you all to care for me, as I do for you, and now I carefor you more than ever,” said Anna, with tears in her eyes. “Ah,how silly I am today!”She passed her handkerchief over her face and began dressing.At the very moment of starting Stepan Arkadyevitch arrived, late, rosy andgood-humored, smelling of wine and cigars.Anna’s emotionalism infected Dolly, and when she embraced hersister-in-law for the last time, she whispered: “Remember, Anna, whatyou’ve done for me—I shall never forget. And remember that I loveyou, and shall always love you as my dearest friend!”“I don’t know why,” said Anna, kissing her and hiding hertears.“You understood me, and you understand. Good-bye, my darling!”Chapter 29“Come, it’s all over, and thank God!” was the first thoughtthat came to Anna Arkadyevna, when she had said good-bye for the last time toher brother, who had stood blocking up the entrance to the carriage till thethird bell rang. She sat down on her lounge beside Annushka, and looked abouther in the twilight of the sleeping-carriage. “Thank God! tomorrow Ishall see Seryozha and Alexey Alexandrovitch, and my life will go on in the oldway, all nice and as usual.”Still in the same anxious frame of mind, as she had been all that day, Annatook pleasure in arranging herself for the journey with great care. With herlittle deft hands she opened and shut her little red bag, took out a cushion,laid it on her knees, and carefully wrapping up her feet, settled herselfcomfortably. An invalid lady had already lain down to sleep. Two other ladiesbegan talking to Anna, and a stout elderly lady tucked up her feet, and madeobservations about the heating of the train. Anna answered a few words, but notforeseeing any entertainment from the conversation, she asked Annushka to get alamp, hooked it onto the arm of her seat, and took from her bag a paper-knifeand an English novel. At first her reading made no progress. The fuss andbustle were disturbing; then when the train had started, she could not helplistening to the noises; then the snow beating on the left window and stickingto the pane, and the sight of the muffled guard passing by, covered with snowon one side, and the conversations about the terrible snowstorm raging outside,distracted her attention. Farther on, it was continually the same again andagain: the same shaking and rattling, the same snow on the window, the samerapid transitions from steaming heat to cold, and back again to heat, the samepassing glimpses of the same figures in the twilight, and the same voices, andAnna began to read and to understand what she read. Annushka was alreadydozing, the red bag on her lap, clutched by her broad hands, in gloves, ofwhich one was torn. Anna Arkadyevna read and understood, but it was distastefulto her to read, that is, to follow the reflection of other people’slives. She had too great a desire to live herself. If she read that the heroineof the novel was nursing a sick man, she longed to move with noiseless stepsabout the room of a sick man; if she read of a member of Parliament making aspeech, she longed to be delivering the speech; if she read of how Lady Maryhad ridden after the hounds, and had provoked her sister-in-law, and hadsurprised everyone by her boldness, she too wished to be doing the same. Butthere was no chance of doing anything; and twisting the smooth paper-knife inher little hands, she forced herself to read.The hero of the novel was already almost reaching his English happiness, abaronetcy and an estate, and Anna was feeling a desire to go with him to theestate, when she suddenly felt that he ought to feel ashamed, and thatshe was ashamed of the same thing. But what had he to be ashamed of?“What have I to be ashamed of?” she asked herself in injuredsurprise. She laid down the book and sank against the back of the chair,tightly gripping the paper-cutter in both hands. There was nothing. She wentover all her Moscow recollections. All were good, pleasant. She remembered theball, remembered Vronsky and his face of slavish adoration, remembered all herconduct with him: there was nothing shameful. And for all that, at the samepoint in her memories, the feeling of shame was intensified, as though someinner voice, just at the point when she thought of Vronsky, were saying to her,“Warm, very warm, hot.” “Well, what is it?” she said toherself resolutely, shifting her seat in the lounge. “What does it mean?Am I afraid to look it straight in the face? Why, what is it? Can it be thatbetween me and this officer boy there exist, or can exist, any other relationsthan such as are common with every acquaintance?” She laughedcontemptuously and took up her book again; but now she was definitely unable tofollow what she read. She passed the paper-knife over the window pane, thenlaid its smooth, cool surface to her cheek, and almost laughed aloud at thefeeling of delight that all at once without cause came over her. She felt asthough her nerves were strings being strained tighter and tighter on some sortof screwing peg. She felt her eyes opening wider and wider, her fingers andtoes twitching nervously, something within oppressing her breathing, while allshapes and sounds seemed in the uncertain half-light to strike her withunaccustomed vividness. Moments of doubt were continually coming upon her, whenshe was uncertain whether the train were going forwards or backwards, or werestanding still altogether; whether it were Annushka at her side or a stranger.“What’s that on the arm of the chair, a fur cloak or some beast?And what am I myself? Myself or some other woman?” She was afraid ofgiving way to this delirium. But something drew her towards it, and she couldyield to it or resist it at will. She got up to rouse herself, and slipped offher plaid and the cape of her warm dress. For a moment she regained herself-possession, and realized that the thin peasant who had come in wearing along overcoat, with buttons missing from it, was the stoveheater, that he waslooking at the thermometer, that it was the wind and snow bursting in after himat the door; but then everything grew blurred again.... That peasant with thelong waist seemed to be gnawing something on the wall, the old lady beganstretching her legs the whole length of the carriage, and filling it with ablack cloud; then there was a fearful shrieking and banging, as though someonewere being torn to pieces; then there was a blinding dazzle of red fire beforeher eyes and a wall seemed to rise up and hide everything. Anna felt as thoughshe were sinking down. But it was not terrible, but delightful. The voice of aman muffled up and covered with snow shouted something in her ear. She got upand pulled herself together; she realized that they had reached a station andthat this was the guard. She asked Annushka to hand her the cape she had takenoff and her shawl, put them on and moved towards the door.“Do you wish to get out?” asked Annushka.“Yes, I want a little air. It’s very hot in here.” And sheopened the door. The driving snow and the wind rushed to meet her and struggledwith her over the door. But she enjoyed the struggle.She opened the door and went out. The wind seemed as though lying in wait forher; with gleeful whistle it tried to snatch her up and bear her off, but sheclung to the cold door post, and holding her skirt got down onto the platformand under the shelter of the carriages. The wind had been powerful on thesteps, but on the platform, under the lee of the carriages, there was a lull.With enjoyment she drew deep breaths of the frozen, snowy air, and standingnear the carriage looked about the platform and the lighted station.Chapter 30The raging tempest rushed whistling between the wheels of the carriages, aboutthe scaffolding, and round the corner of the station. The carriages, posts,people, everything that was to be seen was covered with snow on one side, andwas getting more and more thickly covered. For a moment there would come a lullin the storm, but then it would swoop down again with such onslaughts that itseemed impossible to stand against it. Meanwhile men ran to and fro, talkingmerrily together, their steps crackling on the platform as they continuallyopened and closed the big doors. The bent shadow of a man glided by at herfeet, and she heard sounds of a hammer upon iron. “Hand over thattelegram!” came an angry voice out of the stormy darkness on the otherside. “This way! No. 28!” several different voices shouted again,and muffled figures ran by covered with snow. Two gentlemen with lightedcigarettes passed by her. She drew one more deep breath of the fresh air, andhad just put her hand out of her muff to take hold of the door post and getback into the carriage, when another man in a military overcoat, quite closebeside her, stepped between her and the flickering light of the lamp post. Shelooked round, and the same instant recognized Vronsky’s face. Putting hishand to the peak of his cap, he bowed to her and asked, Was there anything shewanted? Could he be of any service to her? She gazed rather a long while at himwithout answering, and, in spite of the shadow in which he was standing, shesaw, or fancied she saw, both the expression of his face and his eyes. It wasagain that expression of reverential ecstasy which had so worked upon her theday before. More than once she had told herself during the past few days, andagain only a few moments before, that Vronsky was for her only one of thehundreds of young men, forever exactly the same, that are met everywhere, thatshe would never allow herself to bestow a thought upon him. But now at thefirst instant of meeting him, she was seized by a feeling of joyful pride. Shehad no need to ask why he had come. She knew as certainly as if he had told herthat he was here to be where she was.“I didn’t know you were going. What are you coming for?” shesaid, letting fall the hand with which she had grasped the door post. Andirrepressible delight and eagerness shone in her face.“What am I coming for?” he repeated, looking straight into hereyes. “You know that I have come to be where you are,” he said;“I can’t help it.”At that moment the wind, as it were, surmounting all obstacles, sent the snowflying from the carriage roofs, and clanked some sheet of iron it had torn off,while the hoarse whistle of the engine roared in front, plaintively andgloomily. All the awfulness of the storm seemed to her more splendid now. Hehad said what her soul longed to hear, though she feared it with her reason.She made no answer, and in her face he saw conflict.“Forgive me, if you dislike what I said,” he said humbly.He had spoken courteously, deferentially, yet so firmly, so stubbornly, thatfor a long while she could make no answer.“It’s wrong, what you say, and I beg you, if you’re a goodman, to forget what you’ve said, as I forget it,” she said at last.“Not one word, not one gesture of yours shall I, could I, everforget....”“Enough, enough!” she cried trying assiduously to give a sternexpression to her face, into which he was gazing greedily. And clutching at thecold door post, she clambered up the steps and got rapidly into the corridor ofthe carriage. But in the little corridor she paused, going over in herimagination what had happened. Though she could not recall her own words orhis, she realized instinctively that the momentary conversation had broughtthem fearfully closer; and she was panic-stricken and blissful at it. Afterstanding still a few seconds, she went into the carriage and sat down in herplace. The overstrained condition which had tormented her before did not onlycome back, but was intensified, and reached such a pitch that she was afraidevery minute that something would snap within her from the excessive tension.She did not sleep all night. But in that nervous tension, and in the visionsthat filled her imagination, there was nothing disagreeable or gloomy: on thecontrary there was something blissful, glowing, and exhilarating. Towardsmorning Anna sank into a doze, sitting in her place, and when she waked it wasdaylight and the train was near Petersburg. At once thoughts of home, ofhusband and of son, and the details of that day and the following came uponher.At Petersburg, as soon as the train stopped and she got out, the first personthat attracted her attention was her husband. “Oh, mercy! why do his earslook like that?” she thought, looking at his frigid and imposing figure,and especially the ears that struck her at the moment as propping up the brimof his round hat. Catching sight of her, he came to meet her, his lips fallinginto their habitual sarcastic smile, and his big, tired eyes looking straightat her. An unpleasant sensation gripped at her heart when she met his obstinateand weary glance, as though she had expected to see him different. She wasespecially struck by the feeling of dissatisfaction with herself that sheexperienced on meeting him. That feeling was an intimate, familiar feeling,like a consciousness of hypocrisy, which she experienced in her relations withher husband. But hitherto she had not taken note of the feeling, now she wasclearly and painfully aware of it.“Yes, as you see, your tender spouse, as devoted as the first year aftermarriage, burned with impatience to see you,” he said in his deliberate,high-pitched voice, and in that tone which he almost always took with her, atone of jeering at anyone who should say in earnest what he said.“Is Seryozha quite well?” she asked.“And is this all the reward,” said he, “for my ardor?He’s quite well....”Chapter 31Vronsky had not even tried to sleep all that night. He sat in his armchair,looking straight before him or scanning the people who got in and out. If hehad indeed on previous occasions struck and impressed people who did not knowhim by his air of unhesitating composure, he seemed now more haughty andself-possessed than ever. He looked at people as if they were things. A nervousyoung man, a clerk in a law court, sitting opposite him, hated him for thatlook. The young man asked him for a light, and entered into conversation withhim, and even pushed against him, to make him feel that he was not a thing, buta person. But Vronsky gazed at him exactly as he did at the lamp, and the youngman made a wry face, feeling that he was losing his self-possession under theoppression of this refusal to recognize him as a person.Vronsky saw nothing and no one. He felt himself a king, not because he believedthat he had made an impression on Anna—he did not yet believethat,—but because the impression she had made on him gave him happinessand pride.What would come of it all he did not know, he did not even think. He felt thatall his forces, hitherto dissipated, wasted, were centered on one thing, andbent with fearful energy on one blissful goal. And he was happy at it. He knewonly that he had told her the truth, that he had come where she was, that allthe happiness of his life, the only meaning in life for him, now lay in seeingand hearing her. And when he got out of the carriage at Bologova to get someseltzer water, and caught sight of Anna, involuntarily his first word had toldher just what he thought. And he was glad he had told her it, that she knew itnow and was thinking of it. He did not sleep all night. When he was back in thecarriage, he kept unceasingly going over every position in which he had seenher, every word she had uttered, and before his fancy, making his heart faintwith emotion, floated pictures of a possible future.When he got out of the train at Petersburg, he felt after his sleepless nightas keen and fresh as after a cold bath. He paused near his compartment, waitingfor her to get out. “Once more,” he said to himself, smilingunconsciously, “once more I shall see her walk, her face; she will saysomething, turn her head, glance, smile, maybe.” But before he caughtsight of her, he saw her husband, whom the station-master was deferentiallyescorting through the crowd. “Ah, yes! The husband.” Only now forthe first time did Vronsky realize clearly the fact that there was a personattached to her, a husband. He knew that she had a husband, but had hardlybelieved in his existence, and only now fully believed in him, with his headand shoulders, and his legs clad in black trousers; especially when he saw thishusband calmly take her arm with a sense of property.Seeing Alexey Alexandrovitch with his Petersburg face and severelyself-confident figure, in his round hat, with his rather prominent spine, hebelieved in him, and was aware of a disagreeable sensation, such as a man mightfeel tortured by thirst, who, on reaching a spring, should find a dog, a sheep,or a pig, who has drunk of it and muddied the water. AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s manner of walking, with a swing of the hips and flatfeet, particularly annoyed Vronsky. He could recognize in no one but himself anindubitable right to love her. But she was still the same, and the sight of heraffected him the same way, physically reviving him, stirring him, and fillinghis soul with rapture. He told his German valet, who ran up to him from thesecond class, to take his things and go on, and he himself went up to her. Hesaw the first meeting between the husband and wife, and noted with alover’s insight the signs of slight reserve with which she spoke to herhusband. “No, she does not love him and cannot love him,” hedecided to himself.At the moment when he was approaching Anna Arkadyevna he noticed too with joythat she was conscious of his being near, and looked round, and seeing him,turned again to her husband.“Have you passed a good night?” he asked, bowing to her and herhusband together, and leaving it up to Alexey Alexandrovitch to accept the bowon his own account, and to recognize it or not, as he might see fit.“Thank you, very good,” she answered.Her face looked weary, and there was not that play of eagerness in it, peepingout in her smile and her eyes; but for a single instant, as she glanced at him,there was a flash of something in her eyes, and although the flash died away atonce, he was happy for that moment. She glanced at her husband to find outwhether he knew Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked at Vronsky withdispleasure, vaguely recalling who this was. Vronsky’s composure andself-confidence here struck, like a scythe against a stone, upon the coldself-confidence of Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Count Vronsky,” said Anna.“Ah! We are acquainted, I believe,” said Alexey Alexandrovitchindifferently, giving his hand.“You set off with the mother and you return with the son,” he said,articulating each syllable, as though each were a separate favor he wasbestowing.“You’re back from leave, I suppose?” he said, and withoutwaiting for a reply, he turned to his wife in his jesting tone: “Well,were a great many tears shed at Moscow at parting?”By addressing his wife like this he gave Vronsky to understand that he wishedto be left alone, and, turning slightly towards him, he touched his hat; butVronsky turned to Anna Arkadyevna.“I hope I may have the honor of calling on you,” he said.Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced with his weary eyes at Vronsky.“Delighted,” he said coldly. “On Mondays we’re at home.Most fortunate,” he said to his wife, dismissing Vronsky altogether,“that I should just have half an hour to meet you, so that I can prove mydevotion,” he went on in the same jesting tone.“You lay too much stress on your devotion for me to value it much,”she responded in the same jesting tone, involuntarily listening to the sound ofVronsky’s steps behind them. “But what has it to do with me?”she said to herself, and she began asking her husband how Seryozha had got onwithout her.“Oh, capitally! Mariette says he has been very good, And ... I mustdisappoint you ... but he has not missed you as your husband has. But once moremerci, my dear, for giving me a day. Our dear Samovar will bedelighted.” (He used to call the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, well known insociety, a samovar, because she was always bubbling over with excitement.)“She has been continually asking after you. And, do you know, if I mayventure to advise you, you should go and see her today. You know how she takeseverything to heart. Just now, with all her own cares, she’s anxiousabout the Oblonskys being brought together.”The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a friend of her husband’s, and the centerof that one of the coteries of the Petersburg world with which Anna was,through her husband, in the closest relations.“But you know I wrote to her?”“Still she’ll want to hear details. Go and see her, if you’renot too tired, my dear. Well, Kondraty will take you in the carriage, while Igo to my committee. I shall not be alone at dinner again,” AlexeyAlexandrovitch went on, no longer in a sarcastic tone. “Youwouldn’t believe how I’ve missed....” And with a long pressureof her hand and a meaning smile, he put her in her carriage.Chapter 32The first person to meet Anna at home was her son. He dashed down the stairs toher, in spite of the governess’s call, and with desperate joy shrieked:“Mother! mother!” Running up to her, he hung on her neck.“I told you it was mother!” he shouted to the governess. “Iknew!”And her son, like her husband, aroused in Anna a feeling akin todisappointment. She had imagined him better than he was in reality. She had tolet herself drop down to the reality to enjoy him as he really was. But even ashe was, he was charming, with his fair curls, his blue eyes, and his plump,graceful little legs in tightly pulled-up stockings. Anna experienced almostphysical pleasure in the sensation of his nearness, and his caresses, and moralsoothing, when she met his simple, confiding, and loving glance, and heard hisnaïve questions. Anna took out the presents Dolly’s children had senthim, and told her son what sort of little girl was Tanya at Moscow, and howTanya could read, and even taught the other children.“Why, am I not so nice as she?” asked Seryozha.“To me you’re nicer than anyone in the world.”“I know that,” said Seryozha, smiling.Anna had not had time to drink her coffee when the Countess Lidia Ivanovna wasannounced. The Countess Lidia Ivanovna was a tall, stout woman, with anunhealthily sallow face and splendid, pensive black eyes. Anna liked her, buttoday she seemed to be seeing her for the first time with all her defects.“Well, my dear, so you took the olive branch?” inquired CountessLidia Ivanovna, as soon as she came into the room.“Yes, it’s all over, but it was all much less serious than we hadsupposed,” answered Anna. “My belle-sœur is in general toohasty.”But Countess Lidia Ivanovna, though she was interested in everything that didnot concern her, had a habit of never listening to what interested her; sheinterrupted Anna:“Yes, there’s plenty of sorrow and evil in the world. I am soworried today.”“Oh, why?” asked Anna, trying to suppress a smile.“I’m beginning to be weary of fruitlessly championing the truth,and sometimes I’m quite unhinged by it. The Society of the LittleSisters” (this was a religiously-patriotic, philanthropic institution)“was going splendidly, but with these gentlemen it’s impossible todo anything,” added Countess Lidia Ivanovna in a tone of ironicalsubmission to destiny. “They pounce on the idea, and distort it, and thenwork it out so pettily and unworthily. Two or three people, your husband amongthem, understand all the importance of the thing, but the others simply drag itdown. Yesterday Pravdin wrote to me....”Pravdin was a well-known Panslavist abroad, and Countess Lidia Ivanovnadescribed the purport of his letter.Then the countess told her of more disagreements and intrigues against the workof the unification of the churches, and departed in haste, as she had that dayto be at the meeting of some society and also at the Slavonic committee.“It was all the same before, of course; but why was it I didn’tnotice it before?” Anna asked herself. “Or has she been very muchirritated today? It’s really ludicrous; her object is doing good; she aChristian, yet she’s always angry; and she always has enemies, and alwaysenemies in the name of Christianity and doing good.”After Countess Lidia Ivanovna another friend came, the wife of a chiefsecretary, who told her all the news of the town. At three o’clock shetoo went away, promising to come to dinner. Alexey Alexandrovitch was at theministry. Anna, left alone, spent the time till dinner in assisting at herson’s dinner (he dined apart from his parents) and in putting her thingsin order, and in reading and answering the notes and letters which hadaccumulated on her table.The feeling of causeless shame, which she had felt on the journey, and herexcitement, too, had completely vanished. In the habitual conditions of herlife she felt again resolute and irreproachable.She recalled with wonder her state of mind on the previous day. “What wasit? Nothing. Vronsky said something silly, which it was easy to put a stop to,and I answered as I ought to have done. To speak of it to my husband would beunnecessary and out of the question. To speak of it would be to attachimportance to what has no importance.” She remembered how she had toldher husband of what was almost a declaration made her at Petersburg by a youngman, one of her husband’s subordinates, and how Alexey Alexandrovitch hadanswered that every woman living in the world was exposed to such incidents,but that he had the fullest confidence in her tact, and could never lower herand himself by jealousy. “So then there’s no reason to speak of it?And indeed, thank God, there’s nothing to speak of,” she toldherself.Chapter 33Alexey Alexandrovitch came back from the meeting of the ministers at fouro’clock, but as often happened, he had not time to come in to her. Hewent into his study to see the people waiting for him with petitions, and tosign some papers brought him by his chief secretary. At dinner time (there werealways a few people dining with the Karenins) there arrived an old lady, acousin of Alexey Alexandrovitch, the chief secretary of the department and hiswife, and a young man who had been recommended to Alexey Alexandrovitch for theservice. Anna went into the drawing-room to receive these guests. Precisely atfive o’clock, before the bronze Peter the First clock had struck thefifth stroke, Alexey Alexandrovitch came in, wearing a white tie and eveningcoat with two stars, as he had to go out directly after dinner. Every minute ofAlexey Alexandrovitch’s life was portioned out and occupied. And to maketime to get through all that lay before him every day, he adhered to thestrictest punctuality. “Unhasting and unresting,” was his motto. Hecame into the dining hall, greeted everyone, and hurriedly sat down, smiling tohis wife.“Yes, my solitude is over. You wouldn’t believe howuncomfortable” (he laid stress on the word uncomfortable)“it is to dine alone.”At dinner he talked a little to his wife about Moscow matters, and, with asarcastic smile, asked her after Stepan Arkadyevitch; but the conversation wasfor the most part general, dealing with Petersburg official and public news.After dinner he spent half an hour with his guests, and again, with a smile,pressed his wife’s hand, withdrew, and drove off to the council. Anna didnot go out that evening either to the Princess Betsy Tverskaya, who, hearing ofher return, had invited her, nor to the theater, where she had a box for thatevening. She did not go out principally because the dress she had reckoned uponwas not ready. Altogether, Anna, on turning, after the departure of her guests,to the consideration of her attire, was very much annoyed. She was generally amistress of the art of dressing well without great expense, and before leavingMoscow she had given her dressmaker three dresses to transform. The dresses hadto be altered so that they could not be recognized, and they ought to have beenready three days before. It appeared that two dresses had not been done at all,while the other one had not been altered as Anna had intended. The dressmakercame to explain, declaring that it would be better as she had done it, and Annawas so furious that she felt ashamed when she thought of it afterwards. Toregain her serenity completely she went into the nursery, and spent the wholeevening with her son, put him to bed herself, signed him with the cross, andtucked him up. She was glad she had not gone out anywhere, and had spent theevening so well. She felt so light-hearted and serene, she saw so clearly thatall that had seemed to her so important on her railway journey was only one ofthe common trivial incidents of fashionable life, and that she had no reason tofeel ashamed before anyone else or before herself. Anna sat down at the hearthwith an English novel and waited for her husband. Exactly at half-past nine sheheard his ring, and he came into the room.“Here you are at last!” she observed, holding out her hand to him.He kissed her hand and sat down beside her.“Altogether then, I see your visit was a success,” he said to her.“Oh, yes,” she said, and she began telling him about everythingfrom the beginning: her journey with Countess Vronskaya, her arrival, theaccident at the station. Then she described the pity she had felt, first forher brother, and afterwards for Dolly.“I imagine one cannot exonerate such a man from blame, though he is yourbrother,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch severely.Anna smiled. She knew that he said that simply to show that familyconsiderations could not prevent him from expressing his genuine opinion. Sheknew that characteristic in her husband, and liked it.“I am glad it has all ended so satisfactorily, and that you are backagain,” he went on. “Come, what do they say about the new act Ihave got passed in the council?”Anna had heard nothing of this act, and she felt conscience-stricken at havingbeen able so readily to forget what was to him of such importance.“Here, on the other hand, it has made a great sensation,” he said,with a complacent smile.She saw that Alexey Alexandrovitch wanted to tell her something pleasant to himabout it, and she brought him by questions to telling it. With the samecomplacent smile he told her of the ovations he had received in consequence ofthe act he had passed.“I was very, very glad. It shows that at last a reasonable and steadyview of the matter is becoming prevalent among us.”Having drunk his second cup of tea with cream, and bread, Alexey Alexandrovitchgot up, and was going towards his study.“And you’ve not been anywhere this evening? You’ve been dull,I expect?” he said.“Oh, no!” she answered, getting up after him and accompanying himacross the room to his study. “What are you reading now?” sheasked.“Just now I’m reading Duc de Lille, Poésie desEnfers,” he answered. “A very remarkable book.”Anna smiled, as people smile at the weaknesses of those they love, and, puttingher hand under his, she escorted him to the door of the study. She knew hishabit, that had grown into a necessity, of reading in the evening. She knew,too, that in spite of his official duties, which swallowed up almost the wholeof his time, he considered it his duty to keep up with everything of note thatappeared in the intellectual world. She knew, too, that he was reallyinterested in books dealing with politics, philosophy, and theology, that artwas utterly foreign to his nature; but, in spite of this, or rather, inconsequence of it, Alexey Alexandrovitch never passed over anything in theworld of art, but made it his duty to read everything. She knew that inpolitics, in philosophy, in theology, Alexey Alexandrovitch often had doubts,and made investigations; but on questions of art and poetry, and, above all, ofmusic, of which he was totally devoid of understanding, he had the mostdistinct and decided opinions. He was fond of talking about Shakespeare,Raphael, Beethoven, of the significance of new schools of poetry and music, allof which were classified by him with very conspicuous consistency.“Well, God be with you,” she said at the door of the study, where ashaded candle and a decanter of water were already put by his armchair.“And I’ll write to Moscow.”He pressed her hand, and again kissed it.“All the same he’s a good man; truthful, good-hearted, andremarkable in his own line,” Anna said to herself going back to her room,as though she were defending him to someone who had attacked him and said thatone could not love him. “But why is it his ears stick out so strangely?Or has he had his hair cut?”Precisely at twelve o’clock, when Anna was still sitting at herwriting-table, finishing a letter to Dolly, she heard the sound of measuredsteps in slippers, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, freshly washed and combed, with abook under his arm, came in to her.“It’s time, it’s time,” said he, with a meaning smile,and he went into their bedroom.“And what right had he to look at him like that?” thought Anna,recalling Vronsky’s glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch.Undressing, she went into the bedroom; but her face had none of the eagernesswhich, during her stay in Moscow, had fairly flashed from her eyes and hersmile; on the contrary, now the fire seemed quenched in her, hidden somewherefar away.Chapter 34When Vronsky went to Moscow from Petersburg, he had left his large set of roomsin Morskaia to his friend and favorite comrade Petritsky.Petritsky was a young lieutenant, not particularly well-connected, and notmerely not wealthy, but always hopelessly in debt. Towards evening he wasalways drunk, and he had often been locked up after all sorts of ludicrous anddisgraceful scandals, but he was a favorite both of his comrades and hissuperior officers. On arriving at twelve o’clock from the station at hisflat, Vronsky saw, at the outer door, a hired carriage familiar to him. Whilestill outside his own door, as he rang, he heard masculine laughter, the lispof a feminine voice, and Petritsky’s voice. “If that’s one ofthe villains, don’t let him in!” Vronsky told the servant not toannounce him, and slipped quietly into the first room. Baroness Shilton, afriend of Petritsky’s, with a rosy little face and flaxen hair,resplendent in a lilac satin gown, and filling the whole room, like a canary,with her Parisian chatter, sat at the round table making coffee. Petritsky, inhis overcoat, and the cavalry captain Kamerovsky, in full uniform, probablyjust come from duty, were sitting each side of her.“Bravo! Vronsky!” shouted Petritsky, jumping up, scraping hischair. “Our host himself! Baroness, some coffee for him out of the newcoffee pot. Why, we didn’t expect you! Hope you’re satisfied withthe ornament of your study,” he said, indicating the baroness. “Youknow each other, of course?”“I should think so,” said Vronsky, with a bright smile, pressingthe baroness’s little hand. “What next! I’m an oldfriend.”“You’re home after a journey,” said the baroness, “soI’m flying. Oh, I’ll be off this minute, if I’m in theway.”“You’re home, wherever you are, baroness,” said Vronsky.“How do you do, Kamerovsky?” he added, coldly shaking hands withKamerovsky.“There, you never know how to say such pretty things,” said thebaroness, turning to Petritsky.“No; what’s that for? After dinner I say things quite asgood.”“After dinner there’s no credit in them? Well, then, I’llmake you some coffee, so go and wash and get ready,” said the baroness,sitting down again, and anxiously turning the screw in the new coffee pot.“Pierre, give me the coffee,” she said, addressing Petritsky, whomshe called Pierre as a contraction of his surname, making no secret of herrelations with him. “I’ll put it in.”“You’ll spoil it!”“No, I won’t spoil it! Well, and your wife?” said thebaroness suddenly, interrupting Vronsky’s conversation with his comrade.“We’ve been marrying you here. Have you brought your wife?”“No, baroness. I was born a Bohemian, and a Bohemian I shall die.”“So much the better, so much the better. Shake hands on it.”And the baroness, detaining Vronsky, began telling him, with many jokes, abouther last new plans of life, asking his advice.“He persists in refusing to give me a divorce! Well, what am I todo?” (He was her husband.) “Now I want to begin a suitagainst him. What do you advise? Kamerovsky, look after the coffee; it’sboiling over. You see, I’m engrossed with business! I want a lawsuit,because I must have my property. Do you understand the folly of it, that on thepretext of my being unfaithful to him,” she said contemptuously,“he wants to get the benefit of my fortune.”Vronsky heard with pleasure this light-hearted prattle of a pretty woman,agreed with her, gave her half-joking counsel, and altogether dropped at onceinto the tone habitual to him in talking to such women. In his Petersburg worldall people were divided into utterly opposed classes. One, the lower class,vulgar, stupid, and, above all, ridiculous people, who believe that one husbandought to live with the one wife whom he has lawfully married; that a girlshould be innocent, a woman modest, and a man manly, self-controlled, andstrong; that one ought to bring up one’s children, earn one’sbread, and pay one’s debts; and various similar absurdities. This was theclass of old-fashioned and ridiculous people. But there was another class ofpeople, the real people. To this class they all belonged, and in it the greatthing was to be elegant, generous, plucky, gay, to abandon oneself without ablush to every passion, and to laugh at everything else.For the first moment only, Vronsky was startled after the impression of a quitedifferent world that he had brought with him from Moscow. But immediately asthough slipping his feet into old slippers, he dropped back into thelight-hearted, pleasant world he had always lived in.The coffee was never really made, but spluttered over everyone, and boiledaway, doing just what was required of it—that is, providing much causefor much noise and laughter, and spoiling a costly rug and the baroness’sgown.“Well now, good-bye, or you’ll never get washed, and I shall haveon my conscience the worst sin a gentleman can commit. So you would advise aknife to his throat?”“To be sure, and manage that your hand may not be far from his lips.He’ll kiss your hand, and all will end satisfactorily,” answeredVronsky.“So at the Français!” and, with a rustle of her skirts, shevanished.Kamerovsky got up too, and Vronsky, not waiting for him to go, shook hands andwent off to his dressing-room.While he was washing, Petritsky described to him in brief outlines hisposition, as far as it had changed since Vronsky had left Petersburg. No moneyat all. His father said he wouldn’t give him any and pay his debts. Histailor was trying to get him locked up, and another fellow, too, wasthreatening to get him locked up. The colonel of the regiment had announcedthat if these scandals did not cease he would have to leave. As for thebaroness, he was sick to death of her, especially since she’d taken tooffering continually to lend him money. But he had found agirl—he’d show her to Vronsky—a marvel, exquisite, in thestrict Oriental style, “genre of the slave Rebecca, don’t youknow.” He’d had a row, too, with Berkoshov, and was going to sendseconds to him, but of course it would come to nothing. Altogether everythingwas supremely amusing and jolly. And, not letting his comrade enter intofurther details of his position, Petritsky proceeded to tell him all theinteresting news. As he listened to Petritsky’s familiar stories in thefamiliar setting of the rooms he had spent the last three years in, Vronskyfelt a delightful sense of coming back to the careless Petersburg life that hewas used to.“Impossible!” he cried, letting down the pedal of the washing basinin which he had been sousing his healthy red neck. “Impossible!” hecried, at the news that Laura had flung over Fertinghof and had made up toMileev. “And is he as stupid and pleased as ever? Well, and how’sBuzulukov?”“Oh, there is a tale about Buzulukov—simply lovely!” criedPetritsky. “You know his weakness for balls, and he never misses a singlecourt ball. He went to a big ball in a new helmet. Have you seen the newhelmets? Very nice, lighter. Well, so he’s standing.... No, I say, dolisten.”“I am listening,” answered Vronsky, rubbing himself with a roughtowel.“Up comes the Grand Duchess with some ambassador or other, and, asill-luck would have it, she begins talking to him about the new helmets. TheGrand Duchess positively wanted to show the new helmet to the ambassador. Theysee our friend standing there.” (Petritsky mimicked how he was standingwith the helmet.) “The Grand Duchess asked him to give her the helmet; hedoesn’t give it to her. What do you think of that? Well, everyone’swinking at him, nodding, frowning—give it to her, do! He doesn’tgive it to her. He’s mute as a fish. Only picture it!... Well, the ...what’s his name, whatever he was ... tries to take the helmet from him... he won’t give it up!... He pulls it from him, and hands it to theGrand Duchess. ‘Here, your Highness,’ says he, ‘is the newhelmet.’ She turned the helmet the other side up, And—just pictureit!—plop went a pear and sweetmeats out of it, two pounds ofsweetmeats!... He’d been storing them up, the darling!”Vronsky burst into roars of laughter. And long afterwards, when he was talkingof other things, he broke out into his healthy laugh, showing his strong, closerows of teeth, when he thought of the helmet.Having heard all the news, Vronsky, with the assistance of his valet, got intohis uniform, and went off to report himself. He intended, when he had donethat, to drive to his brother’s and to Betsy’s and to pay severalvisits with a view to beginning to go into that society where he might meetMadame Karenina. As he always did in Petersburg, he left home not meaning toreturn till late at night.PART TWOChapter 1At the end of the winter, in the Shtcherbatskys’ house, a consultationwas being held, which was to pronounce on the state of Kitty’s health andthe measures to be taken to restore her failing strength. She had been ill, andas spring came on she grew worse. The family doctor gave her cod liver oil,then iron, then nitrate of silver, but as the first and the second and thethird were alike in doing no good, and as his advice when spring came was to goabroad, a celebrated physician was called in. The celebrated physician, a veryhandsome man, still youngish, asked to examine the patient. He maintained, withpeculiar satisfaction, it seemed, that maiden modesty is a mere relic ofbarbarism, and that nothing could be more natural than for a man still youngishto handle a young girl naked. He thought it natural because he did it everyday, and felt and thought, as it seemed to him, no harm as he did it andconsequently he considered modesty in the girl not merely as a relic ofbarbarism, but also as an insult to himself.There was nothing for it but to submit, since, although all the doctors hadstudied in the same school, had read the same books, and learned the samescience, and though some people said this celebrated doctor was a bad doctor,in the princess’s household and circle it was for some reason acceptedthat this celebrated doctor alone had some special knowledge, and that he alonecould save Kitty. After a careful examination and sounding of the bewilderedpatient, dazed with shame, the celebrated doctor, having scrupulously washedhis hands, was standing in the drawing-room talking to the prince. The princefrowned and coughed, listening to the doctor. As a man who had seen somethingof life, and neither a fool nor an invalid, he had no faith in medicine, and inhis heart was furious at the whole farce, specially as he was perhaps the onlyone who fully comprehended the cause of Kitty’s illness. “Conceitedblockhead!” he thought, as he listened to the celebrated doctor’schatter about his daughter’s symptoms. The doctor was meantime withdifficulty restraining the expression of his contempt for this old gentleman,and with difficulty condescending to the level of his intelligence. Heperceived that it was no good talking to the old man, and that the principalperson in the house was the mother. Before her he decided to scatter hispearls. At that instant the princess came into the drawing-room with the familydoctor. The prince withdrew, trying not to show how ridiculous he thought thewhole performance. The princess was distracted, and did not know what to do.She felt she had sinned against Kitty.“Well, doctor, decide our fate,” said the princess. “Tell meeverything.”“Is there hope?” she meant to say, but her lips quivered, and shecould not utter the question. “Well, doctor?”“Immediately, princess. I will talk it over with my colleague, and then Iwill have the honor of laying my opinion before you.”“So we had better leave you?”“As you please.”The princess went out with a sigh.When the doctors were left alone, the family doctor began timidly explaininghis opinion, that there was a commencement of tuberculous trouble, but ... andso on. The celebrated doctor listened to him, and in the middle of his sentencelooked at his big gold watch.“Yes,” said he. “But....”The family doctor respectfully ceased in the middle of his observations.“The commencement of the tuberculous process we are not, as you areaware, able to define; till there are cavities, there is nothing definite. Butwe may suspect it. And there are indications; malnutrition, nervousexcitability, and so on. The question stands thus: in presence of indicationsof tuberculous process, what is to be done to maintain nutrition?”“But, you know, there are always moral, spiritual causes at the back inthese cases,” the family doctor permitted himself to interpolate with asubtle smile.“Yes, that’s an understood thing,” responded the celebratedphysician, again glancing at his watch. “Beg pardon, is the Yausky bridgedone yet, or shall I have to drive around?” he asked. “Ah! it is.Oh, well, then I can do it in twenty minutes. So we were saying the problem maybe put thus: to maintain nutrition and to give tone to the nerves. The one isin close connection with the other, one must attack both sides at once.”“And how about a tour abroad?” asked the family doctor.“I’ve no liking for foreign tours. And take note: if there is anearly stage of tuberculous process, of which we cannot be certain, a foreigntour will be of no use. What is wanted is means of improving nutrition, and notfor lowering it.” And the celebrated doctor expounded his plan oftreatment with Soden waters, a remedy obviously prescribed primarily on theground that they could do no harm.The family doctor listened attentively and respectfully.“But in favor of foreign travel I would urge the change of habits, theremoval from conditions calling up reminiscences. And then the mother wishesit,” he added.“Ah! Well, in that case, to be sure, let them go. Only, those Germanquacks are mischievous.... They ought to be persuaded.... Well, let them gothen.”He glanced once more at his watch.“Oh! time’s up already,” And he went to the door. Thecelebrated doctor announced to the princess (a feeling of what was due from himdictated his doing so) that he ought to see the patient once more.“What! another examination!” cried the mother, with horror.“Oh, no, only a few details, princess.”“Come this way.”And the mother, accompanied by the doctor, went into the drawing-room to Kitty.Wasted and flushed, with a peculiar glitter in her eyes, left there by theagony of shame she had been put through, Kitty stood in the middle of the room.When the doctor came in she flushed crimson, and her eyes filled with tears.All her illness and treatment struck her as a thing so stupid, ludicrous even!Doctoring her seemed to her as absurd as putting together the pieces of abroken vase. Her heart was broken. Why would they try to cure her with pillsand powders? But she could not grieve her mother, especially as her motherconsidered herself to blame.“May I trouble you to sit down, princess?” the celebrated doctorsaid to her.He sat down with a smile, facing her, felt her pulse, and again began askingher tiresome questions. She answered him, and all at once got up, furious.“Excuse me, doctor, but there is really no object in this. This is thethird time you’ve asked me the same thing.”The celebrated doctor did not take offense.“Nervous irritability,” he said to the princess, when Kitty hadleft the room. “However, I had finished....”And the doctor began scientifically explaining to the princess, as anexceptionally intelligent woman, the condition of the young princess, andconcluded by insisting on the drinking of the waters, which were certainlyharmless. At the question: Should they go abroad? the doctor plunged into deepmeditation, as though resolving a weighty problem. Finally his decision waspronounced: they were to go abroad, but to put no faith in foreign quacks, andto apply to him in any need.It seemed as though some piece of good fortune had come to pass after thedoctor had gone. The mother was much more cheerful when she went back to herdaughter, and Kitty pretended to be more cheerful. She had often, almostalways, to be pretending now.“Really, I’m quite well, mamma. But if you want to go abroad,let’s go!” she said, and trying to appear interested in theproposed tour, she began talking of the preparations for the journey.Chapter 2Soon after the doctor, Dolly had arrived. She knew that there was to be aconsultation that day, and though she was only just up after her confinement(she had another baby, a little girl, born at the end of the winter), thoughshe had trouble and anxiety enough of her own, she had left her tiny baby and asick child, to come and hear Kitty’s fate, which was to be decided thatday.“Well, well?” she said, coming into the drawing-room, withouttaking off her hat. “You’re all in good spirits. Good news,then?”They tried to tell her what the doctor had said, but it appeared that thoughthe doctor had talked distinctly enough and at great length, it was utterlyimpossible to report what he had said. The only point of interest was that itwas settled they should go abroad.Dolly could not help sighing. Her dearest friend, her sister, was going away.And her life was not a cheerful one. Her relations with Stepan Arkadyevitchafter their reconciliation had become humiliating. The union Anna had cementedturned out to be of no solid character, and family harmony was breaking downagain at the same point. There had been nothing definite, but StepanArkadyevitch was hardly ever at home; money, too, was hardly ever forthcoming,and Dolly was continually tortured by suspicions of infidelity, which she triedto dismiss, dreading the agonies of jealousy she had been through already. Thefirst onslaught of jealousy, once lived through, could never come back again,and even the discovery of infidelities could never now affect her as it had thefirst time. Such a discovery now would only mean breaking up family habits, andshe let herself be deceived, despising him and still more herself, for theweakness. Besides this, the care of her large family was a constant worry toher: first, the nursing of her young baby did not go well, then the nurse hadgone away, now one of the children had fallen ill.“Well, how are all of you?” asked her mother.“Ah, mamma, we have plenty of troubles of our own. Lili is ill, andI’m afraid it’s scarlatina. I have come here now to hear aboutKitty, and then I shall shut myself up entirely, if—God forbid—itshould be scarlatina.”The old prince too had come in from his study after the doctor’sdeparture, and after presenting his cheek to Dolly, and saying a few words toher, he turned to his wife:“How have you settled it? you’re going? Well, and what do you meanto do with me?”“I suppose you had better stay here, Alexander,” said his wife.“That’s as you like.”“Mamma, why shouldn’t father come with us?” said Kitty.“It would be nicer for him and for us too.”The old prince got up and stroked Kitty’s hair. She lifted her head andlooked at him with a forced smile. It always seemed to her that he understoodher better than anyone in the family, though he did not say much about her.Being the youngest, she was her father’s favorite, and she fancied thathis love gave him insight. When now her glance met his blue kindly eyes lookingintently at her, it seemed to her that he saw right through her, and understoodall that was not good that was passing within her. Reddening, she stretched outtowards him expecting a kiss, but he only patted her hair and said:“These stupid chignons! There’s no getting at the real daughter.One simply strokes the bristles of dead women. Well, Dolinka,” he turnedto his elder daughter, “what’s your young buck about, hey?”“Nothing, father,” answered Dolly, understanding that her husbandwas meant. “He’s always out; I scarcely ever see him,” shecould not resist adding with a sarcastic smile.“Why, hasn’t he gone into the country yet—to see aboutselling that forest?”“No, he’s still getting ready for the journey.”“Oh, that’s it!” said the prince. “And so am I to begetting ready for a journey too? At your service,” he said to his wife,sitting down. “And I tell you what, Katia,” he went on to hisyounger daughter, “you must wake up one fine day and say to yourself:Why, I’m quite well, and merry, and going out again with father for anearly morning walk in the frost. Hey?”What her father said seemed simple enough, yet at these words Kitty becameconfused and overcome like a detected criminal. “Yes, he sees it all, heunderstands it all, and in these words he’s telling me that thoughI’m ashamed, I must get over my shame.” She could not pluck upspirit to make any answer. She tried to begin, and all at once burst intotears, and rushed out of the room.“See what comes of your jokes!” the princess pounced down on herhusband. “You’re always....” she began a string of reproaches.The prince listened to the princess’s scolding rather a long whilewithout speaking, but his face was more and more frowning.“She’s so much to be pitied, poor child, so much to be pitied, andyou don’t feel how it hurts her to hear the slightest reference to thecause of it. Ah! to be so mistaken in people!” said the princess, and bythe change in her tone both Dolly and the prince knew she was speaking ofVronsky. “I don’t know why there aren’t laws against suchbase, dishonorable people.”“Ah, I can’t bear to hear you!” said the prince gloomily,getting up from his low chair, and seeming anxious to get away, yet stopping inthe doorway. “There are laws, madam, and since you’ve challenged meto it, I’ll tell you who’s to blame for it all: you and you, youand nobody else. Laws against such young gallants there have always been, andthere still are! Yes, if there has been nothing that ought not to have been,old as I am, I’d have called him out to the barrier, the young dandy.Yes, and now you physic her and call in these quacks.”The prince apparently had plenty more to say, but as soon as the princess heardhis tone she subsided at once, and became penitent, as she always did onserious occasions.“Alexander, Alexander,” she whispered, moving to him and beginningto weep.As soon as she began to cry the prince too calmed down. He went up to her.“There, that’s enough, that’s enough! You’re wretchedtoo, I know. It can’t be helped. There’s no great harm done. God ismerciful ... thanks....” he said, not knowing what he was saying, as heresponded to the tearful kiss of the princess that he felt on his hand. And theprince went out of the room.Before this, as soon as Kitty went out of the room in tears, Dolly, with hermotherly, family instincts, had promptly perceived that here a woman’swork lay before her, and she prepared to do it. She took off her hat, and,morally speaking, tucked up her sleeves and prepared for action. While hermother was attacking her father, she tried to restrain her mother, so far asfilial reverence would allow. During the prince’s outburst she wassilent; she felt ashamed for her mother, and tender towards her father for soquickly being kind again. But when her father left them she made ready for whatwas the chief thing needful—to go to Kitty and console her.“I’d been meaning to tell you something for a long while, mamma:did you know that Levin meant to make Kitty an offer when he was here the lasttime? He told Stiva so.”“Well, what then? I don’t understand....”“So did Kitty perhaps refuse him?... She didn’t tell you so?”“No, she has said nothing to me either of one or the other; she’stoo proud. But I know it’s all on account of the other.”“Yes, but suppose she has refused Levin, and she wouldn’t haverefused him if it hadn’t been for the other, I know. And then, he hasdeceived her so horribly.”It was too terrible for the princess to think how she had sinned against herdaughter, and she broke out angrily.“Oh, I really don’t understand! Nowadays they will all go their ownway, and mothers haven’t a word to say in anything, and then....”“Mamma, I’ll go up to her.”“Well, do. Did I tell you not to?” said her mother.Chapter 3When she went into Kitty’s little room, a pretty, pink little room, fullof knick-knacks in vieux saxe, as fresh, and pink, and white, and gay asKitty herself had been two months ago, Dolly remembered how they had decoratedthe room the year before together, with what love and gaiety. Her heart turnedcold when she saw Kitty sitting on a low chair near the door, her eyes fixedimmovably on a corner of the rug. Kitty glanced at her sister, and the cold,rather ill-tempered expression of her face did not change.“I’m just going now, and I shall have to keep in and youwon’t be able to come to see me,” said Dolly, sitting down besideher. “I want to talk to you.”“What about?” Kitty asked swiftly, lifting her head in dismay.“What should it be, but your trouble?”“I have no trouble.”“Nonsense, Kitty. Do you suppose I could help knowing? I know all aboutit. And believe me, it’s of so little consequence.... We’ve allbeen through it.”Kitty did not speak, and her face had a stern expression.“He’s not worth your grieving over him,” pursued DaryaAlexandrovna, coming straight to the point.“No, because he has treated me with contempt,” said Kitty, in abreaking voice. “Don’t talk of it! Please, don’t talk ofit!”“But who can have told you so? No one has said that. I’m certain hewas in love with you, and would still be in love with you, if ithadn’t....”“Oh, the most awful thing of all for me is this sympathizing!”shrieked Kitty, suddenly flying into a passion. She turned round on her chair,flushed crimson, and rapidly moving her fingers, pinched the clasp of her beltfirst with one hand and then with the other. Dolly knew this trick her sisterhad of clenching her hands when she was much excited; she knew, too, that inmoments of excitement Kitty was capable of forgetting herself and saying agreat deal too much, and Dolly would have soothed her, but it was too late.“What, what is it you want to make me feel, eh?” said Kittyquickly. “That I’ve been in love with a man who didn’t care astraw for me, and that I’m dying of love for him? And this is said to meby my own sister, who imagines that ... that ... that she’s sympathizingwith me!... I don’t want these condolences and humbug!”“Kitty, you’re unjust.”“Why are you tormenting me?”“But I ... quite the contrary ... I see you’re unhappy....”But Kitty in her fury did not hear her.“I’ve nothing to grieve over and be comforted about. I am too proudever to allow myself to care for a man who does not love me.”“Yes, I don’t say so either.... Only one thing. Tell me thetruth,” said Darya Alexandrovna, taking her by the hand: “tell me,did Levin speak to you?...”The mention of Levin’s name seemed to deprive Kitty of the last vestigeof self-control. She leaped up from her chair, and flinging her clasp on theground, she gesticulated rapidly with her hands and said:“Why bring Levin in too? I can’t understand what you want totorment me for. I’ve told you, and I say it again, that I have somepride, and never, never would I do as you’re doing—go backto a man who’s deceived you, who has cared for another woman. Ican’t understand it! You may, but I can’t!”And saying these words she glanced at her sister, and seeing that Dolly satsilent, her head mournfully bowed, Kitty, instead of running out of the room asshe had meant to do, sat down near the door, and hid her face in herhandkerchief.The silence lasted for two minutes: Dolly was thinking of herself. Thathumiliation of which she was always conscious came back to her with a peculiarbitterness when her sister reminded her of it. She had not looked for suchcruelty in her sister, and she was angry with her. But suddenly she heard therustle of a skirt, and with it the sound of heart-rending, smothered sobbing,and felt arms about her neck. Kitty was on her knees before her.“Dolinka, I am so, so wretched!” she whispered penitently. And thesweet face covered with tears hid itself in Darya Alexandrovna’s skirt.As though tears were the indispensable oil, without which the machinery ofmutual confidence could not run smoothly between the two sisters, the sistersafter their tears talked, not of what was uppermost in their minds, but, thoughthey talked of outside matters, they understood each other. Kitty knew that thewords she had uttered in anger about her husband’s infidelity and herhumiliating position had cut her poor sister to the heart, but that she hadforgiven her. Dolly for her part knew all she had wanted to find out. She feltcertain that her surmises were correct; that Kitty’s misery, herinconsolable misery, was due precisely to the fact that Levin had made her anoffer and she had refused him, and Vronsky had deceived her, and that she wasfully prepared to love Levin and to detest Vronsky. Kitty said not a word ofthat; she talked of nothing but her spiritual condition.“I have nothing to make me miserable,” she said, getting calmer;“but can you understand that everything has become hateful, loathsome,coarse to me, and I myself most of all? You can’t imagine what loathsomethoughts I have about everything.”“Why, whatever loathsome thoughts can you have?” asked Dolly,smiling.“The most utterly loathsome and coarse: I can’t tell you.It’s not unhappiness, or low spirits, but much worse. As thougheverything that was good in me was all hidden away, and nothing was left butthe most loathsome. Come, how am I to tell you?” she went on, seeing thepuzzled look in her sister’s eyes. “Father began saying somethingto me just now.... It seems to me he thinks all I want is to be married. Mothertakes me to a ball: it seems to me she only takes me to get me married off assoon as may be, and be rid of me. I know it’s not the truth, but Ican’t drive away such thoughts. Eligible suitors, as they callthem—I can’t bear to see them. It seems to me they’re takingstock of me and summing me up. In old days to go anywhere in a ball dress was asimple joy to me, I admired myself; now I feel ashamed and awkward. And then!The doctor.... Then....” Kitty hesitated; she wanted to say further thatever since this change had taken place in her, Stepan Arkadyevitch had becomeinsufferably repulsive to her, and that she could not see him without thegrossest and most hideous conceptions rising before her imagination.“Oh, well, everything presents itself to me, in the coarsest, mostloathsome light,” she went on. “That’s my illness. Perhaps itwill pass off.”“But you mustn’t think about it.”“I can’t help it. I’m never happy except with the children atyour house.”“What a pity you can’t be with me!”“Oh, yes, I’m coming. I’ve had scarlatina, and I’llpersuade mamma to let me.”Kitty insisted on having her way, and went to stay at her sister’s andnursed the children all through the scarlatina, for scarlatina it turned out tobe. The two sisters brought all the six children successfully through it, butKitty was no better in health, and in Lent the Shtcherbatskys went abroad.Chapter 4The highest Petersburg society is essentially one: in it everyone knowseveryone else, everyone even visits everyone else. But this great set has itssubdivisions. Anna Arkadyevna Karenina had friends and close ties in threedifferent circles of this highest society. One circle was her husband’sgovernment official set, consisting of his colleagues and subordinates, broughttogether in the most various and capricious manner, and belonging to differentsocial strata. Anna found it difficult now to recall the feeling of almostawe-stricken reverence which she had at first entertained for these persons.Now she knew all of them as people know one another in a country town; she knewtheir habits and weaknesses, and where the shoe pinched each one of them. Sheknew their relations with one another and with the head authorities, knew whowas for whom, and how each one maintained his position, and where they agreedand disagreed. But the circle of political, masculine interests had neverinterested her, in spite of countess Lidia Ivanovna’s influence, and sheavoided it.Another little set with which Anna was in close relations was the one by meansof which Alexey Alexandrovitch had made his career. The center of this circlewas the Countess Lidia Ivanovna. It was a set made up of elderly, ugly,benevolent, and godly women, and clever, learned, and ambitious men. One of theclever people belonging to the set had called it “the conscience ofPetersburg society.” Alexey Alexandrovitch had the highest esteem forthis circle, and Anna with her special gift for getting on with everyone, hadin the early days of her life in Petersburg made friends in this circle also.Now, since her return from Moscow, she had come to feel this set insufferable.It seemed to her that both she and all of them were insincere, and she felt sobored and ill at ease in that world that she went to see the Countess LidiaIvanovna as little as possible.The third circle with which Anna had ties was preeminently the fashionableworld—the world of balls, of dinners, of sumptuous dresses, the worldthat hung on to the court with one hand, so as to avoid sinking to the level ofthe demi-monde. For the demi-monde the members of that fashionable worldbelieved that they despised, though their tastes were not merely similar, butin fact identical. Her connection with this circle was kept up through PrincessBetsy Tverskaya, her cousin’s wife, who had an income of a hundred andtwenty thousand roubles, and who had taken a great fancy to Anna ever since shefirst came out, showed her much attention, and drew her into her set, makingfun of Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s coterie.“When I’m old and ugly I’ll be the same,” Betsy used tosay; “but for a pretty young woman like you it’s early days forthat house of charity.”Anna had at first avoided as far as she could Princess Tverskaya’s world,because it necessitated an expenditure beyond her means, and besides in herheart she preferred the first circle. But since her visit to Moscow she haddone quite the contrary. She avoided her serious-minded friends, and went outinto the fashionable world. There she met Vronsky, and experienced an agitatingjoy at those meetings. She met Vronsky specially often at Betsy’s forBetsy was a Vronsky by birth and his cousin. Vronsky was everywhere where hehad any chance of meeting Anna, and speaking to her, when he could, of hislove. She gave him no encouragement, but every time she met him there surged upin her heart that same feeling of quickened life that had come upon her thatday in the railway carriage when she saw him for the first time. She wasconscious herself that her delight sparkled in her eyes and curved her lipsinto a smile, and she could not quench the expression of this delight.At first Anna sincerely believed that she was displeased with him for daring topursue her. Soon after her return from Moscow, on arriving at a soiréewhere she had expected to meet him, and not finding him there, she realizeddistinctly from the rush of disappointment that she had been deceiving herself,and that this pursuit was not merely not distasteful to her, but that it madethe whole interest of her life.The celebrated singer was singing for the second time, and all the fashionableworld was in the theater. Vronsky, seeing his cousin from his stall in thefront row, did not wait till the entr’acte, but went to her box.“Why didn’t you come to dinner?” she said to him. “Imarvel at the second sight of lovers,” she added with a smile, so that noone but he could hear; “she wasn’t there. But come after theopera.”Vronsky looked inquiringly at her. She nodded. He thanked her by a smile, andsat down beside her.“But how I remember your jeers!” continued Princess Betsy, who tooka peculiar pleasure in following up this passion to a successful issue.“What’s become of all that? You’re caught, my dearboy.”“That’s my one desire, to be caught,” answered Vronsky, withhis serene, good-humored smile. “If I complain of anything it’sonly that I’m not caught enough, to tell the truth. I begin to losehope.”“Why, whatever hope can you have?” said Betsy, offended on behalfof her friend. “Entendons nous....” But in her eyes therewere gleams of light that betrayed that she understood perfectly and preciselyas he did what hope he might have.“None whatever,” said Vronsky, laughing and showing his even rowsof teeth. “Excuse me,” he added, taking an opera-glass out of herhand, and proceeding to scrutinize, over her bare shoulder, the row of boxesfacing them. “I’m afraid I’m becoming ridiculous.”He was very well aware that he ran no risk of being ridiculous in the eyes ofBetsy or any other fashionable people. He was very well aware that in theireyes the position of an unsuccessful lover of a girl, or of any woman free tomarry, might be ridiculous. But the position of a man pursuing a married woman,and, regardless of everything, staking his life on drawing her into adultery,has something fine and grand about it, and can never be ridiculous; and so itwas with a proud and gay smile under his mustaches that he lowered theopera-glass and looked at his cousin.“But why was it you didn’t come to dinner?” she said,admiring him.“I must tell you about that. I was busily employed, and doing what, doyou suppose? I’ll give you a hundred guesses, a thousand ... you’dnever guess. I’ve been reconciling a husband with a man who’dinsulted his wife. Yes, really!”“Well, did you succeed?”“Almost.”“You really must tell me about it,” she said, getting up.“Come to me in the next entr’acte.”“I can’t; I’m going to the French theater.”“From Nilsson?” Betsy queried in horror, though she could notherself have distinguished Nilsson’s voice from any chorus girl’s.“Can’t help it. I’ve an appointment there, all to do with mymission of peace.”“‘Blessed are the peacemakers; theirs is the kingdom ofheaven,’” said Betsy, vaguely recollecting she had heard somesimilar saying from someone. “Very well, then, sit down, and tell me whatit’s all about.”And she sat down again.Chapter 5“This is rather indiscreet, but it’s so good it’s an awfultemptation to tell the story,” said Vronsky, looking at her with hislaughing eyes. “I’m not going to mention any names.”“But I shall guess, so much the better.”“Well, listen: two festive young men were driving—”“Officers of your regiment, of course?”“I didn’t say they were officers,—two young men who had beenlunching.”“In other words, drinking.”“Possibly. They were driving on their way to dinner with a friend in themost festive state of mind. And they beheld a pretty woman in a hired sledge;she overtakes them, looks round at them, and, so they fancy anyway, nods tothem and laughs. They, of course, follow her. They gallop at full speed. Totheir amazement, the fair one alights at the entrance of the very house towhich they were going. The fair one darts upstairs to the top story. They get aglimpse of red lips under a short veil, and exquisite little feet.”“You describe it with such feeling that I fancy you must be one of thetwo.”“And after what you said, just now! Well, the young men go in to theircomrade’s; he was giving a farewell dinner. There they certainly diddrink a little too much, as one always does at farewell dinners. And at dinnerthey inquire who lives at the top in that house. No one knows; only theirhost’s valet, in answer to their inquiry whether any ‘youngladies’ are living on the top floor, answered that there were a greatmany of them about there. After dinner the two young men go into theirhost’s study, and write a letter to the unknown fair one. They compose anardent epistle, a declaration in fact, and they carry the letter upstairsthemselves, so as to elucidate whatever might appear not perfectly intelligiblein the letter.”“Why are you telling me these horrible stories? Well?”“They ring. A maid-servant opens the door, they hand her the letter, andassure the maid that they’re both so in love that they’ll die onthe spot at the door. The maid, stupefied, carries in their messages. All atonce a gentleman appears with whiskers like sausages, as red as a lobster,announces that there is no one living in the flat except his wife, and sendsthem both about their business.”“How do you know he had whiskers like sausages, as you say?”“Ah, you shall hear. I’ve just been to make peace betweenthem.”“Well, and what then?”“That’s the most interesting part of the story. It appears thatit’s a happy couple, a government clerk and his lady. The governmentclerk lodges a complaint, and I became a mediator, and such a mediator!... Iassure you Talleyrand couldn’t hold a candle to me.”“Why, where was the difficulty?”“Ah, you shall hear.... We apologize in due form: we are in despair, weentreat forgiveness for the unfortunate misunderstanding. The government clerkwith the sausages begins to melt, but he, too, desires to express hissentiments, and as soon as ever he begins to express them, he begins to get hotand say nasty things, and again I’m obliged to trot out all my diplomatictalents. I allowed that their conduct was bad, but I urged him to take intoconsideration their heedlessness, their youth; then, too, the young men hadonly just been lunching together. ‘You understand. They regret it deeply,and beg you to overlook their misbehavior.’ The government clerk wassoftened once more. ‘I consent, count, and am ready to overlook it; butyou perceive that my wife—my wife’s a respectable woman—hasbeen exposed to the persecution, and insults, and effrontery of young upstarts,scoundrels....’ And you must understand, the young upstarts are presentall the while, and I have to keep the peace between them. Again I call out allmy diplomacy, and again as soon as the thing was about at an end, our friendthe government clerk gets hot and red, and his sausages stand on end withwrath, and once more I launch out into diplomatic wiles.”“Ah, he must tell you this story!” said Betsy, laughing, to a ladywho came into her box. “He has been making me laugh so.”“Well, bonne chance!” she added, giving Vronsky one fingerof the hand in which she held her fan, and with a shrug of her shoulders shetwitched down the bodice of her gown that had worked up, so as to be duly nakedas she moved forward towards the footlights into the light of the gas, and thesight of all eyes.Vronsky drove to the French theater, where he really had to see the colonel ofhis regiment, who never missed a single performance there. He wanted to seehim, to report on the result of his mediation, which had occupied and amusedhim for the last three days. Petritsky, whom he liked, was implicated in theaffair, and the other culprit was a capital fellow and first-rate comrade, whohad lately joined the regiment, the young Prince Kedrov. And what was mostimportant, the interests of the regiment were involved in it too.Both the young men were in Vronsky’s company. The colonel of the regimentwas waited upon by the government clerk, Venden, with a complaint against hisofficers, who had insulted his wife. His young wife, so Venden told thestory—he had been married half a year—was at church with hermother, and suddenly overcome by indisposition, arising from her interestingcondition, she could not remain standing, she drove home in the first sledge, asmart-looking one, she came across. On the spot the officers set off in pursuitof her; she was alarmed, and feeling still more unwell, ran up the staircasehome. Venden himself, on returning from his office, heard a ring at their belland voices, went out, and seeing the intoxicated officers with a letter, he hadturned them out. He asked for exemplary punishment.“Yes, it’s all very well,” said the colonel to Vronsky, whomhe had invited to come and see him. “Petritsky’s becomingimpossible. Not a week goes by without some scandal. This government clerkwon’t let it drop, he’ll go on with the thing.”Vronsky saw all the thanklessness of the business, and that there could be noquestion of a duel in it, that everything must be done to soften the governmentclerk, and hush the matter up. The colonel had called in Vronsky just becausehe knew him to be an honorable and intelligent man, and, more than all, a manwho cared for the honor of the regiment. They talked it over, and decided thatPetritsky and Kedrov must go with Vronsky to Venden’s to apologize. Thecolonel and Vronsky were both fully aware that Vronsky’s name and rankwould be sure to contribute greatly to the softening of the injuredhusband’s feelings.And these two influences were not in fact without effect; though the resultremained, as Vronsky had described, uncertain.On reaching the French theater, Vronsky retired to the foyer with the colonel,and reported to him his success, or non-success. The colonel, thinking it allover, made up his mind not to pursue the matter further, but then for his ownsatisfaction proceeded to cross-examine Vronsky about his interview; and it wasa long while before he could restrain his laughter, as Vronsky described howthe government clerk, after subsiding for a while, would suddenly flare upagain, as he recalled the details, and how Vronsky, at the last half word ofconciliation, skillfully manœuvered a retreat, shoving Petritsky out beforehim.“It’s a disgraceful story, but killing. Kedrov really can’tfight the gentleman! Was he so awfully hot?” he commented, laughing.“But what do you say to Claire today? She’s marvelous,” hewent on, speaking of a new French actress. “However often you see her,every day she’s different. It’s only the French who can dothat.”Chapter 6Princess Betsy drove home from the theater, without waiting for the end of thelast act. She had only just time to go into her dressing-room, sprinkle herlong, pale face with powder, rub it, set her dress to rights, and order tea inthe big drawing-room, when one after another carriages drove up to her hugehouse in Bolshaia Morskaia. Her guests stepped out at the wide entrance, andthe stout porter, who used to read the newspapers in the mornings behind theglass door, to the edification of the passers-by, noiselessly opened theimmense door, letting the visitors pass by him into the house.Almost at the same instant the hostess, with freshly arranged coiffure andfreshened face, walked in at one door and her guests at the other door of thedrawing-room, a large room with dark walls, downy rugs, and a brightly lightedtable, gleaming with the light of candles, white cloth, silver samovar, andtransparent china tea-things.The hostess sat down at the table and took off her gloves. Chairs were set withthe aid of footmen, moving almost imperceptibly about the room; the partysettled itself, divided into two groups: one round the samovar near thehostess, the other at the opposite end of the drawing-room, round the handsomewife of an ambassador, in black velvet, with sharply defined black eyebrows. Inboth groups conversation wavered, as it always does, for the first few minutes,broken up by meetings, greetings, offers of tea, and as it were, feeling aboutfor something to rest upon.“She’s exceptionally good as an actress; one can see she’sstudied Kaulbach,” said a diplomatic attaché in the group round theambassador’s wife. “Did you notice how she fell down?...”“Oh, please, don’t let us talk about Nilsson! No one can possiblysay anything new about her,” said a fat, red-faced, flaxen-headed lady,without eyebrows and chignon, wearing an old silk dress. This was PrincessMyakaya, noted for her simplicity and the roughness of her manners, andnicknamed enfant terrible. Princess Myakaya, sitting in the middlebetween the two groups, and listening to both, took part in the conversationfirst of one and then of the other. “Three people have used that veryphrase about Kaulbach to me today already, just as though they had made acompact about it. And I can’t see why they liked that remark so.”The conversation was cut short by this observation, and a new subject had to bethought of again.“Do tell me something amusing but not spiteful,” said theambassador’s wife, a great proficient in the art of that elegantconversation called by the English small talk. She addressed theattaché, who was at a loss now what to begin upon.“They say that that’s a difficult task, that nothing’samusing that isn’t spiteful,” he began with a smile. “ButI’ll try. Get me a subject. It all lies in the subject. If asubject’s given me, it’s easy to spin something round it. I oftenthink that the celebrated talkers of the last century would have found itdifficult to talk cleverly now. Everything clever is so stale....”“That has been said long ago,” the ambassador’s wifeinterrupted him, laughing.The conversation began amiably, but just because it was too amiable, it came toa stop again. They had to have recourse to the sure, never-failingtopic—gossip.“Don’t you think there’s something Louis Quinze aboutTushkevitch?” he said, glancing towards a handsome, fair-haired youngman, standing at the table.“Oh, yes! He’s in the same style as the drawing-room andthat’s why it is he’s so often here.”This conversation was maintained, since it rested on allusions to what couldnot be talked of in that room—that is to say, of the relations ofTushkevitch with their hostess.Round the samovar and the hostess the conversation had been meanwhilevacillating in just the same way between three inevitable topics: the latestpiece of public news, the theater, and scandal. It, too, came finally to reston the last topic, that is, ill-natured gossip.“Have you heard the Maltishtcheva woman—the mother, not thedaughter—has ordered a costume in diable rose color?”“Nonsense! No, that’s too lovely!”“I wonder that with her sense—for she’s not a fool, youknow—that she doesn’t see how funny she is.”Everyone had something to say in censure or ridicule of the luckless MadameMaltishtcheva, and the conversation crackled merrily, like a burningfaggot-stack.The husband of Princess Betsy, a good-natured fat man, an ardent collector ofengravings, hearing that his wife had visitors, came into the drawing-roombefore going to his club. Stepping noiselessly over the thick rugs, he went upto Princess Myakaya.“How did you like Nilsson?” he asked.“Oh, how can you steal upon anyone like that! How you startled me!”she responded. “Please don’t talk to me about the opera; you knownothing about music. I’d better meet you on your own ground, and talkabout your majolica and engravings. Come now, what treasure have you beenbuying lately at the old curiosity shops?”“Would you like me to show you? But you don’t understand suchthings.”“Oh, do show me! I’ve been learning about them atthose—what’s their names?... the bankers ... they’ve somesplendid engravings. They showed them to us.”“Why, have you been at the Schützburgs?” asked the hostess from thesamovar.“Yes, ma chère. They asked my husband and me to dinner, and toldus the sauce at that dinner cost a hundred pounds,” Princess Myakayasaid, speaking loudly, and conscious everyone was listening; “and verynasty sauce it was, some green mess. We had to ask them, and I made them saucefor eighteen pence, and everybody was very much pleased with it. I can’trun to hundred-pound sauces.”“She’s unique!” said the lady of the house.“Marvelous!” said someone.The sensation produced by Princess Myakaya’s speeches was always unique,and the secret of the sensation she produced lay in the fact that though shespoke not always appropriately, as now, she said simple things with some sensein them. In the society in which she lived such plain statements produced theeffect of the wittiest epigram. Princess Myakaya could never see why it hadthat effect, but she knew it had, and took advantage of it.As everyone had been listening while Princess Myakaya spoke, and so theconversation around the ambassador’s wife had dropped, Princess Betsytried to bring the whole party together, and turned to the ambassador’swife.“Will you really not have tea? You should come over here by us.”“No, we’re very happy here,” the ambassador’s wiferesponded with a smile, and she went on with the conversation that had beenbegun.It was a very agreeable conversation. They were criticizing the Karenins,husband and wife.“Anna is quite changed since her stay in Moscow. There’s somethingstrange about her,” said her friend.“The great change is that she brought back with her the shadow of AlexeyVronsky,” said the ambassador’s wife.“Well, what of it? There’s a fable of Grimm’s about a manwithout a shadow, a man who’s lost his shadow. And that’s hispunishment for something. I never could understand how it was a punishment. Buta woman must dislike being without a shadow.”“Yes, but women with a shadow usually come to a bad end,” saidAnna’s friend.“Bad luck to your tongue!” said Princess Myakaya suddenly.“Madame Karenina’s a splendid woman. I don’t like herhusband, but I like her very much.”“Why don’t you like her husband? He’s such a remarkableman,” said the ambassador’s wife. “My husband says there arefew statesmen like him in Europe.”“And my husband tells me just the same, but I don’t believeit,” said Princess Myakaya. “If our husbands didn’t talk tous, we should see the facts as they are. Alexey Alexandrovitch, to my thinking,is simply a fool. I say it in a whisper ... but doesn’t it really makeeverything clear? Before, when I was told to consider him clever, I keptlooking for his ability, and thought myself a fool for not seeing it; butdirectly I said, he’s a fool, though only in a whisper,everything’s explained, isn’t it?”“How spiteful you are today!”“Not a bit. I’d no other way out of it. One of the two had to be afool. And, well, you know one can’t say that of oneself.”“‘No one is satisfied with his fortune, and everyone is satisfiedwith his wit.’” The attaché repeated the French saying.“That’s just it, just it,” Princess Myakaya turned to him.“But the point is that I won’t abandon Anna to your mercies.She’s so nice, so charming. How can she help it if they’re all inlove with her, and follow her about like shadows?”“Oh, I had no idea of blaming her for it,” Anna’s friend saidin self-defense.“If no one follows us about like a shadow, that’s no proof thatwe’ve any right to blame her.”And having duly disposed of Anna’s friend, the Princess Myakaya got up,and together with the ambassador’s wife, joined the group at the table,where the conversation was dealing with the king of Prussia.“What wicked gossip were you talking over there?” asked Betsy.“About the Karenins. The princess gave us a sketch of AlexeyAlexandrovitch,” said the ambassador’s wife with a smile, as shesat down at the table.“Pity we didn’t hear it!” said Princess Betsy, glancingtowards the door. “Ah, here you are at last!” she said, turningwith a smile to Vronsky, as he came in.Vronsky was not merely acquainted with all the persons whom he was meetinghere; he saw them all every day; and so he came in with the quiet manner withwhich one enters a room full of people from whom one has only just parted.“Where do I come from?” he said, in answer to a question from theambassador’s wife. “Well, there’s no help for it, I mustconfess. From the opera bouffe. I do believe I’ve seen it ahundred times, and always with fresh enjoyment. It’s exquisite! I knowit’s disgraceful, but I go to sleep at the opera, and I sit out theopera bouffe to the last minute, and enjoy it. This evening....”He mentioned a French actress, and was going to tell something about her; butthe ambassador’s wife, with playful horror, cut him short.“Please don’t tell us about that horror.”“All right, I won’t especially as everyone knows thosehorrors.”“And we should all go to see them if it were accepted as the correctthing, like the opera,” chimed in Princess Myakaya.Chapter 7Steps were heard at the door, and Princess Betsy, knowing it was MadameKarenina, glanced at Vronsky. He was looking towards the door, and his facewore a strange new expression. Joyfully, intently, and at the same timetimidly, he gazed at the approaching figure, and slowly he rose to his feet.Anna walked into the drawing-room. Holding herself extremely erect, as always,looking straight before her, and moving with her swift, resolute, and lightstep, that distinguished her from all other society women, she crossed theshort space to her hostess, shook hands with her, smiled, and with the samesmile looked around at Vronsky. Vronsky bowed low and pushed a chair up forher.She acknowledged this only by a slight nod, flushed a little, and frowned. Butimmediately, while rapidly greeting her acquaintances, and shaking the handsproffered to her, she addressed Princess Betsy:“I have been at Countess Lidia’s, and meant to have come hereearlier, but I stayed on. Sir John was there. He’s veryinteresting.”“Oh, that’s this missionary?”“Yes; he told us about the life in India, most interesting things.”The conversation, interrupted by her coming in, flickered up again like thelight of a lamp being blown out.“Sir John! Yes, Sir John; I’ve seen him. He speaks well. TheVlassieva girl’s quite in love with him.”“And is it true the younger Vlassieva girl’s to marry Topov?”“Yes, they say it’s quite a settled thing.”“I wonder at the parents! They say it’s a marriage for love.”“For love? What antediluvian notions you have! Can one talk of love inthese days?” said the ambassador’s wife.“What’s to be done? It’s a foolish old fashion that’skept up still,” said Vronsky.“So much the worse for those who keep up the fashion. The only happymarriages I know are marriages of prudence.”“Yes, but then how often the happiness of these prudent marriages fliesaway like dust just because that passion turns up that they have refused torecognize,” said Vronsky.“But by marriages of prudence we mean those in which both parties havesown their wild oats already. That’s like scarlatina—one has to gothrough it and get it over.”“Then they ought to find out how to vaccinate for love, likesmallpox.”“I was in love in my young days with a deacon,” said the PrincessMyakaya. “I don’t know that it did me any good.”“No; I imagine, joking apart, that to know love, one must make mistakesand then correct them,” said Princess Betsy.“Even after marriage?” said the ambassador’s wife playfully.“‘It’s never too late to mend.’” The attachérepeated the English proverb.“Just so,” Betsy agreed; “one must make mistakes and correctthem. What do you think about it?” she turned to Anna, who, with afaintly perceptible resolute smile on her lips, was listening in silence to theconversation.“I think,” said Anna, playing with the glove she had taken off,“I think ... of so many men, so many minds, certainly so many hearts, somany kinds of love.”Vronsky was gazing at Anna, and with a fainting heart waiting for what shewould say. He sighed as after a danger escaped when she uttered these words.Anna suddenly turned to him.“Oh, I have had a letter from Moscow. They write me that KittyShtcherbatskaya’s very ill.”“Really?” said Vronsky, knitting his brows.Anna looked sternly at him.“That doesn’t interest you?”“On the contrary, it does, very much. What was it exactly they told you,if I may know?” he questioned.Anna got up and went to Betsy.“Give me a cup of tea,” she said, standing at her table.While Betsy was pouring out the tea, Vronsky went up to Anna.“What is it they write to you?” he repeated.“I often think men have no understanding of what’s not honorablethough they’re always talking of it,” said Anna, without answeringhim. “I’ve wanted to tell you so a long while,” she added,and moving a few steps away, she sat down at a table in a corner covered withalbums.“I don’t quite understand the meaning of your words,” hesaid, handing her the cup.She glanced towards the sofa beside her, and he instantly sat down.“Yes, I have been wanting to tell you,” she said, not looking athim. “You behaved wrongly, very wrongly.”“Do you suppose I don’t know that I’ve acted wrongly? But whowas the cause of my doing so?”“What do you say that to me for?” she said, glancing severely athim.“You know what for,” he answered boldly and joyfully, meeting herglance and not dropping his eyes.Not he, but she, was confused.“That only shows you have no heart,” she said. But her eyes saidthat she knew he had a heart, and that was why she was afraid of him.“What you spoke of just now was a mistake, and not love.”“Remember that I have forbidden you to utter that word, that hatefulword,” said Anna, with a shudder. But at once she felt that by that veryword “forbidden” she had shown that she acknowledged certain rightsover him, and by that very fact was encouraging him to speak of love. “Ihave long meant to tell you this,” she went on, looking resolutely intohis eyes, and hot all over from the burning flush on her cheeks.“I’ve come on purpose this evening, knowing I should meet you. Ihave come to tell you that this must end. I have never blushed before anyone,and you force me to feel to blame for something.”He looked at her and was struck by a new spiritual beauty in her face.“What do you wish of me?” he said simply and seriously.“I want you to go to Moscow and ask for Kitty’s forgiveness,”she said.“You don’t wish that?” he said.He saw she was saying what she forced herself to say, not what she wanted tosay.“If you love me, as you say,” she whispered, “do so that Imay be at peace.”His face grew radiant.“Don’t you know that you’re all my life to me? But I know nopeace, and I can’t give it to you; all myself—and love ... yes. Ican’t think of you and myself apart. You and I are one to me. And I seeno chance before us of peace for me or for you. I see a chance of despair, ofwretchedness ... or I see a chance of bliss, what bliss!... Can it bethere’s no chance of it?” he murmured with his lips; but she heard.She strained every effort of her mind to say what ought to be said. But insteadof that she let her eyes rest on him, full of love, and made no answer.“It’s come!” he thought in ecstasy. “When I wasbeginning to despair, and it seemed there would be no end—it’scome! She loves me! She owns it!”“Then do this for me: never say such things to me, and let us befriends,” she said in words; but her eyes spoke quite differently.“Friends we shall never be, you know that yourself. Whether we shall bethe happiest or the wretchedest of people—that’s in yourhands.”She would have said something, but he interrupted her.“I ask one thing only: I ask for the right to hope, to suffer as I do.But if even that cannot be, command me to disappear, and I disappear. You shallnot see me if my presence is distasteful to you.”“I don’t want to drive you away.”“Only don’t change anything, leave everything as it is,” hesaid in a shaky voice. “Here’s your husband.”At that instant Alexey Alexandrovitch did in fact walk into the room with hiscalm, awkward gait.Glancing at his wife and Vronsky, he went up to the lady of the house, andsitting down for a cup of tea, began talking in his deliberate, always audiblevoice, in his habitual tone of banter, ridiculing someone.“Your Rambouillet is in full conclave,” he said, looking round atall the party; “the graces and the muses.”But Princess Betsy could not endure that tone ofhis—“sneering,” as she called it, using the English word, andlike a skillful hostess she at once brought him into a serious conversation onthe subject of universal conscription. Alexey Alexandrovitch was immediatelyinterested in the subject, and began seriously defending the new imperialdecree against Princess Betsy, who had attacked it.Vronsky and Anna still sat at the little table.“This is getting indecorous,” whispered one lady, with anexpressive glance at Madame Karenina, Vronsky, and her husband.“What did I tell you?” said Anna’s friend.But not only those ladies, almost everyone in the room, even the PrincessMyakaya and Betsy herself, looked several times in the direction of the two whohad withdrawn from the general circle, as though that were a disturbing fact.Alexey Alexandrovitch was the only person who did not once look in thatdirection, and was not diverted from the interesting discussion he had enteredupon.Noticing the disagreeable impression that was being made on everyone, PrincessBetsy slipped someone else into her place to listen to Alexey Alexandrovitch,and went up to Anna.“I’m always amazed at the clearness and precision of yourhusband’s language,” she said. “The most transcendental ideasseem to be within my grasp when he’s speaking.”“Oh, yes!” said Anna, radiant with a smile of happiness, and notunderstanding a word of what Betsy had said. She crossed over to the big tableand took part in the general conversation.Alexey Alexandrovitch, after staying half an hour, went up to his wife andsuggested that they should go home together. But she answered, not looking athim, that she was staying to supper. Alexey Alexandrovitch made his bows andwithdrew.The fat old Tatar, Madame Karenina’s coachman, was with difficultyholding one of her pair of grays, chilled with the cold and rearing at theentrance. A footman stood opening the carriage door. The hall-porter stoodholding open the great door of the house. Anna Arkadyevna, with her quicklittle hand, was unfastening the lace of her sleeve, caught in the hook of herfur cloak, and with bent head listening to the words Vronsky murmured as heescorted her down.“You’ve said nothing, of course, and I ask nothing,” he wassaying; “but you know that friendship’s not what I want: thatthere’s only one happiness in life for me, that word that you dislike so... yes, love!...”“Love,” she repeated slowly, in an inner voice, and suddenly, atthe very instant she unhooked the lace, she added, “Why I don’tlike the word is that it means too much to me, far more than you canunderstand,” and she glanced into his face. “Aurevoir!”She gave him her hand, and with her rapid, springy step she passed by theporter and vanished into the carriage.Her glance, the touch of her hand, set him aflame. He kissed the palm of hishand where she had touched it, and went home, happy in the sense that he hadgot nearer to the attainment of his aims that evening than during the last twomonths.Chapter 8Alexey Alexandrovitch had seen nothing striking or improper in the fact thathis wife was sitting with Vronsky at a table apart, in eager conversation withhim about something. But he noticed that to the rest of the party this appearedsomething striking and improper, and for that reason it seemed to him too to beimproper. He made up his mind that he must speak of it to his wife.On reaching home Alexey Alexandrovitch went to his study, as he usually did,seated himself in his low chair, opened a book on the Papacy at the place wherehe had laid the paper-knife in it, and read till one o’clock, just as heusually did. But from time to time he rubbed his high forehead and shook hishead, as though to drive away something. At his usual time he got up and madehis toilet for the night. Anna Arkadyevna had not yet come in. With a bookunder his arm he went upstairs. But this evening, instead of his usual thoughtsand meditations upon official details, his thoughts were absorbed by his wifeand something disagreeable connected with her. Contrary to his usual habit, hedid not get into bed, but fell to walking up and down the rooms with his handsclasped behind his back. He could not go to bed, feeling that it was absolutelyneedful for him first to think thoroughly over the position that had justarisen.When Alexey Alexandrovitch had made up his mind that he must talk to his wifeabout it, it had seemed a very easy and simple matter. But now, when he beganto think over the question that had just presented itself, it seemed to himvery complicated and difficult.Alexey Alexandrovitch was not jealous. Jealousy according to his notions was aninsult to one’s wife, and one ought to have confidence in one’swife. Why one ought to have confidence—that is to say, completeconviction that his young wife would always love him—he did not askhimself. But he had no experience of lack of confidence, because he hadconfidence in her, and told himself that he ought to have it. Now, though hisconviction that jealousy was a shameful feeling and that one ought to feelconfidence, had not broken down, he felt that he was standing face to face withsomething illogical and irrational, and did not know what was to be done.Alexey Alexandrovitch was standing face to face with life, with the possibilityof his wife’s loving someone other than himself, and this seemed to himvery irrational and incomprehensible because it was life itself. All his lifeAlexey Alexandrovitch had lived and worked in official spheres, having to dowith the reflection of life. And every time he had stumbled against life itselfhe had shrunk away from it. Now he experienced a feeling akin to that of a manwho, while calmly crossing a precipice by a bridge, should suddenly discoverthat the bridge is broken, and that there is a chasm below. That chasm was lifeitself, the bridge that artificial life in which Alexey Alexandrovitch hadlived. For the first time the question presented itself to him of thepossibility of his wife’s loving someone else, and he was horrified atit.He did not undress, but walked up and down with his regular tread over theresounding parquet of the dining-room, where one lamp was burning, over thecarpet of the dark drawing-room, in which the light was reflected on the bignew portrait of himself hanging over the sofa, and across her boudoir, wheretwo candles burned, lighting up the portraits of her parents and woman friends,and the pretty knick-knacks of her writing-table, that he knew so well. Hewalked across her boudoir to the bedroom door, and turned back again. At eachturn in his walk, especially at the parquet of the lighted dining-room, hehalted and said to himself, “Yes, this I must decide and put a stop to; Imust express my view of it and my decision.” And he turned back again.“But express what—what decision?” he said to himself in thedrawing-room, and he found no reply. “But after all,” he askedhimself before turning into the boudoir, “what has occurred? Nothing. Shewas talking a long while with him. But what of that? Surely women in societycan talk to whom they please. And then, jealousy means lowering both myself andher,” he told himself as he went into her boudoir; but this dictum, whichhad always had such weight with him before, had now no weight and no meaning atall. And from the bedroom door he turned back again; but as he entered the darkdrawing-room some inner voice told him that it was not so, and that if othersnoticed it that showed that there was something. And he said to himself againin the dining-room, “Yes, I must decide and put a stop to it, and expressmy view of it....” And again at the turn in the drawing-room he askedhimself, “Decide how?” And again he asked himself, “What hadoccurred?” and answered, “Nothing,” and recollected thatjealousy was a feeling insulting to his wife; but again in the drawing-room hewas convinced that something had happened. His thoughts, like his body, wentround a complete circle, without coming upon anything new. He noticed this,rubbed his forehead, and sat down in her boudoir.There, looking at her table, with the malachite blotting case lying at the topand an unfinished letter, his thoughts suddenly changed. He began to think ofher, of what she was thinking and feeling. For the first time he picturedvividly to himself her personal life, her ideas, her desires, and the idea thatshe could and should have a separate life of her own seemed to him so alarmingthat he made haste to dispel it. It was the chasm which he was afraid to peepinto. To put himself in thought and feeling in another person’s place wasa spiritual exercise not natural to Alexey Alexandrovitch. He looked on thisspiritual exercise as a harmful and dangerous abuse of the fancy.“And the worst of it all,” thought he, “is that just now, atthe very moment when my great work is approaching completion” (he wasthinking of the project he was bringing forward at the time), “when Istand in need of all my mental peace and all my energies, just now this stupidworry should fall foul of me. But what’s to be done? I’m not one ofthose men who submit to uneasiness and worry without having the force ofcharacter to face them.“I must think it over, come to a decision, and put it out of mymind,” he said aloud.“The question of her feelings, of what has passed and may be passing inher soul, that’s not my affair; that’s the affair of herconscience, and falls under the head of religion,” he said to himself,feeling consolation in the sense that he had found to which division ofregulating principles this new circumstance could be properly referred.“And so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, “questionsas to her feelings, and so on, are questions for her conscience, with which Ican have nothing to do. My duty is clearly defined. As the head of the family,I am a person bound in duty to guide her, and consequently, in part the personresponsible; I am bound to point out the danger I perceive, to warn her, evento use my authority. I ought to speak plainly to her.” And everythingthat he would say tonight to his wife took clear shape in AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s head. Thinking over what he would say, he somewhatregretted that he should have to use his time and mental powers for domesticconsumption, with so little to show for it, but, in spite of that, the form andcontents of the speech before him shaped itself as clearly and distinctly inhis head as a ministerial report.“I must say and express fully the following points: first, exposition ofthe value to be attached to public opinion and to decorum; secondly, expositionof religious significance of marriage; thirdly, if need be, reference to thecalamity possibly ensuing to our son; fourthly, reference to the unhappinesslikely to result to herself.” And, interlacing his fingers, AlexeyAlexandrovitch stretched them, and the joints of the fingers cracked. Thistrick, a bad habit, the cracking of his fingers, always soothed him, and gaveprecision to his thoughts, so needful to him at this juncture.There was the sound of a carriage driving up to the front door. AlexeyAlexandrovitch halted in the middle of the room.A woman’s step was heard mounting the stairs. Alexey Alexandrovitch,ready for his speech, stood compressing his crossed fingers, waiting to see ifthe crack would not come again. One joint cracked.Already, from the sound of light steps on the stairs, he was aware that she wasclose, and though he was satisfied with his speech, he felt frightened of theexplanation confronting him....Chapter 9Anna came in with hanging head, playing with the tassels of her hood. Her facewas brilliant and glowing; but this glow was not one of brightness; itsuggested the fearful glow of a conflagration in the midst of a dark night. Onseeing her husband, Anna raised her head and smiled, as though she had justwaked up.“You’re not in bed? What a wonder!” she said, letting fallher hood, and without stopping, she went on into the dressing-room.“It’s late, Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, when she hadgone through the doorway.“Anna, it’s necessary for me to have a talk with you.”“With me?” she said, wonderingly. She came out from behind the doorof the dressing-room, and looked at him. “Why, what is it? Whatabout?” she asked, sitting down. “Well, let’s talk, ifit’s so necessary. But it would be better to get to sleep.”Anna said what came to her lips, and marveled, hearing herself, at her owncapacity for lying. How simple and natural were her words, and how likely thatshe was simply sleepy! She felt herself clad in an impenetrable armor offalsehood. She felt that some unseen force had come to her aid and wassupporting her.“Anna, I must warn you,” he began.“Warn me?” she said. “Of what?”She looked at him so simply, so brightly, that anyone who did not know her asher husband knew her could not have noticed anything unnatural, either in thesound or the sense of her words. But to him, knowing her, knowing that wheneverhe went to bed five minutes later than usual, she noticed it, and asked him thereason; to him, knowing that every joy, every pleasure and pain that she feltshe communicated to him at once; to him, now to see that she did not care tonotice his state of mind, that she did not care to say a word about herself,meant a great deal. He saw that the inmost recesses of her soul, that hadalways hitherto lain open before him, were closed against him. More than that,he saw from her tone that she was not even perturbed at that, but as it weresaid straight out to him: “Yes, it’s shut up, and so it must be,and will be in future.” Now he experienced a feeling such as a man mighthave, returning home and finding his own house locked up. “But perhapsthe key may yet be found,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.“I want to warn you,” he said in a low voice, “that throughthoughtlessness and lack of caution you may cause yourself to be talked aboutin society. Your too animated conversation this evening with CountVronsky” (he enunciated the name firmly and with deliberate emphasis)“attracted attention.”He talked and looked at her laughing eyes, which frightened him now with theirimpenetrable look, and, as he talked, he felt all the uselessness and idlenessof his words.“You’re always like that,” she answered, as though completelymisapprehending him, and of all he had said only taking in the last phrase.“One time you don’t like my being dull, and another time youdon’t like my being lively. I wasn’t dull. Does that offendyou?”Alexey Alexandrovitch shivered, and bent his hands to make the joints crack.“Oh, please, don’t do that, I do so dislike it,” she said.“Anna, is this you?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, quietly making aneffort over himself, and restraining the motion of his fingers.“But what is it all about?” she said, with such genuine and drollwonder. “What do you want of me?”Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, and rubbed his forehead and his eyes. He saw thatinstead of doing as he had intended—that is to say, warning his wifeagainst a mistake in the eyes of the world—he had unconsciously becomeagitated over what was the affair of her conscience, and was struggling againstthe barrier he fancied between them.“This is what I meant to say to you,” he went on coldly andcomposedly, “and I beg you to listen to it. I consider jealousy, as youknow, a humiliating and degrading feeling, and I shall never allow myself to beinfluenced by it; but there are certain rules of decorum which cannot bedisregarded with impunity. This evening it was not I observed it, but judgingby the impression made on the company, everyone observed that your conduct anddeportment were not altogether what could be desired.”“I positively don’t understand,” said Anna, shrugging hershoulders—“He doesn’t care,” she thought. “Butother people noticed it, and that’s what upsetshim.”—“You’re not well, Alexey Alexandrovitch,”she added, and she got up, and would have gone towards the door; but he movedforward as though he would stop her.His face was ugly and forbidding, as Anna had never seen him. She stopped, andbending her head back and on one side, began with her rapid hand taking out herhairpins.“Well, I’m listening to what’s to come,” she said,calmly and ironically; “and indeed I listen with interest, for I shouldlike to understand what’s the matter.”She spoke, and marveled at the confident, calm, and natural tone in which shewas speaking, and the choice of the words she used.“To enter into all the details of your feelings I have no right, andbesides, I regard that as useless and even harmful,” began AlexeyAlexandrovitch. “Ferreting in one’s soul, one often ferrets outsomething that might have lain there unnoticed. Your feelings are an affair ofyour own conscience; but I am in duty bound to you, to myself, and to God, topoint out to you your duties. Our life has been joined, not by man, but by God.That union can only be severed by a crime, and a crime of that nature bringsits own chastisement.”“I don’t understand a word. And, oh dear! how sleepy I am,unluckily,” she said, rapidly passing her hand through her hair, feelingfor the remaining hairpins.“Anna, for God’s sake don’t speak like that!” he saidgently. “Perhaps I am mistaken, but believe me, what I say, I say as muchfor myself as for you. I am your husband, and I love you.”For an instant her face fell, and the mocking gleam in her eyes died away; butthe word love threw her into revolt again. She thought: “Love? Canhe love? If he hadn’t heard there was such a thing as love, he wouldnever have used the word. He doesn’t even know what love is.”“Alexey Alexandrovitch, really I don’t understand,” she said.“Define what it is you find....”“Pardon, let me say all I have to say. I love you. But I am not speakingof myself; the most important persons in this matter are our son and yourself.It may very well be, I repeat, that my words seem to you utterly unnecessaryand out of place; it may be that they are called forth by my mistakenimpression. In that case, I beg you to forgive me. But if you are consciousyourself of even the smallest foundation for them, then I beg you to think alittle, and if your heart prompts you, to speak out to me....”Alexey Alexandrovitch was unconsciously saying something utterly unlike what hehad prepared.“I have nothing to say. And besides,” she said hurriedly, withdifficulty repressing a smile, “it’s really time to be inbed.”Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, and, without saying more, went into the bedroom.When she came into the bedroom, he was already in bed. His lips were sternlycompressed, and his eyes looked away from her. Anna got into her bed, and layexpecting every minute that he would begin to speak to her again. She bothfeared his speaking and wished for it. But he was silent. She waited for a longwhile without moving, and had forgotten about him. She thought of that other;she pictured him, and felt how her heart was flooded with emotion and guiltydelight at the thought of him. Suddenly she heard an even, tranquil snore. Forthe first instant Alexey Alexandrovitch seemed, as it were, appalled at his ownsnoring, and ceased; but after an interval of two breathings the snore soundedagain, with a new tranquil rhythm.“It’s late, it’s late,” she whispered with a smile. Along while she lay, not moving, with open eyes, whose brilliance she almostfancied she could herself see in the darkness.Chapter 10From that time a new life began for Alexey Alexandrovitch and for his wife.Nothing special happened. Anna went out into society, as she had always done,was particularly often at Princess Betsy’s, and met Vronsky everywhere.Alexey Alexandrovitch saw this, but could do nothing. All his efforts to drawher into open discussion she confronted with a barrier which he could notpenetrate, made up of a sort of amused perplexity. Outwardly everything was thesame, but their inner relations were completely changed. Alexey Alexandrovitch,a man of great power in the world of politics, felt himself helpless in this.Like an ox with head bent, submissively he awaited the blow which he felt waslifted over him. Every time he began to think about it, he felt that he musttry once more, that by kindness, tenderness, and persuasion there was stillhope of saving her, of bringing her back to herself, and every day he madeready to talk to her. But every time he began talking to her, he felt that thespirit of evil and deceit, which had taken possession of her, had possession ofhim too, and he talked to her in a tone quite unlike that in which he had meantto talk. Involuntarily he talked to her in his habitual tone of jeering atanyone who should say what he was saying. And in that tone it was impossible tosay what needed to be said to her.Chapter 11That which for Vronsky had been almost a whole year the one absorbing desire ofhis life, replacing all his old desires; that which for Anna had been animpossible, terrible, and even for that reason more entrancing dream of bliss,that desire had been fulfilled. He stood before her, pale, his lower jawquivering, and besought her to be calm, not knowing how or why.“Anna! Anna!” he said with a choking voice, “Anna, forpity’s sake!...”But the louder he spoke, the lower she dropped her once proud and gay, nowshame-stricken head, and she bowed down and sank from the sofa where she wassitting, down on the floor, at his feet; she would have fallen on the carpet ifhe had not held her.“My God! Forgive me!” she said, sobbing, pressing his hands to herbosom.She felt so sinful, so guilty, that nothing was left her but to humiliateherself and beg forgiveness; and as now there was no one in her life but him,to him she addressed her prayer for forgiveness. Looking at him, she had aphysical sense of her humiliation, and she could say nothing more. He felt whata murderer must feel, when he sees the body he has robbed of life. That body,robbed by him of life, was their love, the first stage of their love. There wassomething awful and revolting in the memory of what had been bought at thisfearful price of shame. Shame at their spiritual nakedness crushed her andinfected him. But in spite of all the murderer’s horror before the bodyof his victim, he must hack it to pieces, hide the body, must use what he hasgained by his murder.And with fury, as it were with passion, the murderer falls on the body, anddrags it and hacks at it; so he covered her face and shoulders with kisses. Sheheld his hand, and did not stir. “Yes, these kisses—that is whathas been bought by this shame. Yes, and one hand, which will always bemine—the hand of my accomplice.” She lifted up that hand and kissedit. He sank on his knees and tried to see her face; but she hid it, and saidnothing. At last, as though making an effort over herself, she got up andpushed him away. Her face was still as beautiful, but it was only the morepitiful for that.“All is over,” she said; “I have nothing but you. Rememberthat.”“I can never forget what is my whole life. For one instant of thishappiness....”“Happiness!” she said with horror and loathing and her horrorunconsciously infected him. “For pity’s sake, not a word, not aword more.”She rose quickly and moved away from him.“Not a word more,” she repeated, and with a look of chill despair,incomprehensible to him, she parted from him. She felt that at that moment shecould not put into words the sense of shame, of rapture, and of horror at thisstepping into a new life, and she did not want to speak of it, to vulgarizethis feeling by inappropriate words. But later too, and the next day and thethird day, she still found no words in which she could express the complexityof her feelings; indeed, she could not even find thoughts in which she couldclearly think out all that was in her soul.She said to herself: “No, just now I can’t think of it, later on,when I am calmer.” But this calm for thought never came; every time thethought rose of what she had done and what would happen to her, and what sheought to do, a horror came over her and she drove those thoughts away.“Later, later,” she said—“when I am calmer.”But in dreams, when she had no control over her thoughts, her positionpresented itself to her in all its hideous nakedness. One dream haunted heralmost every night. She dreamed that both were her husbands at once, that bothwere lavishing caresses on her. Alexey Alexandrovitch was weeping, kissing herhands, and saying, “How happy we are now!” And Alexey Vronsky wasthere too, and he too was her husband. And she was marveling that it had onceseemed impossible to her, was explaining to them, laughing, that this was everso much simpler, and that now both of them were happy and contented. But thisdream weighed on her like a nightmare, and she awoke from it in terror.Chapter 12In the early days after his return from Moscow, whenever Levin shuddered andgrew red, remembering the disgrace of his rejection, he said to himself:“This was just how I used to shudder and blush, thinking myself utterlylost, when I was plucked in physics and did not get my remove; and how Ithought myself utterly ruined after I had mismanaged that affair of mysister’s that was entrusted to me. And yet, now that years have passed, Irecall it and wonder that it could distress me so much. It will be the samething too with this trouble. Time will go by and I shall not mind about thiseither.”But three months had passed and he had not left off minding about it; and itwas as painful for him to think of it as it had been those first days. He couldnot be at peace because after dreaming so long of family life, and feelinghimself so ripe for it, he was still not married, and was further than everfrom marriage. He was painfully conscious himself, as were all about him, thatat his years it is not well for man to be alone. He remembered how beforestarting for Moscow he had once said to his cowman Nikolay, a simple-heartedpeasant, whom he liked talking to: “Well, Nikolay! I mean to getmarried,” and how Nikolay had promptly answered, as of a matter on whichthere could be no possible doubt: “And high time too, KonstantinDmitrievitch.” But marriage had now become further off than ever. Theplace was taken, and whenever he tried to imagine any of the girls he knew inthat place, he felt that it was utterly impossible. Moreover, the recollectionof the rejection and the part he had played in the affair tortured him withshame. However often he told himself that he was in no wise to blame in it,that recollection, like other humiliating reminiscences of a similar kind, madehim twinge and blush. There had been in his past, as in every man’s,actions, recognized by him as bad, for which his conscience ought to havetormented him; but the memory of these evil actions was far from causing him somuch suffering as those trivial but humiliating reminiscences. These woundsnever healed. And with these memories was now ranged his rejection and thepitiful position in which he must have appeared to others that evening. Buttime and work did their part. Bitter memories were more and more covered up bythe incidents—paltry in his eyes, but really important—of hiscountry life. Every week he thought less often of Kitty. He was impatientlylooking forward to the news that she was married, or just going to be married,hoping that such news would, like having a tooth out, completely cure him.Meanwhile spring came on, beautiful and kindly, without the delays andtreacheries of spring,—one of those rare springs in which plants, beasts,and man rejoice alike. This lovely spring roused Levin still more, andstrengthened him in his resolution of renouncing all his past and building uphis lonely life firmly and independently. Though many of the plans with whichhe had returned to the country had not been carried out, still his mostimportant resolution—that of purity—had been kept by him. He wasfree from that shame, which had usually harassed him after a fall; and he couldlook everyone straight in the face. In February he had received a letter fromMarya Nikolaevna telling him that his brother Nikolay’s health wasgetting worse, but that he would not take advice, and in consequence of thisletter Levin went to Moscow to his brother’s and succeeded in persuadinghim to see a doctor and to go to a watering-place abroad. He succeeded so wellin persuading his brother, and in lending him money for the journey withoutirritating him, that he was satisfied with himself in that matter. In additionto his farming, which called for special attention in spring, and in additionto reading, Levin had begun that winter a work on agriculture, the plan ofwhich turned on taking into account the character of the laborer on the land asone of the unalterable data of the question, like the climate and the soil, andconsequently deducing all the principles of scientific culture, not simply fromthe data of soil and climate, but from the data of soil, climate, and a certainunalterable character of the laborer. Thus, in spite of his solitude, or inconsequence of his solitude, his life was exceedingly full. Only rarely hesuffered from an unsatisfied desire to communicate his stray ideas to someonebesides Agafea Mihalovna. With her indeed he not infrequently fell intodiscussion upon physics, the theory of agriculture, and especially philosophy;philosophy was Agafea Mihalovna’s favorite subject.Spring was slow in unfolding. For the last few weeks it had been steadily finefrosty weather. In the daytime it thawed in the sun, but at night there wereeven seven degrees of frost. There was such a frozen surface on the snow thatthey drove the wagons anywhere off the roads. Easter came in the snow. Then allof a sudden, on Easter Monday, a warm wind sprang up, storm clouds swoopeddown, and for three days and three nights the warm, driving rain fell instreams. On Thursday the wind dropped, and a thick gray fog brooded over theland as though hiding the mysteries of the transformations that were beingwrought in nature. Behind the fog there was the flowing of water, the crackingand floating of ice, the swift rush of turbid, foaming torrents; and on thefollowing Monday, in the evening, the fog parted, the storm clouds split upinto little curling crests of cloud, the sky cleared, and the real spring hadcome. In the morning the sun rose brilliant and quickly wore away the thinlayer of ice that covered the water, and all the warm air was quivering withthe steam that rose up from the quickened earth. The old grass looked greener,and the young grass thrust up its tiny blades; the buds of the guelder-rose andof the currant and the sticky birch-buds were swollen with sap, and anexploring bee was humming about the golden blossoms that studded the willow.Larks trilled unseen above the velvety green fields and the ice-coveredstubble-land; peewits wailed over the low lands and marshes flooded by thepools; cranes and wild geese flew high across the sky uttering their springcalls. The cattle, bald in patches where the new hair had not grown yet, lowedin the pastures; the bowlegged lambs frisked round their bleating mothers.Nimble children ran about the drying paths, covered with the prints of barefeet. There was a merry chatter of peasant women over their linen at the pond,and the ring of axes in the yard, where the peasants were repairing ploughs andharrows. The real spring had come.Chapter 13Levin put on his big boots, and, for the first time, a cloth jacket, instead ofhis fur cloak, and went out to look after his farm, stepping over streams ofwater that flashed in the sunshine and dazzled his eyes, and treading oneminute on ice and the next into sticky mud.Spring is the time of plans and projects. And, as he came out into thefarmyard, Levin, like a tree in spring that knows not what form will be takenby the young shoots and twigs imprisoned in its swelling buds, hardly knew whatundertakings he was going to begin upon now in the farm work that was so dearto him. But he felt that he was full of the most splendid plans and projects.First of all he went to the cattle. The cows had been let out into theirpaddock, and their smooth sides were already shining with their new, sleek,spring coats; they basked in the sunshine and lowed to go to the meadow. Levingazed admiringly at the cows he knew so intimately to the minutest detail oftheir condition, and gave orders for them to be driven out into the meadow, andthe calves to be let into the paddock. The herdsman ran gaily to get ready forthe meadow. The cowherd girls, picking up their petticoats, ran splashingthrough the mud with bare legs, still white, not yet brown from the sun, wavingbrush wood in their hands, chasing the calves that frolicked in the mirth ofspring.After admiring the young ones of that year, who were particularlyfine—the early calves were the size of a peasant’s cow, andPava’s daughter, at three months old, was as big as ayearling—Levin gave orders for a trough to be brought out and for them tobe fed in the paddock. But it appeared that as the paddock had not been usedduring the winter, the hurdles made in the autumn for it were broken. He sentfor the carpenter, who, according to his orders, ought to have been at work atthe thrashing machine. But it appeared that the carpenter was repairing theharrows, which ought to have been repaired before Lent. This was very annoyingto Levin. It was annoying to come upon that everlasting slovenliness in thefarm work against which he had been striving with all his might for so manyyears. The hurdles, as he ascertained, being not wanted in winter, had beencarried to the cart-horses’ stable; and there broken, as they were oflight construction, only meant for feeding calves. Moreover, it was apparentalso that the harrows and all the agricultural implements, which he haddirected to be looked over and repaired in the winter, for which very purposehe had hired three carpenters, had not been put into repair, and the harrowswere being repaired when they ought to have been harrowing the field. Levinsent for his bailiff, but immediately went off himself to look for him. Thebailiff, beaming all over, like everyone that day, in a sheepskin bordered withastrachan, came out of the barn, twisting a bit of straw in his hands.“Why isn’t the carpenter at the thrashing machine?”“Oh, I meant to tell you yesterday, the harrows want repairing. Hereit’s time they got to work in the fields.”“But what were they doing in the winter, then?”“But what did you want the carpenter for?”“Where are the hurdles for the calves’ paddock?”“I ordered them to be got ready. What would you have with thosepeasants!” said the bailiff, with a wave of his hand.“It’s not those peasants but this bailiff!” said Levin,getting angry. “Why, what do I keep you for?” he cried. But,bethinking himself that this would not help matters, he stopped short in themiddle of a sentence, and merely sighed. “Well, what do you say? Cansowing begin?” he asked, after a pause.“Behind Turkin tomorrow or the next day they might begin.”“And the clover?”“I’ve sent Vassily and Mishka; they’re sowing. Only Idon’t know if they’ll manage to get through; it’s soslushy.”“How many acres?”“About fifteen.”“Why not sow all?” cried Levin.That they were only sowing the clover on fifteen acres, not on all theforty-five, was still more annoying to him. Clover, as he knew, both from booksand from his own experience, never did well except when it was sown as early aspossible, almost in the snow. And yet Levin could never get this done.“There’s no one to send. What would you have with such a set ofpeasants? Three haven’t turned up. And there’s Semyon....”“Well, you should have taken some men from the thatching.”“And so I have, as it is.”“Where are the peasants, then?”“Five are making compôte” (which meant compost), “four areshifting the oats for fear of a touch of mildew, KonstantinDmitrievitch.”Levin knew very well that “a touch of mildew” meant that hisEnglish seed oats were already ruined. Again they had not done as he hadordered.“Why, but I told you during Lent to put in pipes,” he cried.“Don’t put yourself out; we shall get it all done in time.”Levin waved his hand angrily, went into the granary to glance at the oats, andthen to the stable. The oats were not yet spoiled. But the peasants werecarrying the oats in spades when they might simply let them slide down into thelower granary; and arranging for this to be done, and taking two workmen fromthere for sowing clover, Levin got over his vexation with the bailiff. Indeed,it was such a lovely day that one could not be angry.“Ignat!” he called to the coachman, who, with his sleeves tuckedup, was washing the carriage wheels, “saddle me....”“Which, sir?”“Well, let it be Kolpik.”“Yes, sir.”While they were saddling his horse, Levin again called up the bailiff, who washanging about in sight, to make it up with him, and began talking to him aboutthe spring operations before them, and his plans for the farm.The wagons were to begin carting manure earlier, so as to get all done beforethe early mowing. And the ploughing of the further land to go on without abreak so as to let it ripen lying fallow. And the mowing to be all done byhired labor, not on half-profits. The bailiff listened attentively, andobviously made an effort to approve of his employer’s projects. But stillhe had that look Levin knew so well that always irritated him, a look ofhopelessness and despondency. That look said: “That’s all verywell, but as God wills.”Nothing mortified Levin so much as that tone. But it was the tone common to allthe bailiffs he had ever had. They had all taken up that attitude to his plans,and so now he was not angered by it, but mortified, and felt all the moreroused to struggle against this, as it seemed, elemental force continuallyranged against him, for which he could find no other expression than “asGod wills.”“If we can manage it, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said the bailiff.“Why ever shouldn’t you manage it?”“We positively must have another fifteen laborers. And they don’tturn up. There were some here today asking seventy roubles for thesummer.”Levin was silent. Again he was brought face to face with that opposing force.He knew that however much they tried, they could not hire more thanforty—thirty-seven perhaps or thirty-eight—laborers for areasonable sum. Some forty had been taken on, and there were no more. But stillhe could not help struggling against it.“Send to Sury, to Tchefirovka; if they don’t come we must look forthem.”“Oh, I’ll send, to be sure,” said Vassily Fedorovitchdespondently. “But there are the horses, too, they’re not good formuch.”“We’ll get some more. I know, of course,” Levin addedlaughing, “you always want to do with as little and as poor quality aspossible; but this year I’m not going to let you have things your ownway. I’ll see to everything myself.”“Why, I don’t think you take much rest as it is. It cheers us up towork under the master’s eye....”“So they’re sowing clover behind the Birch Dale? I’ll go andhave a look at them,” he said, getting on to the little bay cob, Kolpik,who was led up by the coachman.“You can’t get across the streams, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,”the coachman shouted.“All right, I’ll go by the forest.”And Levin rode through the slush of the farmyard to the gate and out into theopen country, his good little horse, after his long inactivity, stepping outgallantly, snorting over the pools, and asking, as it were, for guidance. IfLevin had felt happy before in the cattle pens and farmyard, he felt happieryet in the open country. Swaying rhythmically with the ambling paces of hisgood little cob, drinking in the warm yet fresh scent of the snow and the air,as he rode through his forest over the crumbling, wasted snow, still left inparts, and covered with dissolving tracks, he rejoiced over every tree, withthe moss reviving on its bark and the buds swelling on its shoots. When he cameout of the forest, in the immense plain before him, his grass fields stretchedin an unbroken carpet of green, without one bare place or swamp, only spottedhere and there in the hollows with patches of melting snow. He was not put outof temper even by the sight of the peasants’ horses and colts tramplingdown his young grass (he told a peasant he met to drive them out), nor by thesarcastic and stupid reply of the peasant Ipat, whom he met on the way, andasked, “Well, Ipat, shall we soon be sowing?” “We must getthe ploughing done first, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” answered Ipat. Thefurther he rode, the happier he became, and plans for the land rose to his mindeach better than the last; to plant all his fields with hedges along thesouthern borders, so that the snow should not lie under them; to divide them upinto six fields of arable and three of pasture and hay; to build a cattle yardat the further end of the estate, and to dig a pond and to construct movablepens for the cattle as a means of manuring the land. And then eight hundredacres of wheat, three hundred of potatoes, and four hundred of clover, and notone acre exhausted.Absorbed in such dreams, carefully keeping his horse by the hedges, so as notto trample his young crops, he rode up to the laborers who had been sent to sowclover. A cart with the seed in it was standing, not at the edge, but in themiddle of the crop, and the winter corn had been torn up by the wheels andtrampled by the horse. Both the laborers were sitting in the hedge, probablysmoking a pipe together. The earth in the cart, with which the seed was mixed,was not crushed to powder, but crusted together or adhering in clods. Seeingthe master, the laborer, Vassily, went towards the cart, while Mishka set towork sowing. This was not as it should be, but with the laborers Levin seldomlost his temper. When Vassily came up, Levin told him to lead the horse to thehedge.“It’s all right, sir, it’ll spring up again,” respondedVassily.“Please don’t argue,” said Levin, “but do asyou’re told.”“Yes, sir,” answered Vassily, and he took the horse’s head.“What a sowing, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, hesitating;“first rate. Only it’s a work to get about! You drag a ton of earthon your shoes.”“Why is it you have earth that’s not sifted?” said Levin.“Well, we crumble it up,” answered Vassily, taking up some seed androlling the earth in his palms.Vassily was not to blame for their having filled up his cart with unsiftedearth, but still it was annoying.Levin had more than once already tried a way he knew for stifling his anger,and turning all that seemed dark right again, and he tried that way now. Hewatched how Mishka strode along, swinging the huge clods of earth that clung toeach foot; and getting off his horse, he took the sieve from Vassily andstarted sowing himself.“Where did you stop?”Vassily pointed to the mark with his foot, and Levin went forward as best hecould, scattering the seed on the land. Walking was as difficult as on a bog,and by the time Levin had ended the row he was in a great heat, and he stoppedand gave up the sieve to Vassily.“Well, master, when summer’s here, mind you don’t scold mefor these rows,” said Vassily.“Eh?” said Levin cheerily, already feeling the effect of hismethod.“Why, you’ll see in the summer time. It’ll look different.Look you where I sowed last spring. How I did work at it! I do my best,Konstantin Dmitrievitch, d’ye see, as I would for my own father. Idon’t like bad work myself, nor would I let another man do it.What’s good for the master’s good for us too. To look out yondernow,” said Vassily, pointing, “it does one’s heartgood.”“It’s a lovely spring, Vassily.”“Why, it’s a spring such as the old men don’t remember thelike of. I was up home; an old man up there has sown wheat too, about an acreof it. He was saying you wouldn’t know it from rye.”“Have you been sowing wheat long?”“Why, sir, it was you taught us the year before last. You gave me twomeasures. We sold about eight bushels and sowed a rood.”“Well, mind you crumble up the clods,” said Levin, going towardshis horse, “and keep an eye on Mishka. And if there’s a good cropyou shall have half a rouble for every acre.”“Humbly thankful. We are very well content, sir, as it is.”Levin got on his horse and rode towards the field where was last year’sclover, and the one which was ploughed ready for the spring corn.The crop of clover coming up in the stubble was magnificent. It had survivedeverything, and stood up vividly green through the broken stalks of lastyear’s wheat. The horse sank in up to the pasterns, and he drew each hoofwith a sucking sound out of the half-thawed ground. Over the ploughland ridingwas utterly impossible; the horse could only keep a foothold where there wasice, and in the thawing furrows he sank deep in at each step. The ploughlandwas in splendid condition; in a couple of days it would be fit for harrowingand sowing. Everything was capital, everything was cheering. Levin rode backacross the streams, hoping the water would have gone down. And he did in factget across, and startled two ducks. “There must be snipe too,” hethought, and just as he reached the turning homewards he met the forest keeper,who confirmed his theory about the snipe.Levin went home at a trot, so as to have time to eat his dinner and get his gunready for the evening.Chapter 14As he rode up to the house in the happiest frame of mind, Levin heard the bellring at the side of the principal entrance of the house.“Yes, that’s someone from the railway station,” he thought,“just the time to be here from the Moscow train ... Who could it be? Whatif it’s brother Nikolay? He did say: ‘Maybe I’ll go to thewaters, or maybe I’ll come down to you.’” He felt dismayedand vexed for the first minute, that his brother Nikolay’s presenceshould come to disturb his happy mood of spring. But he felt ashamed of thefeeling, and at once he opened, as it were, the arms of his soul, and with asoftened feeling of joy and expectation, now he hoped with all his heart thatit was his brother. He pricked up his horse, and riding out from behind theacacias he saw a hired three-horse sledge from the railway station, and agentleman in a fur coat. It was not his brother. “Oh, if it were onlysome nice person one could talk to a little!” he thought.“Ah,” cried Levin joyfully, flinging up both his hands.“Here’s a delightful visitor! Ah, how glad I am to see you!”he shouted, recognizing Stepan Arkadyevitch.“I shall find out for certain whether she’s married, or whenshe’s going to be married,” he thought. And on that deliciousspring day he felt that the thought of her did not hurt him at all.“Well, you didn’t expect me, eh?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,getting out of the sledge, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on hischeek, and on his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits.“I’ve come to see you in the first place,” he said, embracingand kissing him, “to have some stand-shooting second, and to sell theforest at Ergushovo third.”“Delightful! What a spring we’re having! How ever did you get alongin a sledge?”“In a cart it would have been worse still, KonstantinDmitrievitch,” answered the driver, who knew him.“Well, I’m very, very glad to see you,” said Levin, with agenuine smile of childlike delight.Levin led his friend to the room set apart for visitors, where StepanArkadyevitch’s things were carried also—a bag, a gun in a case, asatchel for cigars. Leaving him there to wash and change his clothes, Levinwent off to the counting house to speak about the ploughing and clover. AgafeaMihalovna, always very anxious for the credit of the house, met him in the hallwith inquiries about dinner.“Do just as you like, only let it be as soon as possible,” he said,and went to the bailiff.When he came back, Stepan Arkadyevitch, washed and combed, came out of his roomwith a beaming smile, and they went upstairs together.“Well, I am glad I managed to get away to you! Now I shall understandwhat the mysterious business is that you are always absorbed in here. No,really, I envy you. What a house, how nice it all is! So bright, socheerful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting that it was not alwaysspring and fine weather like that day. “And your nurse is simplycharming! A pretty maid in an apron might be even more agreeable, perhaps; butfor your severe monastic style it does very well.”Stepan Arkadyevitch told him many interesting pieces of news; especiallyinteresting to Levin was the news that his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, wasintending to pay him a visit in the summer.Not one word did Stepan Arkadyevitch say in reference to Kitty and theShtcherbatskys; he merely gave him greetings from his wife. Levin was gratefulto him for his delicacy and was very glad of his visitor. As always happenedwith him during his solitude, a mass of ideas and feelings had beenaccumulating within him, which he could not communicate to those about him. Andnow he poured out upon Stepan Arkadyevitch his poetic joy in the spring, andhis failures and plans for the land, and his thoughts and criticisms on thebooks he had been reading, and the idea of his own book, the basis of whichreally was, though he was unaware of it himself, a criticism of all the oldbooks on agriculture. Stepan Arkadyevitch, always charming, understandingeverything at the slightest reference, was particularly charming on this visit,and Levin noticed in him a special tenderness, as it were, and a new tone ofrespect that flattered him.The efforts of Agafea Mihalovna and the cook, that the dinner should beparticularly good, only ended in the two famished friends attacking thepreliminary course, eating a great deal of bread and butter, salt goose andsalted mushrooms, and in Levin’s finally ordering the soup to be servedwithout the accompaniment of little pies, with which the cook had particularlymeant to impress their visitor. But though Stepan Arkadyevitch was accustomedto very different dinners, he thought everything excellent: the herb brandy,and the bread, and the butter, and above all the salt goose and the mushrooms,and the nettle soup, and the chicken in white sauce, and the white Crimeanwine—everything was superb and delicious.“Splendid, splendid!” he said, lighting a fat cigar after theroast. “I feel as if, coming to you, I had landed on a peaceful shoreafter the noise and jolting of a steamer. And so you maintain that the laborerhimself is an element to be studied and to regulate the choice of methods inagriculture. Of course, I’m an ignorant outsider; but I should fancytheory and its application will have its influence on the laborer too.”“Yes, but wait a bit. I’m not talking of political economy,I’m talking of the science of agriculture. It ought to be like thenatural sciences, and to observe given phenomena and the laborer in hiseconomic, ethnographical....”At that instant Agafea Mihalovna came in with jam.“Oh, Agafea Mihalovna,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, kissing the tipsof his plump fingers, “what salt goose, what herb brandy!... What do youthink, isn’t it time to start, Kostya?” he added.Levin looked out of the window at the sun sinking behind the bare tree-tops ofthe forest.“Yes, it’s time,” he said. “Kouzma, get ready thetrap,” and he ran downstairs.Stepan Arkadyevitch, going down, carefully took the canvas cover off hisvarnished gun case with his own hands, and opening it, began to get ready hisexpensive new-fashioned gun. Kouzma, who already scented a big tip, never leftStepan Arkadyevitch’s side, and put on him both his stockings and boots,a task which Stepan Arkadyevitch readily left him.“Kostya, give orders that if the merchant Ryabinin comes ... I told himto come today, he’s to be brought in and to wait for me....”“Why, do you mean to say you’re selling the forest toRyabinin?”“Yes. Do you know him?”“To be sure I do. I have had to do business with him, ‘positivelyand conclusively.’”Stepan Arkadyevitch laughed. “Positively and conclusively” were themerchant’s favorite words.“Yes, it’s wonderfully funny the way he talks. She knows where hermaster’s going!” he added, patting Laska, who hung about Levin,whining and licking his hands, his boots, and his gun.The trap was already at the steps when they went out.“I told them to bring the trap round; or would you rather walk?”“No, we’d better drive,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, gettinginto the trap. He sat down, tucked the tiger-skin rug round him, and lighted acigar. “How is it you don’t smoke? A cigar is a sort of thing, notexactly a pleasure, but the crown and outward sign of pleasure. Come, this islife! How splendid it is! This is how I should like to live!”“Why, who prevents you?” said Levin, smiling.“No, you’re a lucky man! You’ve got everything you like. Youlike horses—and you have them; dogs—you have them;shooting—you have it; farming—you have it.”“Perhaps because I rejoice in what I have, and don’t fret for whatI haven’t,” said Levin, thinking of Kitty.Stepan Arkadyevitch comprehended, looked at him, but said nothing.Levin was grateful to Oblonsky for noticing, with his never-failing tact, thathe dreaded conversation about the Shtcherbatskys, and so saying nothing aboutthem. But now Levin was longing to find out what was tormenting him so, yet hehad not the courage to begin.“Come, tell me how things are going with you,” said Levin,bethinking himself that it was not nice of him to think only of himself.Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes sparkled merrily.“You don’t admit, I know, that one can be fond of new rolls whenone has had one’s rations of bread—to your mind it’s a crime;but I don’t count life as life without love,” he said, takingLevin’s question his own way. “What am I to do? I’m made thatway. And really, one does so little harm to anyone, and gives oneself so muchpleasure....”“What! is there something new, then?” queried Levin.“Yes, my boy, there is! There, do you see, you know the type ofOssian’s women.... Women, such as one sees in dreams.... Well, thesewomen are sometimes to be met in reality ... and these women are terrible.Woman, don’t you know, is such a subject that however much you study it,it’s always perfectly new.”“Well, then, it would be better not to study it.”“No. Some mathematician has said that enjoyment lies in the search fortruth, not in the finding it.”Levin listened in silence, and in spite of all the efforts he made, he couldnot in the least enter into the feelings of his friend and understand hissentiments and the charm of studying such women.Chapter 15The place fixed on for the stand-shooting was not far above a stream in alittle aspen copse. On reaching the copse, Levin got out of the trap and ledOblonsky to a corner of a mossy, swampy glade, already quite free from snow. Hewent back himself to a double birch tree on the other side, and leaning his gunon the fork of a dead lower branch, he took off his full overcoat, fastened hisbelt again, and worked his arms to see if they were free.Gray old Laska, who had followed them, sat down warily opposite him and prickedup her ears. The sun was setting behind a thick forest, and in the glow ofsunset the birch trees, dotted about in the aspen copse, stood out clearly withtheir hanging twigs, and their buds swollen almost to bursting.From the thickest parts of the copse, where the snow still remained, came thefaint sound of narrow winding threads of water running away. Tiny birdstwittered, and now and then fluttered from tree to tree.In the pauses of complete stillness there came the rustle of last year’sleaves, stirred by the thawing of the earth and the growth of the grass.“Imagine! One can hear and see the grass growing!” Levin said tohimself, noticing a wet, slate-colored aspen leaf moving beside a blade ofyoung grass. He stood, listened, and gazed sometimes down at the wet mossyground, sometimes at Laska listening all alert, sometimes at the sea of baretree tops that stretched on the slope below him, sometimes at the darkeningsky, covered with white streaks of cloud.A hawk flew high over a forest far away with slow sweep of its wings; anotherflew with exactly the same motion in the same direction and vanished. The birdstwittered more and more loudly and busily in the thicket. An owl hooted not faroff, and Laska, starting, stepped cautiously a few steps forward, and puttingher head on one side, began to listen intently. Beyond the stream was heard thecuckoo. Twice she uttered her usual cuckoo call, and then gave a hoarse,hurried call and broke down.“Imagine! the cuckoo already!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, coming outfrom behind a bush.“Yes, I hear it,” answered Levin, reluctantly breaking thestillness with his voice, which sounded disagreeable to himself. “Nowit’s coming!”Stepan Arkadyevitch’s figure again went behind the bush, and Levin sawnothing but the bright flash of a match, followed by the red glow and bluesmoke of a cigarette.“Tchk! tchk!” came the snapping sound of Stepan Arkadyevitchcocking his gun.“What’s that cry?” asked Oblonsky, drawing Levin’sattention to a prolonged cry, as though a colt were whinnying in a high voice,in play.“Oh, don’t you know it? That’s the hare. But enough talking!Listen, it’s flying!” almost shrieked Levin, cocking his gun.They heard a shrill whistle in the distance, and in the exact time, so wellknown to the sportsman, two seconds later—another, a third, and after thethird whistle the hoarse, guttural cry could be heard.Levin looked about him to right and to left, and there, just facing him againstthe dusky blue sky above the confused mass of tender shoots of the aspens, hesaw the flying bird. It was flying straight towards him; the guttural cry, likethe even tearing of some strong stuff, sounded close to his ear; the long beakand neck of the bird could be seen, and at the very instant when Levin wastaking aim, behind the bush where Oblonsky stood, there was a flash of redlightning: the bird dropped like an arrow, and darted upwards again. Again camethe red flash and the sound of a blow, and fluttering its wings as thoughtrying to keep up in the air, the bird halted, stopped still an instant, andfell with a heavy splash on the slushy ground.“Can I have missed it?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, who could notsee for the smoke.“Here it is!” said Levin, pointing to Laska, who with one earraised, wagging the end of her shaggy tail, came slowly back as though shewould prolong the pleasure, and as it were smiling, brought the dead bird toher master. “Well, I’m glad you were successful,” said Levin,who, at the same time, had a sense of envy that he had not succeeded inshooting the snipe.“It was a bad shot from the right barrel,” responded StepanArkadyevitch, loading his gun. “Sh... it’s flying!”The shrill whistles rapidly following one another were heard again. Two snipe,playing and chasing one another, and only whistling, not crying, flew straightat the very heads of the sportsmen. There was the report of four shots, andlike swallows the snipe turned swift somersaults in the air and vanished fromsight.The stand-shooting was capital. Stepan Arkadyevitch shot two more birds andLevin two, of which one was not found. It began to get dark. Venus, bright andsilvery, shone with her soft light low down in the west behind the birch trees,and high up in the east twinkled the red lights of Arcturus. Over his headLevin made out the stars of the Great Bear and lost them again. The snipe hadceased flying; but Levin resolved to stay a little longer, till Venus, which hesaw below a branch of birch, should be above it, and the stars of the GreatBear should be perfectly plain. Venus had risen above the branch, and the earof the Great Bear with its shaft was now all plainly visible against the darkblue sky, yet still he waited.“Isn’t it time to go home?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.It was quite still now in the copse, and not a bird was stirring.“Let’s stay a little while,” answered Levin.“As you like.”They were standing now about fifteen paces from one another.“Stiva!” said Levin unexpectedly; “how is it you don’ttell me whether your sister-in-law’s married yet, or when she’sgoing to be?”Levin felt so resolute and serene that no answer, he fancied, could affect him.But he had never dreamed of what Stepan Arkadyevitch replied.“She’s never thought of being married, and isn’t thinking ofit; but she’s very ill, and the doctors have sent her abroad.They’re positively afraid she may not live.”“What!” cried Levin. “Very ill? What is wrong with her? Howhas she...?”While they were saying this, Laska, with ears pricked up, was looking upwardsat the sky, and reproachfully at them.“They have chosen a time to talk,” she was thinking.“It’s on the wing.... Here it is, yes, it is. They’ll missit,” thought Laska.But at that very instant both suddenly heard a shrill whistle which, as itwere, smote on their ears, and both suddenly seized their guns and two flashesgleamed, and two bangs sounded at the very same instant. The snipe flying highabove instantly folded its wings and fell into a thicket, bending down thedelicate shoots.“Splendid! Together!” cried Levin, and he ran with Laska into thethicket to look for the snipe.“Oh, yes, what was it that was unpleasant?” he wondered.“Yes, Kitty’s ill.... Well, it can’t be helped; I’mvery sorry,” he thought.“She’s found it! Isn’t she a clever thing?” he said,taking the warm bird from Laska’s mouth and packing it into the almostfull game bag. “I’ve got it, Stiva!” he shouted.Chapter 16On the way home Levin asked all details of Kitty’s illness and theShtcherbatskys’ plans, and though he would have been ashamed to admit it,he was pleased at what he heard. He was pleased that there was still hope, andstill more pleased that she should be suffering who had made him suffer somuch. But when Stepan Arkadyevitch began to speak of the causes ofKitty’s illness, and mentioned Vronsky’s name, Levin cut him short.“I have no right whatever to know family matters, and, to tell the truth,no interest in them either.”Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled hardly perceptibly, catching the instantaneouschange he knew so well in Levin’s face, which had become as gloomy as ithad been bright a minute before.“Have you quite settled about the forest with Ryabinin?” askedLevin.“Yes, it’s settled. The price is magnificent; thirty-eightthousand. Eight straight away, and the rest in six years. I’ve beenbothering about it for ever so long. No one would give more.”“Then you’ve as good as given away your forest for nothing,”said Levin gloomily.“How do you mean for nothing?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with agood-humored smile, knowing that nothing would be right in Levin’s eyesnow.“Because the forest is worth at least a hundred and fifty roubles theacre,” answered Levin.“Oh, these farmers!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch playfully.“Your tone of contempt for us poor townsfolk!... But when it comes tobusiness, we do it better than anyone. I assure you I have reckoned it allout,” he said, “and the forest is fetching a very goodprice—so much so that I’m afraid of this fellow’s crying off,in fact. You know it’s not ‘timber,’” said StepanArkadyevitch, hoping by this distinction to convince Levin completely of theunfairness of his doubts. “And it won’t run to more thantwenty-five yards of fagots per acre, and he’s giving me at the rate ofseventy roubles the acre.”Levin smiled contemptuously. “I know,” he thought, “thatfashion not only in him, but in all city people, who, after being twice in tenyears in the country, pick up two or three phrases and use them in season andout of season, firmly persuaded that they know all about it. ‘Timber,run to so many yards the acre.’ He says those words withoutunderstanding them himself.”“I wouldn’t attempt to teach you what you write about in youroffice,” said he, “and if need arose, I should come to you to askabout it. But you’re so positive you know all the lore of the forest.It’s difficult. Have you counted the trees?”“How count the trees?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, laughing, stilltrying to draw his friend out of his ill-temper. “Count the sands of thesea, number the stars. Some higher power might do it.”“Oh, well, the higher power of Ryabinin can. Not a single merchant everbuys a forest without counting the trees, unless they get it given them fornothing, as you’re doing now. I know your forest. I go there every yearshooting, and your forest’s worth a hundred and fifty roubles an acrepaid down, while he’s giving you sixty by installments. So that in factyou’re making him a present of thirty thousand.”“Come, don’t let your imagination run away with you,” saidStepan Arkadyevitch piteously. “Why was it none would give it,then?”“Why, because he has an understanding with the merchants; he’sbought them off. I’ve had to do with all of them; I know them.They’re not merchants, you know: they’re speculators. Hewouldn’t look at a bargain that gave him ten, fifteen per cent. profit,but holds back to buy a rouble’s worth for twenty kopecks.”“Well, enough of it! You’re out of temper.”“Not the least,” said Levin gloomily, as they drove up to thehouse.At the steps there stood a trap tightly covered with iron and leather, with asleek horse tightly harnessed with broad collar-straps. In the trap sat thechubby, tightly belted clerk who served Ryabinin as coachman. Ryabinin himselfwas already in the house, and met the friends in the hall. Ryabinin was a tall,thinnish, middle-aged man, with mustache and a projecting clean-shaven chin,and prominent muddy-looking eyes. He was dressed in a long-skirted blue coat,with buttons below the waist at the back, and wore high boots wrinkled over theankles and straight over the calf, with big galoshes drawn over them. He rubbedhis face with his handkerchief, and wrapping round him his coat, which satextremely well as it was, he greeted them with a smile, holding out his hand toStepan Arkadyevitch, as though he wanted to catch something.“So here you are,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, giving him his hand.“That’s capital.”“I did not venture to disregard your excellency’s commands, thoughthe road was extremely bad. I positively walked the whole way, but I am here atmy time. Konstantin Dmitrievitch, my respects”; he turned to Levin,trying to seize his hand too. But Levin, scowling, made as though he did notnotice his hand, and took out the snipe. “Your honors have been divertingyourselves with the chase? What kind of bird may it be, pray?” addedRyabinin, looking contemptuously at the snipe: “a great delicacy, Isuppose.” And he shook his head disapprovingly, as though he had gravedoubts whether this game were worth the candle.“Would you like to go into my study?” Levin said in French toStepan Arkadyevitch, scowling morosely. “Go into my study; you can talkthere.”“Quite so, where you please,” said Ryabinin with contemptuousdignity, as though wishing to make it felt that others might be in difficultiesas to how to behave, but that he could never be in any difficulty aboutanything.On entering the study Ryabinin looked about, as his habit was, as thoughseeking the holy picture, but when he had found it, he did not cross himself.He scanned the bookcases and bookshelves, and with the same dubious air withwhich he had regarded the snipe, he smiled contemptuously and shook his headdisapprovingly, as though by no means willing to allow that this game wereworth the candle.“Well, have you brought the money?” asked Oblonsky. “Sitdown.”“Oh, don’t trouble about the money. I’ve come to see you totalk it over.”“What is there to talk over? But do sit down.”“I don’t mind if I do,” said Ryabinin, sitting down andleaning his elbows on the back of his chair in a position of the intensestdiscomfort to himself. “You must knock it down a bit, prince. It would betoo bad. The money is ready conclusively to the last farthing. As to paying themoney down, there’ll be no hitch there.”Levin, who had meanwhile been putting his gun away in the cupboard, was justgoing out of the door, but catching the merchant’s words, he stopped.“Why, you’ve got the forest for nothing as it is,” he said.“He came to me too late, or I’d have fixed the price forhim.”Ryabinin got up, and in silence, with a smile, he looked Levin down and up.“Very close about money is Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said with asmile, turning to Stepan Arkadyevitch; “there’s positively nodealing with him. I was bargaining for some wheat of him, and a pretty price Ioffered too.”“Why should I give you my goods for nothing? I didn’t pick it up onthe ground, nor steal it either.”“Mercy on us! nowadays there’s no chance at all of stealing. Withthe open courts and everything done in style, nowadays there’s noquestion of stealing. We are just talking things over like gentlemen. Hisexcellency’s asking too much for the forest. I can’t make both endsmeet over it. I must ask for a little concession.”“But is the thing settled between you or not? If it’s settled,it’s useless haggling; but if it’s not,” said Levin,“I’ll buy the forest.”The smile vanished at once from Ryabinin’s face. A hawklike, greedy,cruel expression was left upon it. With rapid, bony fingers he unbuttoned hiscoat, revealing a shirt, bronze waistcoat buttons, and a watch chain, andquickly pulled out a fat old pocketbook.“Here you are, the forest is mine,” he said, crossing himselfquickly, and holding out his hand. “Take the money; it’s my forest.That’s Ryabinin’s way of doing business; he doesn’t haggleover every half-penny,” he added, scowling and waving the pocketbook.“I wouldn’t be in a hurry if I were you,” said Levin.“Come, really,” said Oblonsky in surprise. “I’ve givenmy word, you know.”Levin went out of the room, slamming the door. Ryabinin looked towards the doorand shook his head with a smile.“It’s all youthfulness—positively nothing but boyishness.Why, I’m buying it, upon my honor, simply, believe me, for the glory ofit, that Ryabinin, and no one else, should have bought the copse of Oblonsky.And as to the profits, why, I must make what God gives. In God’s name. Ifyou would kindly sign the title-deed....”Within an hour the merchant, stroking his big overcoat neatly down, and hookingup his jacket, with the agreement in his pocket, seated himself in his tightlycovered trap, and drove homewards.“Ugh, these gentlefolks!” he said to the clerk.“They—they’re a nice lot!”“That’s so,” responded the clerk, handing him the reins andbuttoning the leather apron. “But I can congratulate you on the purchase,Mihail Ignatitch?”“Well, well....”Chapter 17Stepan Arkadyevitch went upstairs with his pocket bulging with notes, which themerchant had paid him for three months in advance. The business of the forestwas over, the money in his pocket; their shooting had been excellent, andStepan Arkadyevitch was in the happiest frame of mind, and so he felt speciallyanxious to dissipate the ill-humor that had come upon Levin. He wanted tofinish the day at supper as pleasantly as it had been begun.Levin certainly was out of humor, and in spite of all his desire to beaffectionate and cordial to his charming visitor, he could not control hismood. The intoxication of the news that Kitty was not married had graduallybegun to work upon him.Kitty was not married, but ill, and ill from love for a man who had slightedher. This slight, as it were, rebounded upon him. Vronsky had slighted her, andshe had slighted him, Levin. Consequently Vronsky had the right to despiseLevin, and therefore he was his enemy. But all this Levin did not think out. Hevaguely felt that there was something in it insulting to him, and he was notangry now at what had disturbed him, but he fell foul of everything thatpresented itself. The stupid sale of the forest, the fraud practiced uponOblonsky and concluded in his house, exasperated him.“Well, finished?” he said, meeting Stepan Arkadyevitch upstairs.“Would you like supper?”“Well, I wouldn’t say no to it. What an appetite I get in thecountry! Wonderful! Why didn’t you offer Ryabinin something?”“Oh, damn him!”“Still, how you do treat him!” said Oblonsky. “Youdidn’t even shake hands with him. Why not shake hands with him?”“Because I don’t shake hands with a waiter, and a waiter’s ahundred times better than he is.”“What a reactionist you are, really! What about the amalgamation ofclasses?” said Oblonsky.“Anyone who likes amalgamating is welcome to it, but it sickensme.”“You’re a regular reactionist, I see.”“Really, I have never considered what I am. I am Konstantin Levin, andnothing else.”“And Konstantin Levin very much out of temper,” said StepanArkadyevitch, smiling.“Yes, I am out of temper, and do you know why? Because—excuseme—of your stupid sale....”Stepan Arkadyevitch frowned good-humoredly, like one who feels himself teasedand attacked for no fault of his own.“Come, enough about it!” he said. “When did anybody ever sellanything without being told immediately after the sale, ‘It was worthmuch more’? But when one wants to sell, no one will give anything.... No,I see you’ve a grudge against that unlucky Ryabinin.”“Maybe I have. And do you know why? You’ll say again that I’ma reactionist, or some other terrible word; but all the same it does annoy andanger me to see on all sides the impoverishing of the nobility to which Ibelong, and, in spite of the amalgamation of classes, I’m glad to belong.And their impoverishment is not due to extravagance—that would benothing; living in good style—that’s the proper thing for noblemen;it’s only the nobles who know how to do it. Now the peasants about us buyland, and I don’t mind that. The gentleman does nothing, while thepeasant works and supplants the idle man. That’s as it ought to be. AndI’m very glad for the peasant. But I do mind seeing the process ofimpoverishment from a sort of—I don’t know what to callit—innocence. Here a Polish speculator bought for half its value amagnificent estate from a young lady who lives in Nice. And there a merchantwill get three acres of land, worth ten roubles, as security for the loan ofone rouble. Here, for no kind of reason, you’ve made that rascal apresent of thirty thousand roubles.”“Well, what should I have done? Counted every tree?”“Of course, they must be counted. You didn’t count them, butRyabinin did. Ryabinin’s children will have means of livelihood andeducation, while yours maybe will not!”“Well, you must excuse me, but there’s something mean in thiscounting. We have our business and they have theirs, and they must make theirprofit. Anyway, the thing’s done, and there’s an end of it. Andhere come some poached eggs, my favorite dish. And Agafea Mihalovna will giveus that marvelous herb-brandy....”Stepan Arkadyevitch sat down at the table and began joking with AgafeaMihalovna, assuring her that it was long since he had tasted such a dinner andsuch a supper.“Well, you do praise it, anyway,” said Agafea Mihalovna, “butKonstantin Dmitrievitch, give him what you will—a crust ofbread—he’ll eat it and walk away.”Though Levin tried to control himself, he was gloomy and silent. He wanted toput one question to Stepan Arkadyevitch, but he could not bring himself to thepoint, and could not find the words or the moment in which to put it. StepanArkadyevitch had gone down to his room, undressed, again washed, and attired ina nightshirt with goffered frills, he had got into bed, but Levin stilllingered in his room, talking of various trifling matters, and not daring toask what he wanted to know.“How wonderfully they make this soap,” he said gazing at a piece ofsoap he was handling, which Agafea Mihalovna had put ready for the visitor butOblonsky had not used. “Only look; why, it’s a work of art.”“Yes, everything’s brought to such a pitch of perfectionnowadays,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with a moist and blissful yawn.“The theater, for instance, and the entertainments ...a—a—a!” he yawned. “The electric light everywhere ...a—a—a!”“Yes, the electric light,” said Levin. “Yes. Oh, andwhere’s Vronsky now?” he asked suddenly, laying down the soap.“Vronsky?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, checking his yawn;“he’s in Petersburg. He left soon after you did, and he’s notonce been in Moscow since. And do you know, Kostya, I’ll tell you thetruth,” he went on, leaning his elbow on the table, and propping on hishand his handsome ruddy face, in which his moist, good-natured, sleepy eyesshone like stars. “It’s your own fault. You took fright at thesight of your rival. But, as I told you at the time, I couldn’t say whichhad the better chance. Why didn’t you fight it out? I told you at thetime that....” He yawned inwardly, without opening his mouth.“Does he know, or doesn’t he, that I did make an offer?”Levin wondered, gazing at him. “Yes, there’s something humbugging,diplomatic in his face,” and feeling he was blushing, he looked StepanArkadyevitch straight in the face without speaking.“If there was anything on her side at the time, it was nothing but asuperficial attraction,” pursued Oblonsky. “His being such aperfect aristocrat, don’t you know, and his future position in society,had an influence not with her, but with her mother.”Levin scowled. The humiliation of his rejection stung him to the heart, asthough it were a fresh wound he had only just received. But he was at home, andthe walls of home are a support.“Stay, stay,” he began, interrupting Oblonsky. “You talk ofhis being an aristocrat. But allow me to ask what it consists in, thataristocracy of Vronsky or of anybody else, beside which I can be looked downupon? You consider Vronsky an aristocrat, but I don’t. A man whose fathercrawled up from nothing at all by intrigue, and whose mother—God knowswhom she wasn’t mixed up with.... No, excuse me, but I consider myselfaristocratic, and people like me, who can point back in the past to three orfour honorable generations of their family, of the highest degree of breeding(talent and intellect, of course that’s another matter), and have nevercurried favor with anyone, never depended on anyone for anything, like myfather and my grandfather. And I know many such. You think it mean of me tocount the trees in my forest, while you make Ryabinin a present of thirtythousand; but you get rents from your lands and I don’t know what, whileI don’t and so I prize what’s come to me from my ancestors or beenwon by hard work.... We are aristocrats, and not those who can only exist byfavor of the powerful of this world, and who can be bought for twopencehalfpenny.”“Well, but whom are you attacking? I agree with you,” said StepanArkadyevitch, sincerely and genially; though he was aware that in the class ofthose who could be bought for twopence halfpenny Levin was reckoning him too.Levin’s warmth gave him genuine pleasure. “Whom are you attacking?Though a good deal is not true that you say about Vronsky, but I won’ttalk about that. I tell you straight out, if I were you, I should go back withme to Moscow, and....”“No; I don’t know whether you know it or not, but I don’tcare. And I tell you—I did make an offer and was rejected, and KaterinaAlexandrovna is nothing now to me but a painful and humiliatingreminiscence.”“What ever for? What nonsense!”“But we won’t talk about it. Please forgive me, if I’ve beennasty,” said Levin. Now that he had opened his heart, he became as he hadbeen in the morning. “You’re not angry with me, Stiva? Pleasedon’t be angry,” he said, and smiling, he took his hand.“Of course not; not a bit, and no reason to be. I’m gladwe’ve spoken openly. And do you know, stand-shooting in the morning isunusually good—why not go? I couldn’t sleep the night anyway, but Imight go straight from shooting to the station.”“Capital.”Chapter 18Although all Vronsky’s inner life was absorbed in his passion, hisexternal life unalterably and inevitably followed along the old accustomedlines of his social and regimental ties and interests. The interests of hisregiment took an important place in Vronsky’s life, both because he wasfond of the regiment, and because the regiment was fond of him. They were notonly fond of Vronsky in his regiment, they respected him too, and were proud ofhim; proud that this man, with his immense wealth, his brilliant education andabilities, and the path open before him to every kind of success, distinction,and ambition, had disregarded all that, and of all the interests of life hadthe interests of his regiment and his comrades nearest to his heart. Vronskywas aware of his comrades’ view of him, and in addition to his liking forthe life, he felt bound to keep up that reputation.It need not be said that he did not speak of his love to any of his comrades,nor did he betray his secret even in the wildest drinking bouts (though indeedhe was never so drunk as to lose all control of himself). And he shut up any ofhis thoughtless comrades who attempted to allude to his connection. But inspite of that, his love was known to all the town; everyone guessed with moreor less confidence at his relations with Madame Karenina. The majority of theyounger men envied him for just what was the most irksome factor in hislove—the exalted position of Karenin, and the consequent publicity oftheir connection in society.The greater number of the young women, who envied Anna and had long been wearyof hearing her called virtuous, rejoiced at the fulfillment of theirpredictions, and were only waiting for a decisive turn in public opinion tofall upon her with all the weight of their scorn. They were already makingready their handfuls of mud to fling at her when the right moment arrived. Thegreater number of the middle-aged people and certain great personages weredispleased at the prospect of the impending scandal in society.Vronsky’s mother, on hearing of his connection, was at first pleased atit, because nothing to her mind gave such a finishing touch to a brilliantyoung man as a liaison in the highest society; she was pleased, too,that Madame Karenina, who had so taken her fancy, and had talked so much of herson, was, after all, just like all other pretty and well-bred women,—atleast according to the Countess Vronskaya’s ideas. But she had heard oflate that her son had refused a position offered him of great importance to hiscareer, simply in order to remain in the regiment, where he could be constantlyseeing Madame Karenina. She learned that great personages were displeased withhim on this account, and she changed her opinion. She was vexed, too, that fromall she could learn of this connection it was not that brilliant, graceful,worldly liaison which she would have welcomed, but a sort of Wertherish,desperate passion, so she was told, which might well lead him into imprudence.She had not seen him since his abrupt departure from Moscow, and she sent herelder son to bid him come to see her.This elder son, too, was displeased with his younger brother. He did notdistinguish what sort of love his might be, big or little, passionate orpassionless, lasting or passing (he kept a ballet girl himself, though he wasthe father of a family, so he was lenient in these matters), but he knew thatthis love affair was viewed with displeasure by those whom it was necessary toplease, and therefore he did not approve of his brother’s conduct.Besides the service and society, Vronsky had another greatinterest—horses; he was passionately fond of horses.That year races and a steeplechase had been arranged for the officers. Vronskyhad put his name down, bought a thoroughbred English mare, and in spite of hislove affair, he was looking forward to the races with intense, though reserved,excitement....These two passions did not interfere with one another. On the contrary, heneeded occupation and distraction quite apart from his love, so as to recruitand rest himself from the violent emotions that agitated him.Chapter 19On the day of the races at Krasnoe Selo, Vronsky had come earlier than usual toeat beefsteak in the common messroom of the regiment. He had no need to bestrict with himself, as he had very quickly been brought down to the requiredlight weight; but still he had to avoid gaining flesh, and so he eschewedfarinaceous and sweet dishes. He sat with his coat unbuttoned over a whitewaistcoat, resting both elbows on the table, and while waiting for the steak hehad ordered he looked at a French novel that lay open on his plate. He was onlylooking at the book to avoid conversation with the officers coming in and out;he was thinking.He was thinking of Anna’s promise to see him that day after the races.But he had not seen her for three days, and as her husband had just returnedfrom abroad, he did not know whether she would be able to meet him today ornot, and he did not know how to find out. He had had his last interview withher at his cousin Betsy’s summer villa. He visited the Karenins’summer villa as rarely as possible. Now he wanted to go there, and he ponderedthe question how to do it.“Of course I shall say Betsy has sent me to ask whether she’scoming to the races. Of course, I’ll go,” he decided, lifting hishead from the book. And as he vividly pictured the happiness of seeing her, hisface lighted up.“Send to my house, and tell them to have out the carriage and threehorses as quick as they can,” he said to the servant, who handed him thesteak on a hot silver dish, and moving the dish up he began eating.From the billiard room next door came the sound of balls knocking, of talk andlaughter. Two officers appeared at the entrance-door: one, a young fellow, witha feeble, delicate face, who had lately joined the regiment from the Corps ofPages; the other, a plump, elderly officer, with a bracelet on his wrist, andlittle eyes, lost in fat.Vronsky glanced at them, frowned, and looking down at his book as though he hadnot noticed them, he proceeded to eat and read at the same time.“What? Fortifying yourself for your work?” said the plump officer,sitting down beside him.“As you see,” responded Vronsky, knitting his brows, wiping hismouth, and not looking at the officer.“So you’re not afraid of getting fat?” said the latter,turning a chair round for the young officer.“What?” said Vronsky angrily, making a wry face of disgust, andshowing his even teeth.“You’re not afraid of getting fat?”“Waiter, sherry!” said Vronsky, without replying, and moving thebook to the other side of him, he went on reading.The plump officer took up the list of wines and turned to the young officer.“You choose what we’re to drink,” he said, handing him thecard, and looking at him.“Rhine wine, please,” said the young officer, stealing a timidglance at Vronsky, and trying to pull his scarcely visible mustache. Seeingthat Vronsky did not turn round, the young officer got up.“Let’s go into the billiard room,” he said.The plump officer rose submissively, and they moved towards the door.At that moment there walked into the room the tall and well-built CaptainYashvin. Nodding with an air of lofty contempt to the two officers, he went upto Vronsky.“Ah! here he is!” he cried, bringing his big hand down heavily onhis epaulet. Vronsky looked round angrily, but his face lighted up immediatelywith his characteristic expression of genial and manly serenity.“That’s it, Alexey,” said the captain, in his loud baritone.“You must just eat a mouthful, now, and drink only one tiny glass.”“Oh, I’m not hungry.”“There go the inseparables,” Yashvin dropped, glancingsarcastically at the two officers who were at that instant leaving the room.And he bent his long legs, swathed in tight riding breeches, and sat down inthe chair, too low for him, so that his knees were cramped up in a sharp angle.“Why didn’t you turn up at the Red Theater yesterday? Numerovawasn’t at all bad. Where were you?”“I was late at the Tverskoys’,” said Vronsky.“Ah!” responded Yashvin.Yashvin, a gambler and a rake, a man not merely without moral principles, butof immoral principles, Yashvin was Vronsky’s greatest friend in theregiment. Vronsky liked him both for his exceptional physical strength, whichhe showed for the most part by being able to drink like a fish, and do withoutsleep without being in the slightest degree affected by it; and for his greatstrength of character, which he showed in his relations with his comrades andsuperior officers, commanding both fear and respect, and also at cards, when hewould play for tens of thousands and however much he might have drunk, alwayswith such skill and decision that he was reckoned the best player in theEnglish Club. Vronsky respected and liked Yashvin particularly because he feltYashvin liked him, not for his name and his money, but for himself. And of allmen he was the only one with whom Vronsky would have liked to speak of hislove. He felt that Yashvin, in spite of his apparent contempt for every sort offeeling, was the only man who could, so he fancied, comprehend the intensepassion which now filled his whole life. Moreover, he felt certain thatYashvin, as it was, took no delight in gossip and scandal, and interpreted hisfeeling rightly, that is to say, knew and believed that this passion was not ajest, not a pastime, but something more serious and important.Vronsky had never spoken to him of his passion, but he was aware that he knewall about it, and that he put the right interpretation on it, and he was gladto see that in his eyes.“Ah! yes,” he said, to the announcement that Vronsky had been atthe Tverskoys’; and his black eyes shining, he plucked at his leftmustache, and began twisting it into his mouth, a bad habit he had.“Well, and what did you do yesterday? Win anything?” asked Vronsky.“Eight thousand. But three don’t count; he won’t payup.”“Oh, then you can afford to lose over me,” said Vronsky, laughing.(Yashvin had bet heavily on Vronsky in the races.)“No chance of my losing. Mahotin’s the only one that’srisky.”And the conversation passed to forecasts of the coming race, the only thingVronsky could think of just now.“Come along, I’ve finished,” said Vronsky, and getting up hewent to the door. Yashvin got up too, stretching his long legs and his longback.“It’s too early for me to dine, but I must have a drink. I’llcome along directly. Hi, wine!” he shouted, in his rich voice, thatalways rang out so loudly at drill, and set the windows shaking now.“No, all right,” he shouted again immediately after.“You’re going home, so I’ll go with you.”And he walked out with Vronsky.Chapter 20Vronsky was staying in a roomy, clean, Finnish hut, divided into two by apartition. Petritsky lived with him in camp too. Petritsky was asleep whenVronsky and Yashvin came into the hut.“Get up, don’t go on sleeping,” said Yashvin, going behindthe partition and giving Petritsky, who was lying with ruffled hair and withhis nose in the pillow, a prod on the shoulder.Petritsky jumped up suddenly onto his knees and looked round.“Your brother’s been here,” he said to Vronsky. “Hewaked me up, damn him, and said he’d look in again.” And pulling upthe rug he flung himself back on the pillow. “Oh, do shut up,Yashvin!” he said, getting furious with Yashvin, who was pulling the rugoff him. “Shut up!” He turned over and opened his eyes.“You’d better tell me what to drink; such a nasty taste in mymouth, that....”“Brandy’s better than anything,” boomed Yashvin.“Tereshtchenko! brandy for your master and cucumbers,” he shouted,obviously taking pleasure in the sound of his own voice.“Brandy, do you think? Eh?” queried Petritsky, blinking and rubbinghis eyes. “And you’ll drink something? All right then, we’llhave a drink together! Vronsky, have a drink?” said Petritsky, getting upand wrapping the tiger-skin rug round him. He went to the door of the partitionwall, raised his hands, and hummed in French, “There was a king inThule.” “Vronsky, will you have a drink?”“Go along,” said Vronsky, putting on the coat his valet handed tohim.“Where are you off to?” asked Yashvin. “Oh, here are yourthree horses,” he added, seeing the carriage drive up.“To the stables, and I’ve got to see Bryansky, too, about thehorses,” said Vronsky.Vronsky had as a fact promised to call at Bryansky’s, some eight milesfrom Peterhof, and to bring him some money owing for some horses; and he hopedto have time to get that in too. But his comrades were at once aware that hewas not only going there.Petritsky, still humming, winked and made a pout with his lips, as though hewould say: “Oh, yes, we know your Bryansky.”“Mind you’re not late!” was Yashvin’s only comment; andto change the conversation: “How’s my roan? is he doing allright?” he inquired, looking out of the window at the middle one of thethree horses, which he had sold Vronsky.“Stop!” cried Petritsky to Vronsky as he was just going out.“Your brother left a letter and a note for you. Wait a bit; where arethey?”Vronsky stopped.“Well, where are they?”“Where are they? That’s just the question!” said Petritskysolemnly, moving his forefinger upwards from his nose.“Come, tell me; this is silly!” said Vronsky smiling.“I have not lighted the fire. Here somewhere about.”“Come, enough fooling! Where is the letter?”“No, I’ve forgotten really. Or was it a dream? Wait a bit, wait abit! But what’s the use of getting in a rage. If you’d drunk fourbottles yesterday as I did you’d forget where you were lying. Wait a bit,I’ll remember!”Petritsky went behind the partition and lay down on his bed.“Wait a bit! This was how I was lying, and this was how he was standing.Yes—yes—yes.... Here it is!”—and Petritsky pulled aletter out from under the mattress, where he had hidden it.Vronsky took the letter and his brother’s note. It was the letter he wasexpecting—from his mother, reproaching him for not having been to seeher—and the note was from his brother to say that he must have a littletalk with him. Vronsky knew that it was all about the same thing. “Whatbusiness is it of theirs!” thought Vronsky, and crumpling up the lettershe thrust them between the buttons of his coat so as to read them carefully onthe road. In the porch of the hut he was met by two officers; one of hisregiment and one of another.Vronsky’s quarters were always a meeting place for all the officers.“Where are you off to?”“I must go to Peterhof.”“Has the mare come from Tsarskoe?”“Yes, but I’ve not seen her yet.”“They say Mahotin’s Gladiator’s lame.”“Nonsense! But however are you going to race in this mud?” said theother.“Here are my saviors!” cried Petritsky, seeing them come in. Beforehim stood the orderly with a tray of brandy and salted cucumbers.“Here’s Yashvin ordering me to drink a pick-me-up.”“Well, you did give it to us yesterday,” said one of those who hadcome in; “you didn’t let us get a wink of sleep all night.”“Oh, didn’t we make a pretty finish!” said Petritsky.“Volkov climbed onto the roof and began telling us how sad he was. Isaid: ‘Let’s have music, the funeral march!’ He fairlydropped asleep on the roof over the funeral march.”“Drink it up; you positively must drink the brandy, and then seltzerwater and a lot of lemon,” said Yashvin, standing over Petritsky like amother making a child take medicine, “and then a littlechampagne—just a small bottle.”“Come, there’s some sense in that. Stop a bit, Vronsky. We’llall have a drink.”“No; good-bye all of you. I’m not going to drink today.”“Why, are you gaining weight? All right, then we must have it alone. Giveus the seltzer water and lemon.”“Vronsky!” shouted someone when he was already outside.“Well?”“You’d better get your hair cut, it’ll weigh you down,especially at the top.”Vronsky was in fact beginning, prematurely, to get a little bald. He laughedgaily, showing his even teeth, and pulling his cap over the thin place, wentout and got into his carriage.“To the stables!” he said, and was just pulling out the letters toread them through, but he thought better of it, and put off reading them so asnot to distract his attention before looking at the mare. “Later!”Chapter 21The temporary stable, a wooden shed, had been put up close to the race course,and there his mare was to have been taken the previous day. He had not yet seenher there.During the last few days he had not ridden her out for exercise himself, buthad put her in the charge of the trainer, and so now he positively did not knowin what condition his mare had arrived yesterday and was today. He had scarcelygot out of his carriage when his groom, the so-called “stable boy,”recognizing the carriage some way off, called the trainer. A dry-lookingEnglishman, in high boots and a short jacket, clean-shaven, except for a tuftbelow his chin, came to meet him, walking with the uncouth gait of jockey,turning his elbows out and swaying from side to side.“Well, how’s Frou-Frou?” Vronsky asked in English.“All right, sir,” the Englishman’s voice responded somewherein the inside of his throat. “Better not go in,” he added, touchinghis hat. “I’ve put a muzzle on her, and the mare’s fidgety.Better not go in, it’ll excite the mare.”“No, I’m going in. I want to look at her.”“Come along, then,” said the Englishman, frowning, and speakingwith his mouth shut, and, with swinging elbows, he went on in front with hisdisjointed gait.They went into the little yard in front of the shed. A stable boy, spruce andsmart in his holiday attire, met them with a broom in his hand, and followedthem. In the shed there were five horses in their separate stalls, and Vronskyknew that his chief rival, Gladiator, a very tall chestnut horse, had beenbrought there, and must be standing among them. Even more than his mare,Vronsky longed to see Gladiator, whom he had never seen. But he knew that bythe etiquette of the race course it was not merely impossible for him to seethe horse, but improper even to ask questions about him. Just as he was passingalong the passage, the boy opened the door into the second horse-box on theleft, and Vronsky caught a glimpse of a big chestnut horse with white legs. Heknew that this was Gladiator, but, with the feeling of a man turning away fromthe sight of another man’s open letter, he turned round and went intoFrou-Frou’s stall.“The horse is here belonging to Mak... Mak... I never can say thename,” said the Englishman, over his shoulder, pointing his big fingerand dirty nail towards Gladiator’s stall.“Mahotin? Yes, he’s my most serious rival,” said Vronsky.“If you were riding him,” said the Englishman, “I’d beton you.”“Frou-Frou’s more nervous; he’s stronger,” saidVronsky, smiling at the compliment to his riding.“In a steeplechase it all depends on riding and on pluck,” said theEnglishman.Of pluck—that is, energy and courage—Vronsky did not merely feelthat he had enough; what was of far more importance, he was firmly convincedthat no one in the world could have more of this “pluck” than hehad.“Don’t you think I want more thinning down?”“Oh, no,” answered the Englishman. “Please, don’t speakloud. The mare’s fidgety,” he added, nodding towards the horse-box,before which they were standing, and from which came the sound of restlessstamping in the straw.He opened the door, and Vronsky went into the horse-box, dimly lighted by onelittle window. In the horse-box stood a dark bay mare, with a muzzle on,picking at the fresh straw with her hoofs. Looking round him in the twilight ofthe horse-box, Vronsky unconsciously took in once more in a comprehensiveglance all the points of his favorite mare. Frou-Frou was a beast of mediumsize, not altogether free from reproach, from a breeder’s point of view.She was small-boned all over; though her chest was extremely prominent infront, it was narrow. Her hind-quarters were a little drooping, and in herfore-legs, and still more in her hind-legs, there was a noticeable curvature.The muscles of both hind- and fore-legs were not very thick; but across hershoulders the mare was exceptionally broad, a peculiarity specially strikingnow that she was lean from training. The bones of her legs below the kneeslooked no thicker than a finger from in front, but were extraordinarily thickseen from the side. She looked altogether, except across the shoulders, as itwere, pinched in at the sides and pressed out in depth. But she had in thehighest degree the quality that makes all defects forgotten: that quality wasblood, the blood that tells, as the English expression has it.The muscles stood up sharply under the network of sinews, covered with thedelicate, mobile skin, soft as satin, and they were hard as bone. Her clean-cuthead, with prominent, bright, spirited eyes, broadened out at the opennostrils, that showed the red blood in the cartilage within. About all herfigure, and especially her head, there was a certain expression of energy, and,at the same time, of softness. She was one of those creatures which seem onlynot to speak because the mechanism of their mouth does not allow them to.To Vronsky, at any rate, it seemed that she understood all he felt at thatmoment, looking at her.Directly Vronsky went towards her, she drew in a deep breath, and, turning backher prominent eye till the white looked bloodshot, she started at theapproaching figures from the opposite side, shaking her muzzle, and shiftinglightly from one leg to the other.“There, you see how fidgety she is,” said the Englishman.“There, darling! There!” said Vronsky, going up to the mare andspeaking soothingly to her.But the nearer he came, the more excited she grew. Only when he stood by herhead, she was suddenly quieter, while the muscles quivered under her soft,delicate coat. Vronsky patted her strong neck, straightened over her sharpwithers a stray lock of her mane that had fallen on the other side, and movedhis face near her dilated nostrils, transparent as a bat’s wing. She drewa loud breath and snorted out through her tense nostrils, started, pricked upher sharp ear, and put out her strong, black lip towards Vronsky, as though shewould nip hold of his sleeve. But remembering the muzzle, she shook it andagain began restlessly stamping one after the other her shapely legs.“Quiet, darling, quiet!” he said, patting her again over herhind-quarters; and with a glad sense that his mare was in the best possiblecondition, he went out of the horse-box.The mare’s excitement had infected Vronsky. He felt that his heart wasthrobbing, and that he, too, like the mare, longed to move, to bite; it wasboth dreadful and delicious.“Well, I rely on you, then,” he said to the Englishman;“half-past six on the ground.”“All right,” said the Englishman. “Oh, where are you going,my lord?” he asked suddenly, using the title “my lord,” whichhe had scarcely ever used before.Vronsky in amazement raised his head, and stared, as he knew how to stare, notinto the Englishman’s eyes, but at his forehead, astounded at theimpertinence of his question. But realizing that in asking this the Englishmanhad been looking at him not as an employer, but as a jockey, he answered:“I’ve got to go to Bryansky’s; I shall be home within anhour.”“How often I’m asked that question today!” he said tohimself, and he blushed, a thing which rarely happened to him. The Englishmanlooked gravely at him; and, as though he, too, knew where Vronsky was going, headded:“The great thing’s to keep quiet before a race,” said he;“don’t get out of temper or upset about anything.”“All right,” answered Vronsky, smiling; and jumping into hiscarriage, he told the man to drive to Peterhof.Before he had driven many paces away, the dark clouds that had been threateningrain all day broke, and there was a heavy downpour of rain.“What a pity!” thought Vronsky, putting up the roof of thecarriage. “It was muddy before, now it will be a perfect swamp.” Ashe sat in solitude in the closed carriage, he took out his mother’sletter and his brother’s note, and read them through.Yes, it was the same thing over and over again. Everyone, his mother, hisbrother, everyone thought fit to interfere in the affairs of his heart. Thisinterference aroused in him a feeling of angry hatred—a feeling he hadrarely known before. “What business is it of theirs? Why does everybodyfeel called upon to concern himself about me? And why do they worry me so? Justbecause they see that this is something they can’t understand. If it werea common, vulgar, worldly intrigue, they would have left me alone. They feelthat this is something different, that this is not a mere pastime, that thiswoman is dearer to me than life. And this is incomprehensible, and that’swhy it annoys them. Whatever our destiny is or may be, we have made itourselves, and we do not complain of it,” he said, in the word welinking himself with Anna. “No, they must needs teach us how to live.They haven’t an idea of what happiness is; they don’t know thatwithout our love, for us there is neither happiness nor unhappiness—nolife at all,” he thought.He was angry with all of them for their interference just because he felt inhis soul that they, all these people, were right. He felt that the love thatbound him to Anna was not a momentary impulse, which would pass, as worldlyintrigues do pass, leaving no other traces in the life of either but pleasantor unpleasant memories. He felt all the torture of his own and her position,all the difficulty there was for them, conspicuous as they were in the eye ofall the world, in concealing their love, in lying and deceiving; and in lying,deceiving, feigning, and continually thinking of others, when the passion thatunited them was so intense that they were both oblivious of everything else buttheir love.He vividly recalled all the constantly recurring instances of inevitablenecessity for lying and deceit, which were so against his natural bent. Herecalled particularly vividly the shame he had more than once detected in herat this necessity for lying and deceit. And he experienced the strange feelingthat had sometimes come upon him since his secret love for Anna. This was afeeling of loathing for something—whether for Alexey Alexandrovitch, orfor himself, or for the whole world, he could not have said. But he alwaysdrove away this strange feeling. Now, too, he shook it off and continued thethread of his thoughts.“Yes, she was unhappy before, but proud and at peace; and now she cannotbe at peace and feel secure in her dignity, though she does not show it. Yes,we must put an end to it,” he decided.And for the first time the idea clearly presented itself that it was essentialto put an end to this false position, and the sooner the better. “Throwup everything, she and I, and hide ourselves somewhere alone with ourlove,” he said to himself.Chapter 22The rain did not last long, and by the time Vronsky arrived, his shaft-horsetrotting at full speed and dragging the trace-horses galloping through the mud,with their reins hanging loose, the sun had peeped out again, the roofs of thesummer villas and the old limetrees in the gardens on both sides of theprincipal streets sparkled with wet brilliance, and from the twigs came apleasant drip and from the roofs rushing streams of water. He thought no moreof the shower spoiling the race course, but was rejoicing now that—thanksto the rain—he would be sure to find her at home and alone, as he knewthat Alexey Alexandrovitch, who had lately returned from a foreign wateringplace, had not moved from Petersburg.Hoping to find her alone, Vronsky alighted, as he always did, to avoidattracting attention, before crossing the bridge, and walked to the house. Hedid not go up the steps to the street door, but went into the court.“Has your master come?” he asked a gardener.“No, sir. The mistress is at home. But will you please go to the frontdoor; there are servants there,” the gardener answered.“They’ll open the door.”“No, I’ll go in from the garden.”And feeling satisfied that she was alone, and wanting to take her by surprise,since he had not promised to be there today, and she would certainly not expecthim to come before the races, he walked, holding his sword and steppingcautiously over the sandy path, bordered with flowers, to the terrace thatlooked out upon the garden. Vronsky forgot now all that he had thought on theway of the hardships and difficulties of their position. He thought of nothingbut that he would see her directly, not in imagination, but living, all of her,as she was in reality. He was just going in, stepping on his whole foot so asnot to creak, up the worn steps of the terrace, when he suddenly rememberedwhat he always forgot, and what caused the most torturing side of his relationswith her, her son with his questioning—hostile, as he fancied—eyes.This boy was more often than anyone else a check upon their freedom. When hewas present, both Vronsky and Anna did not merely avoid speaking of anythingthat they could not have repeated before everyone; they did not even allowthemselves to refer by hints to anything the boy did not understand. They hadmade no agreement about this, it had settled itself. They would have felt itwounding themselves to deceive the child. In his presence they talked likeacquaintances. But in spite of this caution, Vronsky often saw thechild’s intent, bewildered glance fixed upon him, and a strange shyness,uncertainty, at one time friendliness, at another, coldness and reserve, in theboy’s manner to him; as though the child felt that between this man andhis mother there existed some important bond, the significance of which hecould not understand.As a fact, the boy did feel that he could not understand this relation, and hetried painfully, and was not able to make clear to himself what feeling heought to have for this man. With a child’s keen instinct for everymanifestation of feeling, he saw distinctly that his father, his governess, hisnurse,—all did not merely dislike Vronsky, but looked on him with horrorand aversion, though they never said anything about him, while his motherlooked on him as her greatest friend.“What does it mean? Who is he? How ought I to love him? If I don’tknow, it’s my fault; either I’m stupid or a naughty boy,”thought the child. And this was what caused his dubious, inquiring, sometimeshostile, expression, and the shyness and uncertainty which Vronsky found soirksome. This child’s presence always and infallibly called up in Vronskythat strange feeling of inexplicable loathing which he had experienced of late.This child’s presence called up both in Vronsky and in Anna a feelingakin to the feeling of a sailor who sees by the compass that the direction inwhich he is swiftly moving is far from the right one, but that to arrest hismotion is not in his power, that every instant is carrying him further andfurther away, and that to admit to himself his deviation from the rightdirection is the same as admitting his certain ruin.This child, with his innocent outlook upon life, was the compass that showedthem the point to which they had departed from what they knew, but did not wantto know.This time Seryozha was not at home, and she was completely alone. She wassitting on the terrace waiting for the return of her son, who had gone out forhis walk and been caught in the rain. She had sent a manservant and a maid outto look for him. Dressed in a white gown, deeply embroidered, she was sittingin a corner of the terrace behind some flowers, and did not hear him. Bendingher curly black head, she pressed her forehead against a cool watering pot thatstood on the parapet, and both her lovely hands, with the rings he knew sowell, clasped the pot. The beauty of her whole figure, her head, her neck, herhands, struck Vronsky every time as something new and unexpected. He stoodstill, gazing at her in ecstasy. But, directly he would have made a step tocome nearer to her, she was aware of his presence, pushed away the wateringpot, and turned her flushed face towards him.“What’s the matter? You are ill?” he said to her in French,going up to her. He would have run to her, but remembering that there might bespectators, he looked round towards the balcony door, and reddened a little, ashe always reddened, feeling that he had to be afraid and be on his guard.“No, I’m quite well,” she said, getting up and pressing hisoutstretched hand tightly. “I did not expect ... thee.”“Mercy! what cold hands!” he said.“You startled me,” she said. “I’m alone, and expectingSeryozha; he’s out for a walk; they’ll come in from thisside.”But, in spite of her efforts to be calm, her lips were quivering.“Forgive me for coming, but I couldn’t pass the day without seeingyou,” he went on, speaking French, as he always did to avoid using thestiff Russian plural form, so impossibly frigid between them, and thedangerously intimate singular.“Forgive you? I’m so glad!”“But you’re ill or worried,” he went on, not letting go herhands and bending over her. “What were you thinking of?”“Always the same thing,” she said, with a smile.She spoke the truth. If ever at any moment she had been asked what she wasthinking of, she could have answered truly: of the same thing, of her happinessand her unhappiness. She was thinking, just when he came upon her, of this: whywas it, she wondered, that to others, to Betsy (she knew of her secretconnection with Tushkevitch) it was all easy, while to her it was such torture?Today this thought gained special poignancy from certain other considerations.She asked him about the races. He answered her questions, and, seeing that shewas agitated, trying to calm her, he began telling her in the simplest tone thedetails of his preparations for the races.“Tell him or not tell him?” she thought, looking into his quiet,affectionate eyes. “He is so happy, so absorbed in his races that hewon’t understand as he ought, he won’t understand all the gravityof this fact to us.”“But you haven’t told me what you were thinking of when I camein,” he said, interrupting his narrative; “please tell me!”She did not answer, and, bending her head a little, she looked inquiringly athim from under her brows, her eyes shining under their long lashes. Her handshook as it played with a leaf she had picked. He saw it, and his faceexpressed that utter subjection, that slavish devotion, which had done so muchto win her.“I see something has happened. Do you suppose I can be at peace, knowingyou have a trouble I am not sharing? Tell me, for God’s sake,” herepeated imploringly.“Yes, I shan’t be able to forgive him if he does not realize allthe gravity of it. Better not tell; why put him to the proof?” shethought, still staring at him in the same way, and feeling the hand that heldthe leaf was trembling more and more.“For God’s sake!” he repeated, taking her hand.“Shall I tell you?”“Yes, yes, yes....”“I’m with child,” she said, softly and deliberately. The leafin her hand shook more violently, but she did not take her eyes off him,watching how he would take it. He turned white, would have said something, butstopped; he dropped her hand, and his head sank on his breast. “Yes, herealizes all the gravity of it,” she thought, and gratefully she pressedhis hand.But she was mistaken in thinking he realized the gravity of the fact as she, awoman, realized it. On hearing it, he felt come upon him with tenfold intensitythat strange feeling of loathing of someone. But at the same time, he felt thatthe turning-point he had been longing for had come now; that it was impossibleto go on concealing things from her husband, and it was inevitable in one wayor another that they should soon put an end to their unnatural position. But,besides that, her emotion physically affected him in the same way. He looked ather with a look of submissive tenderness, kissed her hand, got up, and, insilence, paced up and down the terrace.“Yes,” he said, going up to her resolutely. “Neither you norI have looked on our relations as a passing amusement, and now our fate issealed. It is absolutely necessary to put an end”—he looked roundas he spoke—“to the deception in which we are living.”“Put an end? How put an end, Alexey?” she said softly.She was calmer now, and her face lighted up with a tender smile.“Leave your husband and make our life one.”“It is one as it is,” she answered, scarcely audibly.“Yes, but altogether; altogether.”“But how, Alexey, tell me how?” she said in melancholy mockery atthe hopelessness of her own position. “Is there any way out of such aposition? Am I not the wife of my husband?”“There is a way out of every position. We must take our line,” hesaid. “Anything’s better than the position in which you’reliving. Of course, I see how you torture yourself over everything—theworld and your son and your husband.”“Oh, not over my husband,” she said, with a quiet smile. “Idon’t know him, I don’t think of him. He doesn’texist.”“You’re not speaking sincerely. I know you. You worry about himtoo.”“Oh, he doesn’t even know,” she said, and suddenly a hotflush came over her face; her cheeks, her brow, her neck crimsoned, and tearsof shame came into her eyes. “But we won’t talk of him.”Chapter 23Vronsky had several times already, though not so resolutely as now, tried tobring her to consider their position, and every time he had been confronted bythe same superficiality and triviality with which she met his appeal now. Itwas as though there were something in this which she could not or would notface, as though directly she began to speak of this, she, the real Anna,retreated somehow into herself, and another strange and unaccountable womancame out, whom he did not love, and whom he feared, and who was in oppositionto him. But today he was resolved to have it out.“Whether he knows or not,” said Vronsky, in his usual quiet andresolute tone, “that’s nothing to do with us. We cannot ... youcannot stay like this, especially now.”“What’s to be done, according to you?” she asked with thesame frivolous irony. She who had so feared he would take her condition toolightly was now vexed with him for deducing from it the necessity of takingsome step.“Tell him everything, and leave him.”“Very well, let us suppose I do that,” she said. “Do you knowwhat the result of that would be? I can tell you it all beforehand,” anda wicked light gleamed in her eyes, that had been so soft a minute before.“‘Eh, you love another man, and have entered into criminalintrigues with him?’” (Mimicking her husband, she threw an emphasison the word “criminal,” as Alexey Alexandrovitch did.)“‘I warned you of the results in the religious, the civil, and thedomestic relation. You have not listened to me. Now I cannot let you disgracemy name,—’” “and my son,” she had meant to say,but about her son she could not jest,—“‘disgrace my name,and’—and more in the same style,” she added. “Ingeneral terms, he’ll say in his official manner, and with alldistinctness and precision, that he cannot let me go, but will take allmeasures in his power to prevent scandal. And he will calmly and punctually actin accordance with his words. That’s what will happen. He’s not aman, but a machine, and a spiteful machine when he’s angry,” sheadded, recalling Alexey Alexandrovitch as she spoke, with all the peculiaritiesof his figure and manner of speaking, and reckoning against him every defectshe could find in him, softening nothing for the great wrong she herself wasdoing him.“But, Anna,” said Vronsky, in a soft and persuasive voice, tryingto soothe her, “we absolutely must, anyway, tell him, and then be guidedby the line he takes.”“What, run away?”“And why not run away? I don’t see how we can keep on like this.And not for my sake—I see that you suffer.”“Yes, run away, and become your mistress,” she said angrily.“Anna,” he said, with reproachful tenderness.“Yes,” she went on, “become your mistress, and complete theruin of....”Again she would have said “my son,” but she could not utter thatword.Vronsky could not understand how she, with her strong and truthful nature,could endure this state of deceit, and not long to get out of it. But he didnot suspect that the chief cause of it was the word—son, which shecould not bring herself to pronounce. When she thought of her son, and hisfuture attitude to his mother, who had abandoned his father, she felt suchterror at what she had done, that she could not face it; but, like a woman,could only try to comfort herself with lying assurances that everything wouldremain as it always had been, and that it was possible to forget the fearfulquestion of how it would be with her son.“I beg you, I entreat you,” she said suddenly, taking his hand, andspeaking in quite a different tone, sincere and tender, “never speak tome of that!”“But, Anna....”“Never. Leave it to me. I know all the baseness, all the horror of myposition; but it’s not so easy to arrange as you think. And leave it tome, and do what I say. Never speak to me of it. Do you promise me?... No, no,promise!...”“I promise everything, but I can’t be at peace, especially afterwhat you have told me. I can’t be at peace, when you can’t be atpeace....”“I?” she repeated. “Yes, I am worried sometimes; but thatwill pass, if you will never talk about this. When you talk aboutit—it’s only then it worries me.”“I don’t understand,” he said.“I know,” she interrupted him, “how hard it is for yourtruthful nature to lie, and I grieve for you. I often think that you haveruined your whole life for me.”“I was just thinking the very same thing,” he said; “howcould you sacrifice everything for my sake? I can’t forgive myself thatyou’re unhappy!”“I unhappy?” she said, coming closer to him, and looking at himwith an ecstatic smile of love. “I am like a hungry man who has beengiven food. He may be cold, and dressed in rags, and ashamed, but he is notunhappy. I unhappy? No, this is my unhappiness....”She could hear the sound of her son’s voice coming towards them, andglancing swiftly round the terrace, she got up impulsively. Her eyes glowedwith the fire he knew so well; with a rapid movement she raised her lovelyhands, covered with rings, took his head, looked a long look into his face,and, putting up her face with smiling, parted lips, swiftly kissed his mouthand both eyes, and pushed him away. She would have gone, but he held her back.“When?” he murmured in a whisper, gazing in ecstasy at her.“Tonight, at one o’clock,” she whispered, and, with a heavysigh, she walked with her light, swift step to meet her son.Seryozha had been caught by the rain in the big garden, and he and his nursehad taken shelter in an arbor.“Well, au revoir,” she said to Vronsky. “I must soonbe getting ready for the races. Betsy promised to fetch me.”Vronsky, looking at his watch, went away hurriedly.Chapter 24When Vronsky looked at his watch on the Karenins’ balcony, he was sogreatly agitated and lost in his thoughts that he saw the figures on thewatch’s face, but could not take in what time it was. He came out on tothe highroad and walked, picking his way carefully through the mud, to hiscarriage. He was so completely absorbed in his feeling for Anna, that he didnot even think what o’clock it was, and whether he had time to go toBryansky’s. He had left him, as often happens, only the external facultyof memory, that points out each step one has to take, one after the other. Hewent up to his coachman, who was dozing on the box in the shadow, alreadylengthening, of a thick limetree; he admired the shifting clouds of midgescircling over the hot horses, and, waking the coachman, he jumped into thecarriage, and told him to drive to Bryansky’s. It was only after drivingnearly five miles that he had sufficiently recovered himself to look at hiswatch, and realize that it was half-past five, and he was late.There were several races fixed for that day: the Mounted Guards’ race,then the officers’ mile-and-a-half race, then the three-mile race, andthen the race for which he was entered. He could still be in time for his race,but if he went to Bryansky’s he could only just be in time, and he wouldarrive when the whole of the court would be in their places. That would be apity. But he had promised Bryansky to come, and so he decided to drive on,telling the coachman not to spare the horses.He reached Bryansky’s, spent five minutes there, and galloped back. Thisrapid drive calmed him. All that was painful in his relations with Anna, allthe feeling of indefiniteness left by their conversation, had slipped out ofhis mind. He was thinking now with pleasure and excitement of the race, of hisbeing anyhow, in time, and now and then the thought of the blissful interviewawaiting him that night flashed across his imagination like a flaming light.The excitement of the approaching race gained upon him as he drove further andfurther into the atmosphere of the races, overtaking carriages driving up fromthe summer villas or out of Petersburg.At his quarters no one was left at home; all were at the races, and his valetwas looking out for him at the gate. While he was changing his clothes, hisvalet told him that the second race had begun already, that a lot of gentlemenhad been to ask for him, and a boy had twice run up from the stables. Dressingwithout hurry (he never hurried himself, and never lost his self-possession),Vronsky drove to the sheds. From the sheds he could see a perfect sea ofcarriages, and people on foot, soldiers surrounding the race course, andpavilions swarming with people. The second race was apparently going on, forjust as he went into the sheds he heard a bell ringing. Going towards thestable, he met the white-legged chestnut, Mahotin’s Gladiator, being ledto the race-course in a blue forage horsecloth, with what looked like huge earsedged with blue.“Where’s Cord?” he asked the stable-boy.“In the stable, putting on the saddle.”In the open horse-box stood Frou-Frou, saddled ready. They were just going tolead her out.“I’m not too late?”“All right! All right!” said the Englishman; “don’tupset yourself!”Vronsky once more took in in one glance the exquisite lines of his favoritemare; who was quivering all over, and with an effort he tore himself from thesight of her, and went out of the stable. He went towards the pavilions at themost favorable moment for escaping attention. The mile-and-a-half race was justfinishing, and all eyes were fixed on the horse-guard in front and the lighthussar behind, urging their horses on with a last effort close to the winningpost. From the center and outside of the ring all were crowding to the winningpost, and a group of soldiers and officers of the horse-guards were shoutingloudly their delight at the expected triumph of their officer and comrade.Vronsky moved into the middle of the crowd unnoticed, almost at the very momentwhen the bell rang at the finish of the race, and the tall, mudspatteredhorse-guard who came in first, bending over the saddle, let go the reins of hispanting gray horse that looked dark with sweat.The horse, stiffening out its legs, with an effort stopped its rapid course,and the officer of the horse-guards looked round him like a man waking up froma heavy sleep, and just managed to smile. A crowd of friends and outsiderspressed round him.Vronsky intentionally avoided that select crowd of the upper world, which wasmoving and talking with discreet freedom before the pavilions. He knew thatMadame Karenina was there, and Betsy, and his brother’s wife, and hepurposely did not go near them for fear of something distracting his attention.But he was continually met and stopped by acquaintances, who told him about theprevious races, and kept asking him why he was so late.At the time when the racers had to go to the pavilion to receive the prizes,and all attention was directed to that point, Vronsky’s elder brother,Alexander, a colonel with heavy fringed epaulets, came up to him. He was nottall, though as broadly built as Alexey, and handsomer and rosier than he; hehad a red nose, and an open, drunken-looking face.“Did you get my note?” he said. “There’s never anyfinding you.”Alexander Vronsky, in spite of the dissolute life, and in especial the drunkenhabits, for which he was notorious, was quite one of the court circle.Now, as he talked to his brother of a matter bound to be exceedinglydisagreeable to him, knowing that the eyes of many people might be fixed uponhim, he kept a smiling countenance, as though he were jesting with his brotherabout something of little moment.“I got it, and I really can’t make out what you are worryingyourself about,” said Alexey.“I’m worrying myself because the remark has just been made to methat you weren’t here, and that you were seen in Peterhof onMonday.”“There are matters which only concern those directly interested in them,and the matter you are so worried about is....”“Yes, but if so, you may as well cut the service....”“I beg you not to meddle, and that’s all I have to say.”Alexey Vronsky’s frowning face turned white, and his prominent lower jawquivered, which happened rarely with him. Being a man of very warm heart, hewas seldom angry; but when he was angry, and when his chin quivered, then, asAlexander Vronsky knew, he was dangerous. Alexander Vronsky smiled gaily.“I only wanted to give you Mother’s letter. Answer it, anddon’t worry about anything just before the race. Bonnechance,” he added, smiling and he moved away from him. But after himanother friendly greeting brought Vronsky to a standstill.“So you won’t recognize your friends! How are you, moncher?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, as conspicuously brilliant in themidst of all the Petersburg brilliance as he was in Moscow, his face rosy, andhis whiskers sleek and glossy. “I came up yesterday, and I’mdelighted that I shall see your triumph. When shall we meet?”“Come tomorrow to the messroom,” said Vronsky, and squeezing him bythe sleeve of his coat, with apologies, he moved away to the center of the racecourse, where the horses were being led for the great steeplechase.The horses who had run in the last race were being led home, steaming andexhausted, by the stable-boys, and one after another the fresh horses for thecoming race made their appearance, for the most part English racers, wearinghorsecloths, and looking with their drawn-up bellies like strange, huge birds.On the right was led in Frou-Frou, lean and beautiful, lifting up her elastic,rather long pasterns, as though moved by springs. Not far from her they weretaking the rug off the lop-eared Gladiator. The strong, exquisite, perfectlycorrect lines of the stallion, with his superb hind-quarters and excessivelyshort pasterns almost over his hoofs, attracted Vronsky’s attention inspite of himself. He would have gone up to his mare, but he was again detainedby an acquaintance.“Oh, there’s Karenin!” said the acquaintance with whom he waschatting. “He’s looking for his wife, and she’s in the middleof the pavilion. Didn’t you see her?”“No,” answered Vronsky, and without even glancing round towards thepavilion where his friend was pointing out Madame Karenina, he went up to hismare.Vronsky had not had time to look at the saddle, about which he had to give somedirection, when the competitors were summoned to the pavilion to receive theirnumbers and places in the row at starting. Seventeen officers, looking seriousand severe, many with pale faces, met together in the pavilion and drew thenumbers. Vronsky drew the number seven. The cry was heard: “Mount!”Feeling that with the others riding in the race, he was the center upon whichall eyes were fastened, Vronsky walked up to his mare in that state of nervoustension in which he usually became deliberate and composed in his movements.Cord, in honor of the races, had put on his best clothes, a black coat buttonedup, a stiffly starched collar, which propped up his cheeks, a round black hat,and top boots. He was calm and dignified as ever, and was with his own handsholding Frou-Frou by both reins, standing straight in front of her. Frou-Frouwas still trembling as though in a fever. Her eye, full of fire, glancedsideways at Vronsky. Vronsky slipped his finger under the saddle-girth. Themare glanced aslant at him, drew up her lip, and twitched her ear. TheEnglishman puckered up his lips, intending to indicate a smile that anyoneshould verify his saddling.“Get up; you won’t feel so excited.”Vronsky looked round for the last time at his rivals. He knew that he would notsee them during the race. Two were already riding forward to the point fromwhich they were to start. Galtsin, a friend of Vronsky’s and one of hismore formidable rivals, was moving round a bay horse that would not let himmount. A little light hussar in tight riding breeches rode off at a gallop,crouched up like a cat on the saddle, in imitation of English jockeys. PrinceKuzovlev sat with a white face on his thoroughbred mare from the Grabovskystud, while an English groom led her by the bridle. Vronsky and all hiscomrades knew Kuzovlev and his peculiarity of “weak nerves” andterrible vanity. They knew that he was afraid of everything, afraid of riding aspirited horse. But now, just because it was terrible, because people broketheir necks, and there was a doctor standing at each obstacle, and an ambulancewith a cross on it, and a sister of mercy, he had made up his mind to take partin the race. Their eyes met, and Vronsky gave him a friendly and encouragingnod. Only one he did not see, his chief rival, Mahotin on Gladiator.“Don’t be in a hurry,” said Cord to Vronsky, “andremember one thing: don’t hold her in at the fences, and don’t urgeher on; let her go as she likes.”“All right, all right,” said Vronsky, taking the reins.“If you can, lead the race; but don’t lose heart till the lastminute, even if you’re behind.”Before the mare had time to move, Vronsky stepped with an agile, vigorousmovement into the steel-toothed stirrup, and lightly and firmly seated himselfon the creaking leather of the saddle. Getting his right foot in the stirrup,he smoothed the double reins, as he always did, between his fingers, and Cordlet go.As though she did not know which foot to put first, Frou-Frou started, draggingat the reins with her long neck, and as though she were on springs, shaking herrider from side to side. Cord quickened his step, following him. The excitedmare, trying to shake off her rider first on one side and then the other,pulled at the reins, and Vronsky tried in vain with voice and hand to sootheher.They were just reaching the dammed-up stream on their way to the startingpoint. Several of the riders were in front and several behind, when suddenlyVronsky heard the sound of a horse galloping in the mud behind him, and he wasovertaken by Mahotin on his white-legged, lop-eared Gladiator. Mahotin smiled,showing his long teeth, but Vronsky looked angrily at him. He did not like him,and regarded him now as his most formidable rival. He was angry with him forgalloping past and exciting his mare. Frou-Frou started into a gallop, her leftfoot forward, made two bounds, and fretting at the tightened reins, passed intoa jolting trot, bumping her rider up and down. Cord, too, scowled, and followedVronsky almost at a trot.Chapter 25There were seventeen officers in all riding in this race. The race course was alarge three-mile ring of the form of an ellipse in front of the pavilion. Onthis course nine obstacles had been arranged: the stream, a big and solidbarrier five feet high, just before the pavilion, a dry ditch, a ditch full ofwater, a precipitous slope, an Irish barricade (one of the most difficultobstacles, consisting of a mound fenced with brushwood, beyond which was aditch out of sight for the horses, so that the horse had to clear bothobstacles or might be killed); then two more ditches filled with water, and onedry one; and the end of the race was just facing the pavilion. But the racebegan not in the ring, but two hundred yards away from it, and in that part ofthe course was the first obstacle, a dammed-up stream, seven feet in breadth,which the racers could leap or wade through as they preferred.Three times they were ranged ready to start, but each time some horse thrustitself out of line, and they had to begin again. The umpire who was startingthem, Colonel Sestrin, was beginning to lose his temper, when at last for thefourth time he shouted “Away!” and the racers started.Every eye, every opera-glass, was turned on the brightly colored group ofriders at the moment they were in line to start.“They’re off! They’re starting!” was heard on all sidesafter the hush of expectation.And little groups and solitary figures among the public began running fromplace to place to get a better view. In the very first minute the close groupof horsemen drew out, and it could be seen that they were approaching thestream in twos and threes and one behind another. To the spectators it seemedas though they had all started simultaneously, but to the racers there wereseconds of difference that had great value to them.Frou-Frou, excited and over-nervous, had lost the first moment, and severalhorses had started before her, but before reaching the stream, Vronsky, who washolding in the mare with all his force as she tugged at the bridle, easilyovertook three, and there were left in front of him Mahotin’s chestnutGladiator, whose hind-quarters were moving lightly and rhythmically up and downexactly in front of Vronsky, and in front of all, the dainty mare Diana bearingKuzovlev more dead than alive.For the first instant Vronsky was not master either of himself or his mare. Upto the first obstacle, the stream, he could not guide the motions of his mare.Gladiator and Diana came up to it together and almost at the same instant;simultaneously they rose above the stream and flew across to the other side;Frou-Frou darted after them, as if flying; but at the very moment when Vronskyfelt himself in the air, he suddenly saw almost under his mare’s hoofsKuzovlev, who was floundering with Diana on the further side of the stream.(Kuzovlev had let go the reins as he took the leap, and the mare had sent himflying over her head.) Those details Vronsky learned later; at the moment allhe saw was that just under him, where Frou-Frou must alight, Diana’s legsor head might be in the way. But Frou-Frou drew up her legs and back in thevery act of leaping, like a falling cat, and, clearing the other mare, alightedbeyond her.“O the darling!” thought Vronsky.After crossing the stream Vronsky had complete control of his mare, and beganholding her in, intending to cross the great barrier behind Mahotin, and to tryto overtake him in the clear ground of about five hundred yards that followedit.The great barrier stood just in front of the imperial pavilion. The Tsar andthe whole court and crowds of people were all gazing at them—at him, andMahotin a length ahead of him, as they drew near the “devil,” asthe solid barrier was called. Vronsky was aware of those eyes fastened upon himfrom all sides, but he saw nothing except the ears and neck of his own mare,the ground racing to meet him, and the back and white legs of Gladiator beatingtime swiftly before him, and keeping always the same distance ahead. Gladiatorrose, with no sound of knocking against anything. With a wave of his short tailhe disappeared from Vronsky’s sight.“Bravo!” cried a voice.At the same instant, under Vronsky’s eyes, right before him flashed thepalings of the barrier. Without the slightest change in her action his mareflew over it; the palings vanished, and he heard only a crash behind him. Themare, excited by Gladiator’s keeping ahead, had risen too soon before thebarrier, and grazed it with her hind hoofs. But her pace never changed, andVronsky, feeling a spatter of mud in his face, realized that he was once morethe same distance from Gladiator. Once more he perceived in front of him thesame back and short tail, and again the same swiftly moving white legs that gotno further away.At the very moment when Vronsky thought that now was the time to overtakeMahotin, Frou-Frou herself, understanding his thoughts, without any incitementon his part, gained ground considerably, and began getting alongside of Mahotinon the most favorable side, close to the inner cord. Mahotin would not let herpass that side. Vronsky had hardly formed the thought that he could perhapspass on the outer side, when Frou-Frou shifted her pace and began overtakinghim on the other side. Frou-Frou’s shoulder, beginning by now to be darkwith sweat, was even with Gladiator’s back. For a few lengths they movedevenly. But before the obstacle they were approaching, Vronsky began working atthe reins, anxious to avoid having to take the outer circle, and swiftly passedMahotin just upon the declivity. He caught a glimpse of his mud-stained face ashe flashed by. He even fancied that he smiled. Vronsky passed Mahotin, but hewas immediately aware of him close upon him, and he never ceased hearing theeven-thudding hoofs and the rapid and still quite fresh breathing of Gladiator.The next two obstacles, the water course and the barrier, were easily crossed,but Vronsky began to hear the snorting and thud of Gladiator closer upon him.He urged on his mare, and to his delight felt that she easily quickened herpace, and the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs was again heard at the samedistance away.Vronsky was at the head of the race, just as he wanted to be and as Cord hadadvised, and now he felt sure of being the winner. His excitement, his delight,and his tenderness for Frou-Frou grew keener and keener. He longed to lookround again, but he did not dare do this, and tried to be cool and not to urgeon his mare so to keep the same reserve of force in her as he felt thatGladiator still kept. There remained only one obstacle, the most difficult; ifhe could cross it ahead of the others he would come in first. He was flyingtowards the Irish barricade, Frou-Frou and he both together saw the barricadein the distance, and both the man and the mare had a moment’s hesitation.He saw the uncertainty in the mare’s ears and lifted the whip, but at thesame time felt that his fears were groundless; the mare knew what was wanted.She quickened her pace and rose smoothly, just as he had fancied she would, andas she left the ground gave herself up to the force of her rush, which carriedher far beyond the ditch; and with the same rhythm, without effort, with thesame leg forward, Frou-Frou fell back into her pace again.“Bravo, Vronsky!” he heard shouts from a knot of men—he knewthey were his friends in the regiment—who were standing at the obstacle.He could not fail to recognize Yashvin’s voice though he did not see him.“O my sweet!” he said inwardly to Frou-Frou, as he listened forwhat was happening behind. “He’s cleared it!” he thought,catching the thud of Gladiator’s hoofs behind him. There remained onlythe last ditch, filled with water and five feet wide. Vronsky did not even lookat it, but anxious to get in a long way first began sawing away at the reins,lifting the mare’s head and letting it go in time with her paces. He feltthat the mare was at her very last reserve of strength; not her neck andshoulders merely were wet, but the sweat was standing in drops on her mane, herhead, her sharp ears, and her breath came in short, sharp gasps. But he knewthat she had strength left more than enough for the remaining five hundredyards. It was only from feeling himself nearer the ground and from the peculiarsmoothness of his motion that Vronsky knew how greatly the mare had quickenedher pace. She flew over the ditch as though not noticing it. She flew over itlike a bird; but at the same instant Vronsky, to his horror, felt that he hadfailed to keep up with the mare’s pace, that he had, he did not know how,made a fearful, unpardonable mistake, in recovering his seat in the saddle. Allat once his position had shifted and he knew that something awful had happened.He could not yet make out what had happened, when the white legs of a chestnuthorse flashed by close to him, and Mahotin passed at a swift gallop. Vronskywas touching the ground with one foot, and his mare was sinking on that foot.He just had time to free his leg when she fell on one side, gasping painfully,and, making vain efforts to rise with her delicate, soaking neck, she flutteredon the ground at his feet like a shot bird. The clumsy movement made by Vronskyhad broken her back. But that he only knew much later. At that moment he knewonly that Mahotin had flown swiftly by, while he stood staggering alone on themuddy, motionless ground, and Frou-Frou lay gasping before him, bending herhead back and gazing at him with her exquisite eyes. Still unable to realizewhat had happened, Vronsky tugged at his mare’s reins. Again shestruggled all over like a fish, and her shoulders setting the saddle heaving,she rose on her front legs but unable to lift her back, she quivered all overand again fell on her side. With a face hideous with passion, his lower jawtrembling, and his cheeks white, Vronsky kicked her with his heel in thestomach and again fell to tugging at the rein. She did not stir, but thrustingher nose into the ground, she simply gazed at her master with her speakingeyes.“A—a—a!” groaned Vronsky, clutching at his head.“Ah! what have I done!” he cried. “The race lost! And myfault! shameful, unpardonable! And the poor darling, ruined mare! Ah! what haveI done!”A crowd of men, a doctor and his assistant, the officers of his regiment, ranup to him. To his misery he felt that he was whole and unhurt. The mare hadbroken her back, and it was decided to shoot her. Vronsky could not answerquestions, could not speak to anyone. He turned, and without picking up his capthat had fallen off, walked away from the race course, not knowing where he wasgoing. He felt utterly wretched. For the first time in his life he knew thebitterest sort of misfortune, misfortune beyond remedy, and caused by his ownfault.Yashvin overtook him with his cap, and led him home, and half an hour laterVronsky had regained his self-possession. But the memory of that race remainedfor long in his heart, the cruelest and bitterest memory of his life.Chapter 26The external relations of Alexey Alexandrovitch and his wife had remainedunchanged. The sole difference lay in the fact that he was more busily occupiedthan ever. As in former years, at the beginning of the spring he had gone to aforeign watering-place for the sake of his health, deranged by thewinter’s work that every year grew heavier. And just as always hereturned in July and at once fell to work as usual with increased energy. Asusual, too, his wife had moved for the summer to a villa out of town, while heremained in Petersburg. From the date of their conversation after the party atPrincess Tverskaya’s he had never spoken again to Anna of his suspicionsand his jealousies, and that habitual tone of his bantering mimicry was themost convenient tone possible for his present attitude to his wife. He was alittle colder to his wife. He simply seemed to be slightly displeased with herfor that first midnight conversation, which she had repelled. In his attitudeto her there was a shade of vexation, but nothing more. “You would not beopen with me,” he seemed to say, mentally addressing her; “so muchthe worse for you. Now you may beg as you please, but I won’t be openwith you. So much the worse for you!” he said mentally, like a man who,after vainly attempting to extinguish a fire, should fly in a rage with hisvain efforts and say, “Oh, very well then! you shall burn forthis!” This man, so subtle and astute in official life, did not realizeall the senselessness of such an attitude to his wife. He did not realize it,because it was too terrible to him to realize his actual position, and he shutdown and locked and sealed up in his heart that secret place where lay hid hisfeelings towards his family, that is, his wife and son. He who had been such acareful father, had from the end of that winter become peculiarly frigid to hisson, and adopted to him just the same bantering tone he used with his wife.“Aha, young man!” was the greeting with which he met him.Alexey Alexandrovitch asserted and believed that he had never in any previousyear had so much official business as that year. But he was not aware that hesought work for himself that year, that this was one of the means for keepingshut that secret place where lay hid his feelings towards his wife and son andhis thoughts about them, which became more terrible the longer they lay there.If anyone had had the right to ask Alexey Alexandrovitch what he thought of hiswife’s behavior, the mild and peaceable Alexey Alexandrovitch would havemade no answer, but he would have been greatly angered with any man who shouldquestion him on that subject. For this reason there positively came into AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s face a look of haughtiness and severity whenever anyoneinquired after his wife’s health. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want tothink at all about his wife’s behavior, and he actually succeeded in notthinking about it at all.Alexey Alexandrovitch’s permanent summer villa was in Peterhof, and theCountess Lidia Ivanovna used as a rule to spend the summer there, close toAnna, and constantly seeing her. That year Countess Lidia Ivanovna declined tosettle in Peterhof, was not once at Anna Arkadyevna’s, and inconversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch hinted at the unsuitability ofAnna’s close intimacy with Betsy and Vronsky. Alexey Alexandrovitchsternly cut her short, roundly declaring his wife to be above suspicion, andfrom that time began to avoid Countess Lidia Ivanovna. He did not want to see,and did not see, that many people in society cast dubious glances on his wife;he did not want to understand, and did not understand, why his wife had soparticularly insisted on staying at Tsarskoe, where Betsy was staying, and notfar from the camp of Vronsky’s regiment. He did not allow himself tothink about it, and he did not think about it; but all the same though he neveradmitted it to himself, and had no proofs, not even suspicious evidence, in thebottom of his heart he knew beyond all doubt that he was a deceived husband,and he was profoundly miserable about it.How often during those eight years of happy life with his wife AlexeyAlexandrovitch had looked at other men’s faithless wives and otherdeceived husbands and asked himself: “How can people descend to that? howis it they don’t put an end to such a hideous position?” But now,when the misfortune had come upon himself, he was so far from thinking ofputting an end to the position that he would not recognize it at all, would notrecognize it just because it was too awful, too unnatural.Since his return from abroad Alexey Alexandrovitch had twice been at theircountry villa. Once he dined there, another time he spent the evening therewith a party of friends, but he had not once stayed the night there, as it hadbeen his habit to do in previous years.The day of the races had been a very busy day for Alexey Alexandrovitch; butwhen mentally sketching out the day in the morning, he made up his mind to goto their country house to see his wife immediately after dinner, and from thereto the races, which all the Court were to witness, and at which he was bound tobe present. He was going to see his wife, because he had determined to see heronce a week to keep up appearances. And besides, on that day, as it was thefifteenth, he had to give his wife some money for her expenses, according totheir usual arrangement.With his habitual control over his thoughts, though he thought all this abouthis wife, he did not let his thoughts stray further in regard to her.That morning was a very full one for Alexey Alexandrovitch. The evening before,Countess Lidia Ivanovna had sent him a pamphlet by a celebrated traveler inChina, who was staying in Petersburg, and with it she enclosed a note begginghim to see the traveler himself, as he was an extremely interesting person fromvarious points of view, and likely to be useful. Alexey Alexandrovitch had nothad time to read the pamphlet through in the evening, and finished it in themorning. Then people began arriving with petitions, and there came the reports,interviews, appointments, dismissals, apportionment of rewards, pensions,grants, notes, the workaday round, as Alexey Alexandrovitch called it, thatalways took up so much time. Then there was private business of his own, avisit from the doctor and the steward who managed his property. The steward didnot take up much time. He simply gave Alexey Alexandrovitch the money he neededtogether with a brief statement of the position of his affairs, which was notaltogether satisfactory, as it had happened that during that year, owing toincreased expenses, more had been paid out than usual, and there was a deficit.But the doctor, a celebrated Petersburg doctor, who was an intimateacquaintance of Alexey Alexandrovitch, took up a great deal of time. AlexeyAlexandrovitch had not expected him that day, and was surprised at his visit,and still more so when the doctor questioned him very carefully about hishealth, listened to his breathing, and tapped at his liver. AlexeyAlexandrovitch did not know that his friend Lidia Ivanovna, noticing that hewas not as well as usual that year, had begged the doctor to go and examinehim. “Do this for my sake,” the Countess Lidia Ivanovna had said tohim.“I will do it for the sake of Russia, countess,” replied thedoctor.“A priceless man!” said the Countess Lidia Ivanovna.The doctor was extremely dissatisfied with Alexey Alexandrovitch. He found theliver considerably enlarged, and the digestive powers weakened, while thecourse of mineral waters had been quite without effect. He prescribed morephysical exercise as far as possible, and as far as possible less mentalstrain, and above all no worry—in other words, just what was as much outof Alexey Alexandrovitch’s power as abstaining from breathing. Then hewithdrew, leaving in Alexey Alexandrovitch an unpleasant sense that somethingwas wrong with him, and that there was no chance of curing it.As he was coming away, the doctor chanced to meet on the staircase anacquaintance of his, Sludin, who was secretary of Alexey Alexandrovitch’sdepartment. They had been comrades at the university, and though they rarelymet, they thought highly of each other and were excellent friends, and so therewas no one to whom the doctor would have given his opinion of a patient sofreely as to Sludin.“How glad I am you’ve been seeing him!” said Sludin.“He’s not well, and I fancy.... Well, what do you think ofhim?”“I’ll tell you,” said the doctor, beckoning overSludin’s head to his coachman to bring the carriage round.“It’s just this,” said the doctor, taking a finger of his kidglove in his white hands and pulling it, “if you don’t strain thestrings, and then try to break them, you’ll find it a difficult job; butstrain a string to its very utmost, and the mere weight of one finger on thestrained string will snap it. And with his close assiduity, his conscientiousdevotion to his work, he’s strained to the utmost; and there’s someoutside burden weighing on him, and not a light one,” concluded thedoctor, raising his eyebrows significantly. “Will you be at theraces?” he added, as he sank into his seat in the carriage.“Yes, yes, to be sure; it does waste a lot of time,” the doctorresponded vaguely to some reply of Sludin’s he had not caught.Directly after the doctor, who had taken up so much time, came the celebratedtraveler, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, by means of the pamphlet he had only justfinished reading and his previous acquaintance with the subject, impressed thetraveler by the depth of his knowledge of the subject and the breadth andenlightenment of his view of it.At the same time as the traveler there was announced a provincial marshal ofnobility on a visit to Petersburg, with whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had to havesome conversation. After his departure, he had to finish the daily routine ofbusiness with his secretary, and then he still had to drive round to call on acertain great personage on a matter of grave and serious import. AlexeyAlexandrovitch only just managed to be back by five o’clock, hisdinner-hour, and after dining with his secretary, he invited him to drive withhim to his country villa and to the races.Though he did not acknowledge it to himself, Alexey Alexandrovitch always triednowadays to secure the presence of a third person in his interviews with hiswife.Chapter 27Anna was upstairs, standing before the looking-glass, and, withAnnushka’s assistance, pinning the last ribbon on her gown when she heardcarriage wheels crunching the gravel at the entrance.“It’s too early for Betsy,” she thought, and glancing out ofthe window she caught sight of the carriage and the black hat of AlexeyAlexandrovitch, and the ears that she knew so well sticking up each side of it.“How unlucky! Can he be going to stay the night?” she wondered, andthe thought of all that might come of such a chance struck her as so awful andterrible that, without dwelling on it for a moment, she went down to meet himwith a bright and radiant face; and conscious of the presence of that spirit offalsehood and deceit in herself that she had come to know of late, sheabandoned herself to that spirit and began talking, hardly knowing what she wassaying.“Ah, how nice of you!” she said, giving her husband her hand, andgreeting Sludin, who was like one of the family, with a smile.“You’re staying the night, I hope?” was the first word thespirit of falsehood prompted her to utter; “and now we’ll gotogether. Only it’s a pity I’ve promised Betsy. She’s comingfor me.”Alexey Alexandrovitch knit his brows at Betsy’s name.“Oh, I’m not going to separate the inseparables,” he said inhis usual bantering tone. “I’m going with Mihail Vassilievitch.I’m ordered exercise by the doctors too. I’ll walk, and fancymyself at the springs again.”“There’s no hurry,” said Anna. “Would you liketea?”She rang.“Bring in tea, and tell Seryozha that Alexey Alexandrovitch is here.Well, tell me, how have you been? Mihail Vassilievitch, you’ve not beento see me before. Look how lovely it is out on the terrace,” she said,turning first to one and then to the other.She spoke very simply and naturally, but too much and too fast. She was themore aware of this from noticing in the inquisitive look Mihail Vassilievitchturned on her that he was, as it were, keeping watch on her.Mihail Vassilievitch promptly went out on the terrace.She sat down beside her husband.“You don’t look quite well,” she said.“Yes,” he said; “the doctor’s been with me today andwasted an hour of my time. I feel that someone of our friends must have senthim: my health’s so precious, it seems.”“No; what did he say?”She questioned him about his health and what he had been doing, and tried topersuade him to take a rest and come out to her.All this she said brightly, rapidly, and with a peculiar brilliance in hereyes. But Alexey Alexandrovitch did not now attach any special significance tothis tone of hers. He heard only her words and gave them only the direct sensethey bore. And he answered simply, though jestingly. There was nothingremarkable in all this conversation, but never after could Anna recall thisbrief scene without an agonizing pang of shame.Seryozha came in preceded by his governess. If Alexey Alexandrovitch hadallowed himself to observe he would have noticed the timid and bewildered eyeswith which Seryozha glanced first at his father and then at his mother. But hewould not see anything, and he did not see it.“Ah, the young man! He’s grown. Really, he’s getting quite aman. How are you, young man?”And he gave his hand to the scared child. Seryozha had been shy of his fatherbefore, and now, ever since Alexey Alexandrovitch had taken to calling himyoung man, and since that insoluble question had occurred to him whetherVronsky were a friend or a foe, he avoided his father. He looked round towardshis mother as though seeking shelter. It was only with his mother that he wasat ease. Meanwhile, Alexey Alexandrovitch was holding his son by the shoulderwhile he was speaking to the governess, and Seryozha was so miserablyuncomfortable that Anna saw he was on the point of tears.Anna, who had flushed a little the instant her son came in, noticing thatSeryozha was uncomfortable, got up hurriedly, took AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s hand from her son’s shoulder, and kissing the boy,led him out onto the terrace, and quickly came back.“It’s time to start, though,” said she, glancing at herwatch. “How is it Betsy doesn’t come?...”“Yes,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and getting up, he folded hishands and cracked his fingers. “I’ve come to bring you some money,too, for nightingales, we know, can’t live on fairy tales,” hesaid. “You want it, I expect?”“No, I don’t ... yes, I do,” she said, not looking at him,and crimsoning to the roots of her hair. “But you’ll come back hereafter the races, I suppose?”“Oh, yes!” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. “And here’sthe glory of Peterhof, Princess Tverskaya,” he added, looking out of thewindow at the elegant English carriage with the tiny seats placed extremelyhigh. “What elegance! Charming! Well, let us be starting too,then.”Princess Tverskaya did not get out of her carriage, but her groom, in highboots, a cape, and black hat, darted out at the entrance.“I’m going; good-bye!” said Anna, and kissing her son, shewent up to Alexey Alexandrovitch and held out her hand to him. “It wasever so nice of you to come.”Alexey Alexandrovitch kissed her hand.“Well, au revoir, then! You’ll come back for some tea;that’s delightful!” she said, and went out, gay and radiant. But assoon as she no longer saw him, she was aware of the spot on her hand that hislips had touched, and she shuddered with repulsion.Chapter 28When Alexey Alexandrovitch reached the race-course, Anna was already sitting inthe pavilion beside Betsy, in that pavilion where all the highest society hadgathered. She caught sight of her husband in the distance. Two men, her husbandand her lover, were the two centers of her existence, and unaided by herexternal senses she was aware of their nearness. She was aware of her husbandapproaching a long way off, and she could not help following him in the surgingcrowd in the midst of which he was moving. She watched his progress towards thepavilion, saw him now responding condescendingly to an ingratiating bow, nowexchanging friendly, nonchalant greetings with his equals, now assiduouslytrying to catch the eye of some great one of this world, and taking off his biground hat that squeezed the tips of his ears. All these ways of his she knew,and all were hateful to her. “Nothing but ambition, nothing but thedesire to get on, that’s all there is in his soul,” she thought;“as for these lofty ideals, love of culture, religion, they are only somany tools for getting on.”From his glances towards the ladies’ pavilion (he was staring straight ather, but did not distinguish his wife in the sea of muslin, ribbons, feathers,parasols and flowers) she saw that he was looking for her, but she purposelyavoided noticing him.“Alexey Alexandrovitch!” Princess Betsy called to him;“I’m sure you don’t see your wife: here she is.”He smiled his chilly smile.“There’s so much splendor here that one’s eyes aredazzled,” he said, and he went into the pavilion. He smiled to his wifeas a man should smile on meeting his wife after only just parting from her, andgreeted the princess and other acquaintances, giving to each what wasdue—that is to say, jesting with the ladies and dealing out friendlygreetings among the men. Below, near the pavilion, was standing anadjutant-general of whom Alexey Alexandrovitch had a high opinion, noted forhis intelligence and culture. Alexey Alexandrovitch entered into conversationwith him.There was an interval between the races, and so nothing hindered conversation.The adjutant-general expressed his disapproval of races. Alexey Alexandrovitchreplied defending them. Anna heard his high, measured tones, not losing oneword, and every word struck her as false, and stabbed her ears with pain.When the three-mile steeplechase was beginning, she bent forward and gazed withfixed eyes at Vronsky as he went up to his horse and mounted, and at the sametime she heard that loathsome, never-ceasing voice of her husband. She was inan agony of terror for Vronsky, but a still greater agony was thenever-ceasing, as it seemed to her, stream of her husband’s shrill voicewith its familiar intonations.“I’m a wicked woman, a lost woman,” she thought; “but Idon’t like lying, I can’t endure falsehood, while as for him(her husband) it’s the breath of his life—falsehood. He knows allabout it, he sees it all; what does he care if he can talk so calmly? If hewere to kill me, if he were to kill Vronsky, I might respect him. No, all hewants is falsehood and propriety,” Anna said to herself, not consideringexactly what it was she wanted of her husband, and how she would have liked tosee him behave. She did not understand either that AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s peculiar loquacity that day, so exasperating to her, wasmerely the expression of his inward distress and uneasiness. As a child thathas been hurt skips about, putting all his muscles into movement to drown thepain, in the same way Alexey Alexandrovitch needed mental exercise to drown thethoughts of his wife that in her presence and in Vronsky’s, and with thecontinual iteration of his name, would force themselves on his attention. Andit was as natural for him to talk well and cleverly, as it is natural for achild to skip about. He was saying:“Danger in the races of officers, of cavalry men, is an essential elementin the race. If England can point to the most brilliant feats of cavalry inmilitary history, it is simply owing to the fact that she has historicallydeveloped this force both in beasts and in men. Sport has, in my opinion, agreat value, and as is always the case, we see nothing but what is mostsuperficial.”“It’s not superficial,” said Princess Tverskaya. “Oneof the officers, they say, has broken two ribs.”Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled his smile, which uncovered his teeth, but revealednothing more.“We’ll admit, princess, that that’s not superficial,”he said, “but internal. But that’s not the point,” and heturned again to the general with whom he was talking seriously; “wemustn’t forget that those who are taking part in the race are militarymen, who have chosen that career, and one must allow that every calling has itsdisagreeable side. It forms an integral part of the duties of an officer. Lowsports, such as prize-fighting or Spanish bull-fights, are a sign of barbarity.But specialized trials of skill are a sign of development.”“No, I shan’t come another time; it’s too upsetting,”said Princess Betsy. “Isn’t it, Anna?”“It is upsetting, but one can’t tear oneself away,” saidanother lady. “If I’d been a Roman woman I should never have misseda single circus.”Anna said nothing, and keeping her opera-glass up, gazed always at the samespot.At that moment a tall general walked through the pavilion. Breaking off what hewas saying, Alexey Alexandrovitch got up hurriedly, though with dignity, andbowed low to the general.“You’re not racing?” the officer asked, chaffing him.“My race is a harder one,” Alexey Alexandrovitch respondeddeferentially.And though the answer meant nothing, the general looked as though he had hearda witty remark from a witty man, and fully relished la pointe de lasauce.“There are two aspects,” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed:“those who take part and those who look on; and love for such spectaclesis an unmistakable proof of a low degree of development in the spectator, Iadmit, but....”“Princess, bets!” sounded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice frombelow, addressing Betsy. “Who’s your favorite?”“Anna and I are for Kuzovlev,” replied Betsy.“I’m for Vronsky. A pair of gloves?”“Done!”“But it is a pretty sight, isn’t it?”Alexey Alexandrovitch paused while there was talking about him, but he beganagain directly.“I admit that manly sports do not....” he was continuing.But at that moment the racers started, and all conversation ceased. AlexeyAlexandrovitch too was silent, and everyone stood up and turned towards thestream. Alexey Alexandrovitch took no interest in the race, and so he did notwatch the racers, but fell listlessly to scanning the spectators with his wearyeyes. His eyes rested upon Anna.Her face was white and set. She was obviously seeing nothing and no one but oneman. Her hand had convulsively clutched her fan, and she held her breath. Helooked at her and hastily turned away, scrutinizing other faces.“But here’s this lady too, and others very much moved as well;it’s very natural,” Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. He triednot to look at her, but unconsciously his eyes were drawn to her. He examinedthat face again, trying not to read what was so plainly written on it, andagainst his own will, with horror read on it what he did not want to know.The first fall—Kuzovlev’s, at the stream—agitated everyone,but Alexey Alexandrovitch saw distinctly on Anna’s pale, triumphant facethat the man she was watching had not fallen. When, after Mahotin and Vronskyhad cleared the worst barrier, the next officer had been thrown straight on hishead at it and fatally injured, and a shudder of horror passed over the wholepublic, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that Anna did not even notice it, and hadsome difficulty in realizing what they were talking of about her. But more andmore often, and with greater persistence, he watched her. Anna, whollyengrossed as she was with the race, became aware of her husband’s coldeyes fixed upon her from one side.She glanced round for an instant, looked inquiringly at him, and with a slightfrown turned away again.“Ah, I don’t care!” she seemed to say to him, and she did notonce glance at him again.The race was an unlucky one, and of the seventeen officers who rode in it morethan half were thrown and hurt. Towards the end of the race everyone was in astate of agitation, which was intensified by the fact that the Tsar wasdispleased.Chapter 29Everyone was loudly expressing disapprobation, everyone was repeating a phrasesomeone had uttered—“The lions and gladiators will be the nextthing,” and everyone was feeling horrified; so that when Vronsky fell tothe ground, and Anna moaned aloud, there was nothing very out of the way in it.But afterwards a change came over Anna’s face which really was beyonddecorum. She utterly lost her head. She began fluttering like a caged bird, atone moment would have got up and moved away, at the next turned to Betsy.“Let us go, let us go!” she said.But Betsy did not hear her. She was bending down, talking to a general who hadcome up to her.Alexey Alexandrovitch went up to Anna and courteously offered her his arm.“Let us go, if you like,” he said in French, but Anna was listeningto the general and did not notice her husband.“He’s broken his leg too, so they say,” the general wassaying. “This is beyond everything.”Without answering her husband, Anna lifted her opera-glass and gazed towardsthe place where Vronsky had fallen; but it was so far off, and there was such acrowd of people about it, that she could make out nothing. She laid down theopera-glass, and would have moved away, but at that moment an officer gallopedup and made some announcement to the Tsar. Anna craned forward, listening.“Stiva! Stiva!” she cried to her brother.But her brother did not hear her. Again she would have moved away.“Once more I offer you my arm if you want to be going,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, reaching towards her hand.She drew back from him with aversion, and without looking in his face answered:“No, no, let me be, I’ll stay.”She saw now that from the place of Vronsky’s accident an officer wasrunning across the course towards the pavilion. Betsy waved her handkerchief tohim. The officer brought the news that the rider was not killed, but the horsehad broken its back.On hearing this Anna sat down hurriedly, and hid her face in her fan. AlexeyAlexandrovitch saw that she was weeping, and could not control her tears, noreven the sobs that were shaking her bosom. Alexey Alexandrovitch stood so as toscreen her, giving her time to recover herself.“For the third time I offer you my arm,” he said to her after alittle time, turning to her. Anna gazed at him and did not know what to say.Princess Betsy came to her rescue.“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch; I brought Anna and I promised to take herhome,” put in Betsy.“Excuse me, princess,” he said, smiling courteously but looking hervery firmly in the face, “but I see that Anna’s not very well, andI wish her to come home with me.”Anna looked about her in a frightened way, got up submissively, and laid herhand on her husband’s arm.“I’ll send to him and find out, and let you know,” Betsywhispered to her.As they left the pavilion, Alexey Alexandrovitch, as always, talked to those hemet, and Anna had, as always, to talk and answer; but she was utterly besideherself, and moved hanging on her husband’s arm as though in a dream.“Is he killed or not? Is it true? Will he come or not? Shall I see himtoday?” she was thinking.She took her seat in her husband’s carriage in silence, and in silencedrove out of the crowd of carriages. In spite of all he had seen, AlexeyAlexandrovitch still did not allow himself to consider his wife’s realcondition. He merely saw the outward symptoms. He saw that she was behavingunbecomingly, and considered it his duty to tell her so. But it was verydifficult for him not to say more, to tell her nothing but that. He opened hismouth to tell her she had behaved unbecomingly, but he could not help sayingsomething utterly different.“What an inclination we all have, though, for these cruelspectacles,” he said. “I observe....”“Eh? I don’t understand,” said Anna contemptuously.He was offended, and at once began to say what he had meant to say.“I am obliged to tell you,” he began.“So now we are to have it out,” she thought, and she feltfrightened.“I am obliged to tell you that your behavior has been unbecomingtoday,” he said to her in French.“In what way has my behavior been unbecoming?” she said aloud,turning her head swiftly and looking him straight in the face, not with thebright expression that seemed covering something, but with a look ofdetermination, under which she concealed with difficulty the dismay she wasfeeling.“Mind,” he said, pointing to the open window opposite the coachman.He got up and pulled up the window.“What did you consider unbecoming?” she repeated.“The despair you were unable to conceal at the accident to one of theriders.”He waited for her to answer, but she was silent, looking straight before her.“I have already begged you so to conduct yourself in society that evenmalicious tongues can find nothing to say against you. There was a time when Ispoke of your inward attitude, but I am not speaking of that now. Now I speakonly of your external attitude. You have behaved improperly, and I would wishit not to occur again.”She did not hear half of what he was saying; she felt panic-stricken beforehim, and was thinking whether it was true that Vronsky was not killed. Was itof him they were speaking when they said the rider was unhurt, but the horsehad broken its back? She merely smiled with a pretense of irony when hefinished, and made no reply, because she had not heard what he said. AlexeyAlexandrovitch had begun to speak boldly, but as he realized plainly what hewas speaking of, the dismay she was feeling infected him too. He saw the smile,and a strange misapprehension came over him.“She is smiling at my suspicions. Yes, she will tell me directly what shetold me before; that there is no foundation for my suspicions, that it’sabsurd.”At that moment, when the revelation of everything was hanging over him, therewas nothing he expected so much as that she would answer mockingly as beforethat his suspicions were absurd and utterly groundless. So terrible to him waswhat he knew that now he was ready to believe anything. But the expression ofher face, scared and gloomy, did not now promise even deception.“Possibly I was mistaken,” said he. “If so, I beg yourpardon.”“No, you were not mistaken,” she said deliberately, lookingdesperately into his cold face. “You were not mistaken. I was, and Icould not help being in despair. I hear you, but I am thinking of him. I lovehim, I am his mistress; I can’t bear you; I’m afraid of you, and Ihate you.... You can do what you like to me.”And dropping back into the corner of the carriage, she broke into sobs, hidingher face in her hands. Alexey Alexandrovitch did not stir, and kept lookingstraight before him. But his whole face suddenly bore the solemn rigidity ofthe dead, and his expression did not change during the whole time of the drivehome. On reaching the house he turned his head to her, still with the sameexpression.“Very well! But I expect a strict observance of the external forms ofpropriety till such time”—his voice shook—“as I maytake measures to secure my honor and communicate them to you.”He got out first and helped her to get out. Before the servants he pressed herhand, took his seat in the carriage, and drove back to Petersburg. Immediatelyafterwards a footman came from Princess Betsy and brought Anna a note.“I sent to Alexey to find out how he is, and he writes me he is quitewell and unhurt, but in despair.”“So he will be here,” she thought. “What a good thingI told him all!”She glanced at her watch. She had still three hours to wait, and the memoriesof their last meeting set her blood in flame.“My God, how light it is! It’s dreadful, but I do love to see hisface, and I do love this fantastic light.... My husband! Oh! yes.... Well,thank God! everything’s over with him.”Chapter 30In the little German watering-place to which the Shtcherbatskys had betakenthemselves, as in all places indeed where people are gathered together, theusual process, as it were, of the crystallization of society went on, assigningto each member of that society a definite and unalterable place. Just as theparticle of water in frost, definitely and unalterably, takes the special formof the crystal of snow, so each new person that arrived at the springs was atonce placed in his special place.Fürst Shtcherbatsky, sammt Gemahlin und Tochter, by theapartments they took, and from their name and from the friends they made, wereimmediately crystallized into a definite place marked out for them.There was visiting the watering-place that year a real German Fürstin, inconsequence of which the crystallizing process went on more vigorously thanever. Princess Shtcherbatskaya wished, above everything, to present herdaughter to this German princess, and the day after their arrival she dulyperformed this rite. Kitty made a low and graceful curtsey in the verysimple, that is to say, very elegant frock that had been ordered her fromParis. The German princess said, “I hope the roses will soon come back tothis pretty little face,” and for the Shtcherbatskys certain definitelines of existence were at once laid down from which there was no departing.The Shtcherbatskys made the acquaintance too of the family of an English LadySomebody, and of a German countess and her son, wounded in the last war, and ofa learned Swede, and of M. Canut and his sister. But yet inevitably theShtcherbatskys were thrown most into the society of a Moscow lady, MaryaYevgenyevna Rtishtcheva and her daughter, whom Kitty disliked, because she hadfallen ill, like herself, over a love affair, and a Moscow colonel, whom Kittyhad known from childhood, and always seen in uniform and epaulets, and who now,with his little eyes and his open neck and flowered cravat, was uncommonlyridiculous and tedious, because there was no getting rid of him. When all thiswas so firmly established, Kitty began to be very much bored, especially as theprince went away to Carlsbad and she was left alone with her mother. She tookno interest in the people she knew, feeling that nothing fresh would come ofthem. Her chief mental interest in the watering-place consisted in watching andmaking theories about the people she did not know. It was characteristic ofKitty that she always imagined everything in people in the most favorable lightpossible, especially so in those she did not know. And now as she made surmisesas to who people were, what were their relations to one another, and what theywere like, Kitty endowed them with the most marvelous and noble characters, andfound confirmation of her idea in her observations.Of these people the one that attracted her most was a Russian girl who had cometo the watering-place with an invalid Russian lady, Madame Stahl, as everyonecalled her. Madame Stahl belonged to the highest society, but she was so illthat she could not walk, and only on exceptionally fine days made herappearance at the springs in an invalid carriage. But it was not so much fromill-health as from pride—so Princess Shtcherbatskaya interpretedit—that Madame Stahl had not made the acquaintance of anyone among theRussians there. The Russian girl looked after Madame Stahl, and besides that,she was, as Kitty observed, on friendly terms with all the invalids who wereseriously ill, and there were many of them at the springs, and looked afterthem in the most natural way. This Russian girl was not, as Kitty gathered,related to Madame Stahl, nor was she a paid attendant. Madame Stahl called herVarenka, and other people called her “Mademoiselle Varenka.” Apartfrom the interest Kitty took in this girl’s relations with Madame Stahland with other unknown persons, Kitty, as often happened, felt an inexplicableattraction to Mademoiselle Varenka, and was aware when their eyes met that shetoo liked her.Of Mademoiselle Varenka one would not say that she had passed her first youth,but she was, as it were, a creature without youth; she might have been takenfor nineteen or for thirty. If her features were criticized separately, she washandsome rather than plain, in spite of the sickly hue of her face. She wouldhave been a good figure, too, if it had not been for her extreme thinness andthe size of her head, which was too large for her medium height. But she wasnot likely to be attractive to men. She was like a fine flower, already pastits bloom and without fragrance, though the petals were still unwithered.Moreover, she would have been unattractive to men also from the lack of justwhat Kitty had too much of—of the suppressed fire of vitality, and theconsciousness of her own attractiveness.She always seemed absorbed in work about which there could be no doubt, and soit seemed she could not take interest in anything outside it. It was just thiscontrast with her own position that was for Kitty the great attraction ofMademoiselle Varenka. Kitty felt that in her, in her manner of life, she wouldfind an example of what she was now so painfully seeking: interest in life, adignity in life—apart from the worldly relations of girls with men, whichso revolted Kitty, and appeared to her now as a shameful hawking about of goodsin search of a purchaser. The more attentively Kitty watched her unknownfriend, the more convinced she was this girl was the perfect creature shefancied her, and the more eagerly she wished to make her acquaintance.The two girls used to meet several times a day, and every time they met,Kitty’s eyes said: “Who are you? What are you? Are you really theexquisite creature I imagine you to be? But for goodness’ sakedon’t suppose,” her eyes added, “that I would force myacquaintance on you, I simply admire you and like you.” “I like youtoo, and you’re very, very sweet. And I should like you better still, ifI had time,” answered the eyes of the unknown girl. Kitty saw indeed,that she was always busy. Either she was taking the children of a Russianfamily home from the springs, or fetching a shawl for a sick lady, and wrappingher up in it, or trying to interest an irritable invalid, or selecting andbuying cakes for tea for someone.Soon after the arrival of the Shtcherbatskys there appeared in the morningcrowd at the springs two persons who attracted universal and unfavorableattention. These were a tall man with a stooping figure, and huge hands, in anold coat too short for him, with black, simple, and yet terrible eyes, and apockmarked, kind-looking woman, very badly and tastelessly dressed. Recognizingthese persons as Russians, Kitty had already in her imagination begunconstructing a delightful and touching romance about them. But the princess,having ascertained from the visitors’ list that this was Nikolay Levinand Marya Nikolaevna, explained to Kitty what a bad man this Levin was, and allher fancies about these two people vanished. Not so much from what her mothertold her, as from the fact that it was Konstantin’s brother, this pairsuddenly seemed to Kitty intensely unpleasant. This Levin, with his continualtwitching of his head, aroused in her now an irrepressible feeling of disgust.It seemed to her that his big, terrible eyes, which persistently pursued her,expressed a feeling of hatred and contempt, and she tried to avoid meeting him.Chapter 31It was a wet day; it had been raining all the morning, and the invalids, withtheir parasols, had flocked into the arcades.Kitty was walking there with her mother and the Moscow colonel, smart andjaunty in his European coat, bought ready-made at Frankfort. They were walkingon one side of the arcade, trying to avoid Levin, who was walking on the otherside. Varenka, in her dark dress, in a black hat with a turn-down brim, waswalking up and down the whole length of the arcade with a blind Frenchwoman,and, every time she met Kitty, they exchanged friendly glances.“Mamma, couldn’t I speak to her?” said Kitty, watching herunknown friend, and noticing that she was going up to the spring, and that theymight come there together.“Oh, if you want to so much, I’ll find out about her first and makeher acquaintance myself,” answered her mother. “What do you see inher out of the way? A companion, she must be. If you like, I’ll makeacquaintance with Madame Stahl; I used to know her belle-sœur,”added the princess, lifting her head haughtily.Kitty knew that the princess was offended that Madame Stahl had seemed to avoidmaking her acquaintance. Kitty did not insist.“How wonderfully sweet she is!” she said, gazing at Varenka just asshe handed a glass to the Frenchwoman. “Look how natural and sweet it allis.”“It’s so funny to see your engouements,” said theprincess. “No, we’d better go back,” she added, noticingLevin coming towards them with his companion and a German doctor, to whom hewas talking very noisily and angrily.They turned to go back, when suddenly they heard, not noisy talk, but shouting.Levin, stopping short, was shouting at the doctor, and the doctor, too, wasexcited. A crowd gathered about them. The princess and Kitty beat a hastyretreat, while the colonel joined the crowd to find out what was the matter.A few minutes later the colonel overtook them.“What was it?” inquired the princess.“Scandalous and disgraceful!” answered the colonel. “The onething to be dreaded is meeting Russians abroad. That tall gentleman was abusingthe doctor, flinging all sorts of insults at him because he wasn’ttreating him quite as he liked, and he began waving his stick at him.It’s simply a scandal!”“Oh, how unpleasant!” said the princess. “Well, and how didit end?”“Luckily at that point that ... the one in the mushroom hat ...intervened. A Russian lady, I think she is,” said the colonel.“Mademoiselle Varenka?” asked Kitty.“Yes, yes. She came to the rescue before anyone; she took the man by thearm and led him away.”“There, mamma,” said Kitty; “you wonder that I’menthusiastic about her.”The next day, as she watched her unknown friend, Kitty noticed thatMademoiselle Varenka was already on the same terms with Levin and his companionas with her other protégés. She went up to them, entered intoconversation with them, and served as interpreter for the woman, who could notspeak any foreign language.Kitty began to entreat her mother still more urgently to let her make friendswith Varenka. And, disagreeable as it was to the princess to seem to take thefirst step in wishing to make the acquaintance of Madame Stahl, who thought fitto give herself airs, she made inquiries about Varenka, and, having ascertainedparticulars about her tending to prove that there could be no harm thoughlittle good in the acquaintance, she herself approached Varenka and madeacquaintance with her.Choosing a time when her daughter had gone to the spring, while Varenka hadstopped outside the baker’s, the princess went up to her.“Allow me to make your acquaintance,” she said, with her dignifiedsmile. “My daughter has lost her heart to you,” she said.“Possibly you do not know me. I am....”“That feeling is more than reciprocal, princess,” Varenka answeredhurriedly.“What a good deed you did yesterday to our poor compatriot!” saidthe princess.Varenka flushed a little. “I don’t remember. I don’t think Idid anything,” she said.“Why, you saved that Levin from disagreeable consequences.”“Yes, sa compagne called me, and I tried to pacify him, he’svery ill, and was dissatisfied with the doctor. I’m used to looking aftersuch invalids.”“Yes, I’ve heard you live at Mentone with your aunt—Ithink—Madame Stahl: I used to know her belle-sœur.”“No, she’s not my aunt. I call her mamma, but I am not related toher; I was brought up by her,” answered Varenka, flushing a little again.This was so simply said, and so sweet was the truthful and candid expression ofher face, that the princess saw why Kitty had taken such a fancy to Varenka.“Well, and what’s this Levin going to do?” asked theprincess.“He’s going away,” answered Varenka.At that instant Kitty came up from the spring beaming with delight that hermother had become acquainted with her unknown friend.“Well, see, Kitty, your intense desire to make friends withMademoiselle....”“Varenka,” Varenka put in smiling, “that’s whateveryone calls me.”Kitty blushed with pleasure, and slowly, without speaking, pressed her newfriend’s hand, which did not respond to her pressure, but lay motionlessin her hand. The hand did not respond to her pressure, but the face ofMademoiselle Varenka glowed with a soft, glad, though rather mournful smile,that showed large but handsome teeth.“I have long wished for this too,” she said.“But you are so busy.”“Oh, no, I’m not at all busy,” answered Varenka, but at thatmoment she had to leave her new friends because two little Russian girls,children of an invalid, ran up to her.“Varenka, mamma’s calling!” they cried.And Varenka went after them.Chapter 32The particulars which the princess had learned in regard to Varenka’spast and her relations with Madame Stahl were as follows:Madame Stahl, of whom some people said that she had worried her husband out ofhis life, while others said it was he who had made her wretched by his immoralbehavior, had always been a woman of weak health and enthusiastic temperament.When, after her separation from her husband, she gave birth to her only child,the child had died almost immediately, and the family of Madame Stahl, knowingher sensibility, and fearing the news would kill her, had substituted anotherchild, a baby born the same night and in the same house in Petersburg, thedaughter of the chief cook of the Imperial Household. This was Varenka. MadameStahl learned later on that Varenka was not her own child, but she went onbringing her up, especially as very soon afterwards Varenka had not a relationof her own living. Madame Stahl had now been living more than ten yearscontinuously abroad, in the south, never leaving her couch. And some peoplesaid that Madame Stahl had made her social position as a philanthropic, highlyreligious woman; other people said she really was at heart the highly ethicalbeing, living for nothing but the good of her fellow creatures, which sherepresented herself to be. No one knew what her faith was—Catholic,Protestant, or Orthodox. But one fact was indubitable—she was in amicablerelations with the highest dignitaries of all the churches and sects.Varenka lived with her all the while abroad, and everyone who knew Madame Stahlknew and liked Mademoiselle Varenka, as everyone called her.Having learned all these facts, the princess found nothing to object to in herdaughter’s intimacy with Varenka, more especially as Varenka’sbreeding and education were of the best—she spoke French and Englishextremely well—and what was of the most weight, brought a message fromMadame Stahl expressing her regret that she was prevented by her ill healthfrom making the acquaintance of the princess.After getting to know Varenka, Kitty became more and more fascinated by herfriend, and every day she discovered new virtues in her.The princess, hearing that Varenka had a good voice, asked her to come and singto them in the evening.“Kitty plays, and we have a piano; not a good one, it’s true, butyou will give us so much pleasure,” said the princess with her affectedsmile, which Kitty disliked particularly just then, because she noticed thatVarenka had no inclination to sing. Varenka came, however, in the evening andbrought a roll of music with her. The princess had invited Marya Yevgenyevnaand her daughter and the colonel.Varenka seemed quite unaffected by there being persons present she did notknow, and she went directly to the piano. She could not accompany herself, butshe could sing music at sight very well. Kitty, who played well, accompaniedher.“You have an extraordinary talent,” the princess said to her afterVarenka had sung the first song extremely well.Marya Yevgenyevna and her daughter expressed their thanks and admiration.“Look,” said the colonel, looking out of the window, “what anaudience has collected to listen to you.” There actually was quite aconsiderable crowd under the windows.“I am very glad it gives you pleasure,” Varenka answered simply.Kitty looked with pride at her friend. She was enchanted by her talent, and hervoice, and her face, but most of all by her manner, by the way Varenkaobviously thought nothing of her singing and was quite unmoved by theirpraises. She seemed only to be asking: “Am I to sing again, or is thatenough?”“If it had been I,” thought Kitty, “how proud I should havebeen! How delighted I should have been to see that crowd under the windows! Butshe’s utterly unmoved by it. Her only motive is to avoid refusing and toplease mamma. What is there in her? What is it gives her the power to look downon everything, to be calm independently of everything? How I should like toknow it and to learn it of her!” thought Kitty, gazing into her sereneface. The princess asked Varenka to sing again, and Varenka sang another song,also smoothly, distinctly, and well, standing erect at the piano and beatingtime on it with her thin, dark-skinned hand.The next song in the book was an Italian one. Kitty played the opening bars,and looked round at Varenka.“Let’s skip that,” said Varenka, flushing a little. Kitty lether eyes rest on Varenka’s face, with a look of dismay and inquiry.“Very well, the next one,” she said hurriedly, turning over thepages, and at once feeling that there was something connected with the song.“No,” answered Varenka with a smile, laying her hand on the music,“no, let’s have that one.” And she sang it just as quietly,as coolly, and as well as the others.When she had finished, they all thanked her again, and went off to tea. Kittyand Varenka went out into the little garden that adjoined the house.“Am I right, that you have some reminiscences connected with thatsong?” said Kitty. “Don’t tell me,” she added hastily,“only say if I’m right.”“No, why not? I’ll tell you simply,” said Varenka, and,without waiting for a reply, she went on: “Yes, it brings up memories,once painful ones. I cared for someone once, and I used to sing him thatsong.”Kitty with big, wide-open eyes gazed silently, sympathetically at Varenka.“I cared for him, and he cared for me; but his mother did not wish it,and he married another girl. He’s living now not far from us, and I seehim sometimes. You didn’t think I had a love story too,” she said,and there was a faint gleam in her handsome face of that fire which Kitty feltmust once have glowed all over her.“I didn’t think so? Why, if I were a man, I could never care foranyone else after knowing you. Only I can’t understand how he could, toplease his mother, forget you and make you unhappy; he had no heart.”“Oh, no, he’s a very good man, and I’m not unhappy; quite thecontrary, I’m very happy. Well, so we shan’t be singing any morenow,” she added, turning towards the house.“How good you are! how good you are!” cried Kitty, and stoppingher, she kissed her. “If I could only be even a little like you!”“Why should you be like anyone? You’re nice as you are,” saidVarenka, smiling her gentle, weary smile.“No, I’m not nice at all. Come, tell me.... Stop a minute,let’s sit down,” said Kitty, making her sit down again beside her.“Tell me, isn’t it humiliating to think that a man has disdainedyour love, that he hasn’t cared for it?...”“But he didn’t disdain it; I believe he cared for me, but he was adutiful son....”“Yes, but if it hadn’t been on account of his mother, if it hadbeen his own doing?...” said Kitty, feeling she was giving away hersecret, and that her face, burning with the flush of shame, had betrayed heralready.“In that case he would have done wrong, and I should not have regrettedhim,” answered Varenka, evidently realizing that they were now talkingnot of her, but of Kitty.“But the humiliation,” said Kitty, “the humiliation one cannever forget, can never forget,” she said, remembering her look at thelast ball during the pause in the music.“Where is the humiliation? Why, you did nothing wrong?”“Worse than wrong—shameful.”Varenka shook her head and laid her hand on Kitty’s hand.“Why, what is there shameful?” she said. “You didn’ttell a man, who didn’t care for you, that you loved him, did you?”“Of course not; I never said a word, but he knew it. No, no, there arelooks, there are ways; I can’t forget it, if I live a hundredyears.”“Why so? I don’t understand. The whole point is whether you lovehim now or not,” said Varenka, who called everything by its name.“I hate him; I can’t forgive myself.”“Why, what for?”“The shame, the humiliation!”“Oh! if everyone were as sensitive as you are!” said Varenka.“There isn’t a girl who hasn’t been through the same. Andit’s all so unimportant.”“Why, what is important?” said Kitty, looking into her face withinquisitive wonder.“Oh, there’s so much that’s important,” said Varenka,smiling.“Why, what?”“Oh, so much that’s more important,” answered Varenka, notknowing what to say. But at that instant they heard the princess’s voicefrom the window. “Kitty, it’s cold! Either get a shawl, or comeindoors.”“It really is time to go in!” said Varenka, getting up. “Ihave to go on to Madame Berthe’s; she asked me to.”Kitty held her by the hand, and with passionate curiosity and entreaty her eyesasked her: “What is it, what is this of such importance that gives yousuch tranquillity? You know, tell me!” But Varenka did not even know whatKitty’s eyes were asking her. She merely thought that she had to go tosee Madame Berthe too that evening, and to make haste home in time formaman’s tea at twelve o’clock. She went indoors, collectedher music, and saying good-bye to everyone, was about to go.“Allow me to see you home,” said the colonel.“Yes, how can you go alone at night like this?” chimed in theprincess. “Anyway, I’ll send Parasha.”Kitty saw that Varenka could hardly restrain a smile at the idea that sheneeded an escort.“No, I always go about alone and nothing ever happens to me,” shesaid, taking her hat. And kissing Kitty once more, without saying what wasimportant, she stepped out courageously with the music under her arm andvanished into the twilight of the summer night, bearing away with her hersecret of what was important and what gave her the calm and dignity so much tobe envied.Chapter 33Kitty made the acquaintance of Madame Stahl too, and this acquaintance,together with her friendship with Varenka, did not merely exercise a greatinfluence on her, it also comforted her in her mental distress. She found thiscomfort through a completely new world being opened to her by means of thisacquaintance, a world having nothing in common with her past, an exalted, nobleworld, from the height of which she could contemplate her past calmly. It wasrevealed to her that besides the instinctive life to which Kitty had givenherself up hitherto there was a spiritual life. This life was disclosed inreligion, but a religion having nothing in common with that one which Kitty hadknown from childhood, and which found expression in litanies and all-nightservices at the Widow’s Home, where one might meet one’s friends,and in learning by heart Slavonic texts with the priest. This was a lofty,mysterious religion connected with a whole series of noble thoughts andfeelings, which one could do more than merely believe because one was told to,which one could love.Kitty found all this out not from words. Madame Stahl talked to Kitty as to acharming child that one looks on with pleasure as on the memory of one’syouth, and only once she said in passing that in all human sorrows nothinggives comfort but love and faith, and that in the sight of Christ’scompassion for us no sorrow is trifling—and immediately talked of otherthings. But in every gesture of Madame Stahl, in every word, in everyheavenly—as Kitty called it—look, and above all in the whole storyof her life, which she heard from Varenka, Kitty recognized that something“that was important,” of which, till then, she had known nothing.Yet, elevated as Madame Stahl’s character was, touching as was her story,and exalted and moving as was her speech, Kitty could not help detecting in hersome traits which perplexed her. She noticed that when questioning her abouther family, Madame Stahl had smiled contemptuously, which was not in accordwith Christian meekness. She noticed, too, that when she had found a Catholicpriest with her, Madame Stahl had studiously kept her face in the shadow of thelamp-shade and had smiled in a peculiar way. Trivial as these two observationswere, they perplexed her, and she had her doubts as to Madame Stahl. But on theother hand Varenka, alone in the world, without friends or relations, with amelancholy disappointment in the past, desiring nothing, regretting nothing,was just that perfection of which Kitty dared hardly dream. In Varenka sherealized that one has but to forget oneself and love others, and one will becalm, happy, and noble. And that was what Kitty longed to be. Seeing nowclearly what was the most important, Kitty was not satisfied with beingenthusiastic over it; she at once gave herself up with her whole soul to thenew life that was opening to her. From Varenka’s accounts of the doingsof Madame Stahl and other people whom she mentioned, Kitty had alreadyconstructed the plan of her own future life. She would, like MadameStahl’s niece, Aline, of whom Varenka had talked to her a great deal,seek out those who were in trouble, wherever she might be living, help them asfar as she could, give them the Gospel, read the Gospel to the sick, tocriminals, to the dying. The idea of reading the Gospel to criminals, as Alinedid, particularly fascinated Kitty. But all these were secret dreams, of whichKitty did not talk either to her mother or to Varenka.While awaiting the time for carrying out her plans on a large scale, however,Kitty, even then at the springs, where there were so many people ill andunhappy, readily found a chance for practicing her new principles in imitationof Varenka.At first the princess noticed nothing but that Kitty was much under theinfluence of her engouement, as she called it, for Madame Stahl, andstill more for Varenka. She saw that Kitty did not merely imitate Varenka inher conduct, but unconsciously imitated her in her manner of walking, oftalking, of blinking her eyes. But later on the princess noticed that, apartfrom this adoration, some kind of serious spiritual change was taking place inher daughter.The princess saw that in the evenings Kitty read a French testament that MadameStahl had given her—a thing she had never done before; that she avoidedsociety acquaintances and associated with the sick people who were underVarenka’s protection, and especially one poor family, that of a sickpainter, Petrov. Kitty was unmistakably proud of playing the part of a sisterof mercy in that family. All this was well enough, and the princess had nothingto say against it, especially as Petrov’s wife was a perfectly nice sortof woman, and that the German princess, noticing Kitty’s devotion,praised her, calling her an angel of consolation. All this would have been verywell, if there had been no exaggeration. But the princess saw that her daughterwas rushing into extremes, and so indeed she told her.“Il ne faut jamais rien outrer,” she said to her.Her daughter made her no reply, only in her heart she thought that one couldnot talk about exaggeration where Christianity was concerned. What exaggerationcould there be in the practice of a doctrine wherein one was bidden to turn theother cheek when one was smitten, and give one’s cloak if one’scoat were taken? But the princess disliked this exaggeration, and disliked evenmore the fact that she felt her daughter did not care to show her all herheart. Kitty did in fact conceal her new views and feelings from her mother.She concealed them not because she did not respect or did not love her mother,but simply because she was her mother. She would have revealed them to anyonesooner than to her mother.“How is it Anna Pavlovna’s not been to see us for so long?”the princess said one day of Madame Petrova. “I’ve asked her, butshe seems put out about something.”“No, I’ve not noticed it, maman,” said Kitty, flushing hotly.“Is it long since you went to see them?”“We’re meaning to make an expedition to the mountainstomorrow,” answered Kitty.“Well, you can go,” answered the princess, gazing at herdaughter’s embarrassed face and trying to guess the cause of herembarrassment.That day Varenka came to dinner and told them that Anna Pavlovna had changedher mind and given up the expedition for the morrow. And the princess noticedagain that Kitty reddened.“Kitty, haven’t you had some misunderstanding with thePetrovs?” said the princess, when they were left alone. “Why hasshe given up sending the children and coming to see us?”Kitty answered that nothing had happened between them, and that she could nottell why Anna Pavlovna seemed displeased with her. Kitty answered perfectlytruly. She did not know the reason Anna Pavlovna had changed to her, but sheguessed it. She guessed at something which she could not tell her mother, whichshe did not put into words to herself. It was one of those things which oneknows but which one can never speak of even to oneself, so terrible andshameful would it be to be mistaken.Again and again she went over in her memory all her relations with the family.She remembered the simple delight expressed on the round, good-humored face ofAnna Pavlovna at their meetings; she remembered their secret confabulationsabout the invalid, their plots to draw him away from the work which wasforbidden him, and to get him out-of-doors; the devotion of the youngest boy,who used to call her “my Kitty,” and would not go to bed withouther. How nice it all was! Then she recalled the thin, terribly thin figure ofPetrov, with his long neck, in his brown coat, his scant, curly hair, hisquestioning blue eyes that were so terrible to Kitty at first, and his painfulattempts to seem hearty and lively in her presence. She recalled the effortsshe had made at first to overcome the repugnance she felt for him, as for allconsumptive people, and the pains it had cost her to think of things to say tohim. She recalled the timid, softened look with which he gazed at her, and thestrange feeling of compassion and awkwardness, and later of a sense of her owngoodness, which she had felt at it. How nice it all was! But all that was atfirst. Now, a few days ago, everything was suddenly spoiled. Anna Pavlovna hadmet Kitty with affected cordiality, and had kept continual watch on her and onher husband.Could that touching pleasure he showed when she came near be the cause of AnnaPavlovna’s coolness?“Yes,” she mused, “there was something unnatural about AnnaPavlovna, and utterly unlike her good nature, when she said angrily the daybefore yesterday: ‘There, he will keep waiting for you; he wouldn’tdrink his coffee without you, though he’s grown so dreadfullyweak.’”“Yes, perhaps, too, she didn’t like it when I gave him the rug. Itwas all so simple, but he took it so awkwardly, and was so long thanking me,that I felt awkward too. And then that portrait of me he did so well. And mostof all that look of confusion and tenderness! Yes, yes, that’s it!”Kitty repeated to herself with horror. “No, it can’t be, itoughtn’t to be! He’s so much to be pitied!” she said toherself directly after.This doubt poisoned the charm of her new life.Chapter 34Before the end of the course of drinking the waters, Prince Shtcherbatsky, whohad gone on from Carlsbad to Baden and Kissingen to Russian friends—toget a breath of Russian air, as he said—came back to his wife anddaughter.The views of the prince and of the princess on life abroad were completelyopposed. The princess thought everything delightful, and in spite of herestablished position in Russian society, she tried abroad to be like a Europeanfashionable lady, which she was not—for the simple reason that she was atypical Russian gentlewoman; and so she was affected, which did not altogethersuit her. The prince, on the contrary, thought everything foreign detestable,got sick of European life, kept to his Russian habits, and purposely tried toshow himself abroad less European than he was in reality.The prince returned thinner, with the skin hanging in loose bags on his cheeks,but in the most cheerful frame of mind. His good humor was even greater when hesaw Kitty completely recovered. The news of Kitty’s friendship withMadame Stahl and Varenka, and the reports the princess gave him of some kind ofchange she had noticed in Kitty, troubled the prince and aroused his habitualfeeling of jealousy of everything that drew his daughter away from him, and adread that his daughter might have got out of the reach of his influence intoregions inaccessible to him. But these unpleasant matters were all drowned inthe sea of kindliness and good humor which was always within him, and more sothan ever since his course of Carlsbad waters.The day after his arrival the prince, in his long overcoat, with his Russianwrinkles and baggy cheeks propped up by a starched collar, set off with hisdaughter to the spring in the greatest good humor.It was a lovely morning: the bright, cheerful houses with their little gardens,the sight of the red-faced, red-armed, beer-drinking German waitresses, workingaway merrily, did the heart good. But the nearer they got to the springs theoftener they met sick people; and their appearance seemed more pitiable thanever among the everyday conditions of prosperous German life. Kitty was nolonger struck by this contrast. The bright sun, the brilliant green of thefoliage, the strains of the music were for her the natural setting of all thesefamiliar faces, with their changes to greater emaciation or to convalescence,for which she watched. But to the prince the brightness and gaiety of the Junemorning, and the sound of the orchestra playing a gay waltz then in fashion,and above all, the appearance of the healthy attendants, seemed somethingunseemly and monstrous, in conjunction with these slowly moving, dying figuresgathered together from all parts of Europe. In spite of his feeling of prideand, as it were, of the return of youth, with his favorite daughter on his arm,he felt awkward, and almost ashamed of his vigorous step and his sturdy, stoutlimbs. He felt almost like a man not dressed in a crowd.“Present me to your new friends,” he said to his daughter,squeezing her hand with his elbow. “I like even your horrid Soden formaking you so well again. Only it’s melancholy, very melancholy here.Who’s that?”Kitty mentioned the names of all the people they met, with some of whom she wasacquainted and some not. At the entrance of the garden they met the blind lady,Madame Berthe, with her guide, and the prince was delighted to see the oldFrenchwoman’s face light up when she heard Kitty’s voice. She atonce began talking to him with French exaggerated politeness, applauding himfor having such a delightful daughter, extolling Kitty to the skies before herface, and calling her a treasure, a pearl, and a consoling angel.“Well, she’s the second angel, then,” said the prince,smiling. “she calls Mademoiselle Varenka angel number one.”“Oh! Mademoiselle Varenka, she’s a real angel, allez,” MadameBerthe assented.In the arcade they met Varenka herself. She was walking rapidly towards themcarrying an elegant red bag.“Here is papa come,” Kitty said to her.Varenka made—simply and naturally as she did everything—a movementbetween a bow and a curtsey, and immediately began talking to the prince,without shyness, naturally, as she talked to everyone.“Of course I know you; I know you very well,” the prince said toher with a smile, in which Kitty detected with joy that her father liked herfriend. “Where are you off to in such haste?”“Maman’s here,” she said, turning to Kitty. “She hasnot slept all night, and the doctor advised her to go out. I’m taking herher work.”“So that’s angel number one?” said the prince when Varenkahad gone on.Kitty saw that her father had meant to make fun of Varenka, but that he couldnot do it because he liked her.“Come, so we shall see all your friends,” he went on, “evenMadame Stahl, if she deigns to recognize me.”“Why, did you know her, papa?” Kitty asked apprehensively, catchingthe gleam of irony that kindled in the prince’s eyes at the mention ofMadame Stahl.“I used to know her husband, and her too a little, before she’djoined the Pietists.”“What is a Pietist, papa?” asked Kitty, dismayed to find that whatshe prized so highly in Madame Stahl had a name.“I don’t quite know myself. I only know that she thanks God foreverything, for every misfortune, and thanks God too that her husband died. Andthat’s rather droll, as they didn’t get on together.”“Who’s that? What a piteous face!” he asked, noticing a sickman of medium height sitting on a bench, wearing a brown overcoat and whitetrousers that fell in strange folds about his long, fleshless legs. This manlifted his straw hat, showed his scanty curly hair and high forehead, painfullyreddened by the pressure of the hat.“That’s Petrov, an artist,” answered Kitty, blushing.“And that’s his wife,” she added, indicating Anna Pavlovna,who, as though on purpose, at the very instant they approached walked awayafter a child that had run off along a path.“Poor fellow! and what a nice face he has!” said the prince.“Why don’t you go up to him? He wanted to speak to you.”“Well, let us go, then,” said Kitty, turning round resolutely.“How are you feeling today?” she asked Petrov.Petrov got up, leaning on his stick, and looked shyly at the prince.“This is my daughter,” said the prince. “Let me introducemyself.”The painter bowed and smiled, showing his strangely dazzling white teeth.“We expected you yesterday, princess,” he said to Kitty. Hestaggered as he said this, and then repeated the motion, trying to make it seemas if it had been intentional.“I meant to come, but Varenka said that Anna Pavlovna sent word you werenot going.”“Not going!” said Petrov, blushing, and immediately beginning tocough, and his eyes sought his wife. “Anita! Anita!” he saidloudly, and the swollen veins stood out like cords on his thin white neck.Anna Pavlovna came up.“So you sent word to the princess that we weren’t going!” hewhispered to her angrily, losing his voice.“Good morning, princess,” said Anna Pavlovna, with an assumed smileutterly unlike her former manner. “Very glad to make youracquaintance,” she said to the prince. “You’ve long beenexpected, prince.”“What did you send word to the princess that we weren’t goingfor?” the artist whispered hoarsely once more, still more angrily,obviously exasperated that his voice failed him so that he could not give hiswords the expression he would have liked to.“Oh, mercy on us! I thought we weren’t going,” his wifeanswered crossly.“What, when....” He coughed and waved his hand. The prince took offhis hat and moved away with his daughter.“Ah! ah!” he sighed deeply. “Oh, poor things!”“Yes, papa,” answered Kitty. “And you must know they’vethree children, no servant, and scarcely any means. He gets something from theAcademy,” she went on briskly, trying to drown the distress that thequeer change in Anna Pavlovna’s manner to her had aroused in her.“Oh, here’s Madame Stahl,” said Kitty, indicating an invalidcarriage, where, propped on pillows, something in gray and blue was lying undera sunshade. This was Madame Stahl. Behind her stood the gloomy, healthy-lookingGerman workman who pushed the carriage. Close by was standing a flaxen-headedSwedish count, whom Kitty knew by name. Several invalids were lingering nearthe low carriage, staring at the lady as though she were some curiosity.The prince went up to her, and Kitty detected that disconcerting gleam of ironyin his eyes. He went up to Madame Stahl, and addressed her with extremecourtesy and affability in that excellent French that so few speak nowadays.“I don’t know if you remember me, but I must recall myself to thankyou for your kindness to my daughter,” he said, taking off his hat andnot putting it on again.“Prince Alexander Shtcherbatsky,” said Madame Stahl, lifting uponhim her heavenly eyes, in which Kitty discerned a look of annoyance.“Delighted! I have taken a great fancy to your daughter.”“You are still in weak health?”“Yes; I’m used to it,” said Madame Stahl, and she introducedthe prince to the Swedish count.“You are scarcely changed at all,” the prince said to her.“It’s ten or eleven years since I had the honor of seeingyou.”“Yes; God sends the cross and sends the strength to bear it. Often onewonders what is the goal of this life?... The other side!” she saidangrily to Varenka, who had rearranged the rug over her feet not to hersatisfaction.“To do good, probably,” said the prince with a twinkle in his eye.“That is not for us to judge,” said Madame Stahl, perceiving theshade of expression on the prince’s face. “So you will send me thatbook, dear count? I’m very grateful to you,” she said to the youngSwede.“Ah!” cried the prince, catching sight of the Moscow colonelstanding near, and with a bow to Madame Stahl he walked away with his daughterand the Moscow colonel, who joined them.“That’s our aristocracy, prince!” the Moscow colonel saidwith ironical intention. He cherished a grudge against Madame Stahl for notmaking his acquaintance.“She’s just the same,” replied the prince.“Did you know her before her illness, prince—that’s to saybefore she took to her bed?”“Yes. She took to her bed before my eyes,” said the prince.“They say it’s ten years since she has stood on her feet.”“She doesn’t stand up because her legs are too short. She’s avery bad figure.”“Papa, it’s not possible!” cried Kitty.“That’s what wicked tongues say, my darling. And your Varenkacatches it too,” he added. “Oh, these invalid ladies!”“Oh, no, papa!” Kitty objected warmly. “Varenka worships her.And then she does so much good! Ask anyone! Everyone knows her and AlineStahl.”“Perhaps so,” said the prince, squeezing her hand with his elbow;“but it’s better when one does good so that you may ask everyoneand no one knows.”Kitty did not answer, not because she had nothing to say, but because she didnot care to reveal her secret thoughts even to her father. But, strange to say,although she had so made up her mind not to be influenced by her father’sviews, not to let him into her inmost sanctuary, she felt that the heavenlyimage of Madame Stahl, which she had carried for a whole month in her heart,had vanished, never to return, just as the fantastic figure made up of someclothes thrown down at random vanishes when one sees that it is only somegarment lying there. All that was left was a woman with short legs, who laydown because she had a bad figure, and worried patient Varenka for notarranging her rug to her liking. And by no effort of the imagination couldKitty bring back the former Madame Stahl.Chapter 35The prince communicated his good humor to his own family and his friends, andeven to the German landlord in whose rooms the Shtcherbatskys were staying.On coming back with Kitty from the springs, the prince, who had asked thecolonel, and Marya Yevgenyevna, and Varenka all to come and have coffee withthem, gave orders for a table and chairs to be taken into the garden under thechestnut tree, and lunch to be laid there. The landlord and the servants, too,grew brisker under the influence of his good spirits. They knew hisopen-handedness; and half an hour later the invalid doctor from Hamburg, wholived on the top floor, looked enviously out of the window at the merry partyof healthy Russians assembled under the chestnut tree. In the trembling circlesof shadow cast by the leaves, at a table, covered with a white cloth, and setwith coffeepot, bread-and-butter, cheese, and cold game, sat the princess in ahigh cap with lilac ribbons, distributing cups and bread-and-butter. At theother end sat the prince, eating heartily, and talking loudly and merrily. Theprince had spread out near him his purchases, carved boxes, and knick-knacks,paper-knives of all sorts, of which he bought a heap at every watering-place,and bestowed them upon everyone, including Lieschen, the servant girl, and thelandlord, with whom he jested in his comically bad German, assuring him that itwas not the water had cured Kitty, but his splendid cookery, especially hisplum soup. The princess laughed at her husband for his Russian ways, but shewas more lively and good-humored than she had been all the while she had beenat the waters. The colonel smiled, as he always did, at the prince’sjokes, but as far as regards Europe, of which he believed himself to be makinga careful study, he took the princess’s side. The simple-hearted MaryaYevgenyevna simply roared with laughter at everything absurd the prince said,and his jokes made Varenka helpless with feeble but infectious laughter, whichwas something Kitty had never seen before.Kitty was glad of all this, but she could not be light-hearted. She could notsolve the problem her father had unconsciously set her by his good-humored viewof her friends, and of the life that had so attracted her. To this doubt therewas joined the change in her relations with the Petrovs, which had been soconspicuously and unpleasantly marked that morning. Everyone was good-humored,but Kitty could not feel good-humored, and this increased her distress. Shefelt a feeling such as she had known in childhood, when she had been shut inher room as a punishment, and had heard her sisters’ merry laughteroutside.“Well, but what did you buy this mass of things for?” said theprincess, smiling, and handing her husband a cup of coffee.“One goes for a walk, one looks in a shop, and they ask you to buy.‘Erlaucht, Durchlaucht?’ Directly they say‘Durchlaucht,’ I can’t hold out. I lose tenthalers.”“It’s simply from boredom,” said the princess.“Of course it is. Such boredom, my dear, that one doesn’t know whatto do with oneself.”“How can you be bored, prince? There’s so much that’sinteresting now in Germany,” said Marya Yevgenyevna.“But I know everything that’s interesting: the plum soup I know,and the pea sausages I know. I know everything.”“No, you may say what you like, prince, there’s the interest oftheir institutions,” said the colonel.“But what is there interesting about it? They’re all as pleased asbrass halfpence. They’ve conquered everybody, and why am I to be pleasedat that? I haven’t conquered anyone; and I’m obliged to take off myown boots, yes, and put them away too; in the morning, get up and dress atonce, and go to the dining-room to drink bad tea! How different it is at home!You get up in no haste, you get cross, grumble a little, and come round again.You’ve time to think things over, and no hurry.”“But time’s money, you forget that,” said the colonel.“Time, indeed, that depends! Why, there’s time one would give amonth of for sixpence, and time you wouldn’t give half an hour of for anymoney. Isn’t that so, Katinka? What is it? why are you sodepressed?”“I’m not depressed.”“Where are you off to? Stay a little longer,” he said to Varenka.“I must be going home,” said Varenka, getting up, and again shewent off into a giggle. When she had recovered, she said good-bye, and wentinto the house to get her hat.Kitty followed her. Even Varenka struck her as different. She was not worse,but different from what she had fancied her before.“Oh, dear! it’s a long while since I’ve laughed somuch!” said Varenka, gathering up her parasol and her bag. “Hownice he is, your father!”Kitty did not speak.“When shall I see you again?” asked Varenka.“Mamma meant to go and see the Petrovs. Won’t you be there?”said Kitty, to try Varenka.“Yes,” answered Varenka. “They’re getting ready to goaway, so I promised to help them pack.”“Well, I’ll come too, then.”“No, why should you?”“Why not? why not? why not?” said Kitty, opening her eyes wide, andclutching at Varenka’s parasol, so as not to let her go. “No, waita minute; why not?”“Oh, nothing; your father has come, and besides, they will feel awkwardat your helping.”“No, tell me why you don’t want me to be often at thePetrovs’. You don’t want me to—why not?”“I didn’t say that,” said Varenka quietly.“No, please tell me!”“Tell you everything?” asked Varenka.“Everything, everything!” Kitty assented.“Well, there’s really nothing of any consequence; only that MihailAlexeyevitch” (that was the artist’s name) “had meant toleave earlier, and now he doesn’t want to go away,” said Varenka,smiling.“Well, well!” Kitty urged impatiently, looking darkly at Varenka.“Well, and for some reason Anna Pavlovna told him that he didn’twant to go because you are here. Of course, that was nonsense; but there was adispute over it—over you. You know how irritable these sick peopleare.”Kitty, scowling more than ever, kept silent, and Varenka went on speakingalone, trying to soften or soothe her, and seeing a storm coming—she didnot know whether of tears or of words.“So you’d better not go.... You understand; you won’t beoffended?...”“And it serves me right! And it serves me right!” Kitty criedquickly, snatching the parasol out of Varenka’s hand, and looking pasther friend’s face.Varenka felt inclined to smile, looking at her childish fury, but she wasafraid of wounding her.“How does it serve you right? I don’t understand,” she said.“It serves me right, because it was all sham; because it was all done onpurpose, and not from the heart. What business had I to interfere withoutsiders? And so it’s come about that I’m a cause of quarrel, andthat I’ve done what nobody asked me to do. Because it was all a sham! asham! a sham!...”“A sham! with what object?” said Varenka gently.“Oh, it’s so idiotic! so hateful! There was no need whatever forme.... Nothing but sham!” she said, opening and shutting the parasol.“But with what object?”“To seem better to people, to myself, to God; to deceive everyone. No!now I won’t descend to that. I’ll be bad; but anyway not a liar, acheat.”“But who is a cheat?” said Varenka reproachfully. “You speakas if....”But Kitty was in one of her gusts of fury, and she would not let her finish.“I don’t talk about you, not about you at all. You’reperfection. Yes, yes, I know you’re all perfection; but what am I to doif I’m bad? This would never have been if I weren’t bad. So let mebe what I am. I won’t be a sham. What have I to do with Anna Pavlovna?Let them go their way, and me go mine. I can’t be different.... And yetit’s not that, it’s not that.”“What is not that?” asked Varenka in bewilderment.“Everything. I can’t act except from the heart, and you act fromprinciple. I liked you simply, but you most likely only wanted to save me, toimprove me.”“You are unjust,” said Varenka.“But I’m not speaking of other people, I’m speaking ofmyself.”“Kitty,” they heard her mother’s voice, “come here,show papa your necklace.”Kitty, with a haughty air, without making peace with her friend, took thenecklace in a little box from the table and went to her mother.“What’s the matter? Why are you so red?” her mother andfather said to her with one voice.“Nothing,” she answered. “I’ll be back directly,”and she ran back.“She’s still here,” she thought. “What am I to say toher? Oh, dear! what have I done, what have I said? Why was I rude to her? Whatam I to do? What am I to say to her?” thought Kitty, and she stopped inthe doorway.Varenka in her hat and with the parasol in her hands was sitting at the tableexamining the spring which Kitty had broken. She lifted her head.“Varenka, forgive me, do forgive me,” whispered Kitty, going up toher. “I don’t remember what I said. I....”“I really didn’t mean to hurt you,” said Varenka, smiling.Peace was made. But with her father’s coming all the world in which shehad been living was transformed for Kitty. She did not give up everything shehad learned, but she became aware that she had deceived herself in supposingshe could be what she wanted to be. Her eyes were, it seemed, opened; she feltall the difficulty of maintaining herself without hypocrisy and self-conceit onthe pinnacle to which she had wished to mount. Moreover, she became aware ofall the dreariness of the world of sorrow, of sick and dying people, in whichshe had been living. The efforts she had made to like it seemed to herintolerable, and she felt a longing to get back quickly into the fresh air, toRussia, to Ergushovo, where, as she knew from letters, her sister Dolly hadalready gone with her children.But her affection for Varenka did not wane. As she said good-bye, Kitty beggedher to come to them in Russia.“I’ll come when you get married,” said Varenka.“I shall never marry.”“Well, then, I shall never come.”“Well, then, I shall be married simply for that. Mind now, remember yourpromise,” said Kitty.The doctor’s prediction was fulfilled. Kitty returned home to Russiacured. She was not so gay and thoughtless as before, but she was serene. HerMoscow troubles had become a memory to her.PART THREEChapter 1Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev wanted a rest from mental work, and instead ofgoing abroad as he usually did, he came towards the end of May to stay in thecountry with his brother. In his judgment the best sort of life was a countrylife. He had come now to enjoy such a life at his brother’s. KonstantinLevin was very glad to have him, especially as he did not expect his brotherNikolay that summer. But in spite of his affection and respect for SergeyIvanovitch, Konstantin Levin was uncomfortable with his brother in the country.It made him uncomfortable, and it positively annoyed him to see hisbrother’s attitude to the country. To Konstantin Levin the country wasthe background of life, that is of pleasures, endeavors, labor. To SergeyIvanovitch the country meant on one hand rest from work, on the other avaluable antidote to the corrupt influences of town, which he took withsatisfaction and a sense of its utility. To Konstantin Levin the country wasgood first because it afforded a field for labor, of the usefulness of whichthere could be no doubt. To Sergey Ivanovitch the country was particularlygood, because there it was possible and fitting to do nothing. Moreover, SergeyIvanovitch’s attitude to the peasants rather piqued Konstantin. SergeyIvanovitch used to say that he knew and liked the peasantry, and he oftentalked to the peasants, which he knew how to do without affectation orcondescension, and from every such conversation he would deduce generalconclusions in favor of the peasantry and in confirmation of his knowing them.Konstantin Levin did not like such an attitude to the peasants. To Konstantinthe peasant was simply the chief partner in their common labor, and in spite ofall the respect and the love, almost like that of kinship, he had for thepeasant—sucked in probably, as he said himself, with the milk of hispeasant nurse—still as a fellow-worker with him, while sometimesenthusiastic over the vigor, gentleness, and justice of these men, he was veryoften, when their common labors called for other qualities, exasperated withthe peasant for his carelessness, lack of method, drunkenness, and lying. If hehad been asked whether he liked or didn’t like the peasants, KonstantinLevin would have been absolutely at a loss what to reply. He liked and did notlike the peasants, just as he liked and did not like men in general. Of course,being a good-hearted man, he liked men rather than he disliked them, and so toowith the peasants. But like or dislike “the people” as somethingapart he could not, not only because he lived with “the people,”and all his interests were bound up with theirs, but also because he regardedhimself as a part of “the people,” did not see any specialqualities or failings distinguishing himself and “the people,” andcould not contrast himself with them. Moreover, although he had lived so longin the closest relations with the peasants, as farmer and arbitrator, and whatwas more, as adviser (the peasants trusted him, and for thirty miles round theywould come to ask his advice), he had no definite views of “thepeople,” and would have been as much at a loss to answer the questionwhether he knew “the people” as the question whether he liked them.For him to say he knew the peasantry would have been the same as to say he knewmen. He was continually watching and getting to know people of all sorts, andamong them peasants, whom he regarded as good and interesting people, and hewas continually observing new points in them, altering his former views of themand forming new ones. With Sergey Ivanovitch it was quite the contrary. Just ashe liked and praised a country life in comparison with the life he did notlike, so too he liked the peasantry in contradistinction to the class of men hedid not like, and so too he knew the peasantry as something distinct from andopposed to men generally. In his methodical brain there were distinctlyformulated certain aspects of peasant life, deduced partly from that lifeitself, but chiefly from contrast with other modes of life. He never changedhis opinion of the peasantry and his sympathetic attitude towards them.In the discussions that arose between the brothers on their views of thepeasantry, Sergey Ivanovitch always got the better of his brother, preciselybecause Sergey Ivanovitch had definite ideas about the peasant—hischaracter, his qualities, and his tastes. Konstantin Levin had no definite andunalterable idea on the subject, and so in their arguments Konstantin wasreadily convicted of contradicting himself.In Sergey Ivanovitch’s eyes his younger brother was a capital fellow,with his heart in the right place (as he expressed it in French), butwith a mind which, though fairly quick, was too much influenced by theimpressions of the moment, and consequently filled with contradictions. Withall the condescension of an elder brother he sometimes explained to him thetrue import of things, but he derived little satisfaction from arguing with himbecause he got the better of him too easily.Konstantin Levin regarded his brother as a man of immense intellect andculture, as generous in the highest sense of the word, and possessed of aspecial faculty for working for the public good. But in the depths of hisheart, the older he became, and the more intimately he knew his brother, themore and more frequently the thought struck him that this faculty of workingfor the public good, of which he felt himself utterly devoid, was possibly notso much a quality as a lack of something—not a lack of good, honest,noble desires and tastes, but a lack of vital force, of what is called heart,of that impulse which drives a man to choose someone out of the innumerablepaths of life, and to care only for that one. The better he knew his brother,the more he noticed that Sergey Ivanovitch, and many other people who workedfor the public welfare, were not led by an impulse of the heart to care for thepublic good, but reasoned from intellectual considerations that it was a rightthing to take interest in public affairs, and consequently took interest inthem. Levin was confirmed in this generalization by observing that his brotherdid not take questions affecting the public welfare or the question of theimmortality of the soul a bit more to heart than he did chess problems, or theingenious construction of a new machine.Besides this, Konstantin Levin was not at his ease with his brother, because insummer in the country Levin was continually busy with work on the land, and thelong summer day was not long enough for him to get through all he had to do,while Sergey Ivanovitch was taking a holiday. But though he was taking aholiday now, that is to say, he was doing no writing, he was so used tointellectual activity that he liked to put into concise and eloquent shape theideas that occurred to him, and liked to have someone to listen to him. Hismost usual and natural listener was his brother. And so in spite of thefriendliness and directness of their relations, Konstantin felt an awkwardnessin leaving him alone. Sergey Ivanovitch liked to stretch himself on the grassin the sun, and to lie so, basking and chatting lazily.“You wouldn’t believe,” he would say to his brother,“what a pleasure this rural laziness is to me. Not an idea in one’sbrain, as empty as a drum!”But Konstantin Levin found it dull sitting and listening to him, especiallywhen he knew that while he was away they would be carting dung onto the fieldsnot ploughed ready for it, and heaping it all up anyhow; and would not screwthe shares in the ploughs, but would let them come off and then say that thenew ploughs were a silly invention, and there was nothing like the oldAndreevna plough, and so on.“Come, you’ve done enough trudging about in the heat,” SergeyIvanovitch would say to him.“No, I must just run round to the counting-house for a minute,”Levin would answer, and he would run off to the fields.Chapter 2Early in June it happened that Agafea Mihalovna, the old nurse and housekeeper,in carrying to the cellar a jar of mushrooms she had just pickled, slipped,fell, and sprained her wrist. The district doctor, a talkative young medicalstudent, who had just finished his studies, came to see her. He examined thewrist, said it was not broken, was delighted at a chance of talking to thecelebrated Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev, and to show his advanced views ofthings told him all the scandal of the district, complaining of the poor stateinto which the district council had fallen. Sergey Ivanovitch listenedattentively, asked him questions, and, roused by a new listener, he talkedfluently, uttered a few keen and weighty observations, respectfully appreciatedby the young doctor, and was soon in that eager frame of mind his brother knewso well, which always, with him, followed a brilliant and eager conversation.After the departure of the doctor, he wanted to go with a fishing rod to theriver. Sergey Ivanovitch was fond of angling, and was, it seemed, proud ofbeing able to care for such a stupid occupation.Konstantin Levin, whose presence was needed in the plough land and meadows, hadcome to take his brother in the trap.It was that time of the year, the turning-point of summer, when the crops ofthe present year are a certainty, when one begins to think of the sowing fornext year, and the mowing is at hand; when the rye is all in ear, though itsears are still light, not yet full, and it waves in gray-green billows in thewind; when the green oats, with tufts of yellow grass scattered here and thereamong it, droop irregularly over the late-sown fields; when the early buckwheatis already out and hiding the ground; when the fallow lands, trodden hard asstone by the cattle, are half ploughed over, with paths left untouched by theplough; when from the dry dung-heaps carted onto the fields there comes atsunset a smell of manure mixed with meadow-sweet, and on the low-lying landsthe riverside meadows are a thick sea of grass waiting for the mowing, withblackened heaps of the stalks of sorrel among it.It was the time when there comes a brief pause in the toil of the fields beforethe beginning of the labors of harvest—every year recurring, every yearstraining every nerve of the peasants. The crop was a splendid one, and bright,hot summer days had set in with short, dewy nights.The brothers had to drive through the woods to reach the meadows. SergeyIvanovitch was all the while admiring the beauty of the woods, which were atangled mass of leaves, pointing out to his brother now an old lime tree on thepoint of flowering, dark on the shady side, and brightly spotted with yellowstipules, now the young shoots of this year’s saplings brilliant withemerald. Konstantin Levin did not like talking and hearing about the beauty ofnature. Words for him took away the beauty of what he saw. He assented to whathis brother said, but he could not help beginning to think of other things.When they came out of the woods, all his attention was engrossed by the view ofthe fallow land on the upland, in parts yellow with grass, in parts trampledand checkered with furrows, in parts dotted with ridges of dung, and in partseven ploughed. A string of carts was moving across it. Levin counted the carts,and was pleased that all that were wanted had been brought, and at the sight ofthe meadows his thoughts passed to the mowing. He always felt something specialmoving him to the quick at the hay-making. On reaching the meadow Levin stoppedthe horse.The morning dew was still lying on the thick undergrowth of the grass, and thathe might not get his feet wet, Sergey Ivanovitch asked his brother to drive himin the trap up to the willow tree from which the carp was caught. Sorry asKonstantin Levin was to crush down his mowing grass, he drove him into themeadow. The high grass softly turned about the wheels and the horse’slegs, leaving its seeds clinging to the wet axles and spokes of the wheels. Hisbrother seated himself under a bush, arranging his tackle, while Levin led thehorse away, fastened him up, and walked into the vast gray-green sea of grassunstirred by the wind. The silky grass with its ripe seeds came almost to hiswaist in the dampest spots.Crossing the meadow, Konstantin Levin came out onto the road, and met an oldman with a swollen eye, carrying a skep on his shoulder.“What? taken a stray swarm, Fomitch?” he asked.“No, indeed, Konstantin Dmitrich! All we can do to keep our own! This isthe second swarm that has flown away.... Luckily the lads caught them. Theywere ploughing your field. They unyoked the horses and galloped afterthem.”“Well, what do you say, Fomitch—start mowing or wait a bit?”“Eh, well. Our way’s to wait till St. Peter’s Day. But youalways mow sooner. Well, to be sure, please God, the hay’s good.There’ll be plenty for the beasts.”“What do you think about the weather?”“That’s in God’s hands. Maybe it will be fine.”Levin went up to his brother.Sergey Ivanovitch had caught nothing, but he was not bored, and seemed in themost cheerful frame of mind. Levin saw that, stimulated by his conversationwith the doctor, he wanted to talk. Levin, on the other hand, would have likedto get home as soon as possible to give orders about getting together themowers for next day, and to set at rest his doubts about the mowing, whichgreatly absorbed him.“Well, let’s be going,” he said.“Why be in such a hurry? Let’s stay a little. But how wet you are!Even though one catches nothing, it’s nice. That’s the best thingabout every part of sport, that one has to do with nature. How exquisite thissteely water is!” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “These riverside banksalways remind me of the riddle—do you know it? ‘The grass says tothe water: we quiver and we quiver.’”“I don’t know the riddle,” answered Levin wearily.Chapter 3“Do you know, I’ve been thinking about you,” said SergeyIvanovitch. “It’s beyond everything what’s being done in thedistrict, according to what this doctor tells me. He’s a very intelligentfellow. And as I’ve told you before, I tell you again: it’s notright for you not to go to the meetings, and altogether to keep out of thedistrict business. If decent people won’t go into it, of courseit’s bound to go all wrong. We pay the money, and it all goes insalaries, and there are no schools, nor district nurses, nor midwives, nordrugstores—nothing.”“Well, I did try, you know,” Levin said slowly and unwillingly.“I can’t! and so there’s no help for it.”“But why can’t you? I must own I can’t make it out.Indifference, incapacity—I won’t admit; surely it’s notsimply laziness?”“None of those things. I’ve tried, and I see I can donothing,” said Levin.He had hardly grasped what his brother was saying. Looking towards the ploughland across the river, he made out something black, but he could notdistinguish whether it was a horse or the bailiff on horseback.“Why is it you can do nothing? You made an attempt and didn’tsucceed, as you think, and you give in. How can you have so littleself-respect?”“Self-respect!” said Levin, stung to the quick by hisbrother’s words; “I don’t understand. If they’d told meat college that other people understood the integral calculus, and Ididn’t, then pride would have come in. But in this case one wants firstto be convinced that one has certain qualifications for this sort of business,and especially that all this business is of great importance.”“What! do you mean to say it’s not of importance?” saidSergey Ivanovitch, stung to the quick too at his brother’s consideringanything of no importance that interested him, and still more at his obviouslypaying little attention to what he was saying.“I don’t think it important; it does not take hold of me, Ican’t help it,” answered Levin, making out that what he saw was thebailiff, and that the bailiff seemed to be letting the peasants go off theploughed land. They were turning the plough over. “Can they have finishedploughing?” he wondered.“Come, really though,” said the elder brother, with a frown on hishandsome, clever face, “there’s a limit to everything. It’svery well to be original and genuine, and to dislike everythingconventional—I know all about that; but really, what you’re sayingeither has no meaning, or it has a very wrong meaning. How can you think it amatter of no importance whether the peasant, whom you love as youassert....”“I never did assert it,” thought Konstantin Levin.“...dies without help? The ignorant peasant-women starve the children,and the people stagnate in darkness, and are helpless in the hands of everyvillage clerk, while you have at your disposal a means of helping them, anddon’t help them because to your mind it’s of no importance.”And Sergey Ivanovitch put before him the alternative: either you are soundeveloped that you can’t see all that you can do, or you won’tsacrifice your ease, your vanity, or whatever it is, to do it.Konstantin Levin felt that there was no course open to him but to submit, or toconfess to a lack of zeal for the public good. And this mortified him and hurthis feelings.“It’s both,” he said resolutely: “I don’t seethat it was possible....”“What! was it impossible, if the money were properly laid out, to providemedical aid?”“Impossible, as it seems to me.... For the three thousand square miles ofour district, what with our thaws, and the storms, and the work in the fields,I don’t see how it is possible to provide medical aid all over. Andbesides, I don’t believe in medicine.”“Oh, well, that’s unfair ... I can quote to you thousands ofinstances.... But the schools, anyway.”“Why have schools?”“What do you mean? Can there be two opinions of the advantage ofeducation? If it’s a good thing for you, it’s a good thing foreveryone.”Konstantin Levin felt himself morally pinned against a wall, and so he got hot,and unconsciously blurted out the chief cause of his indifference to publicbusiness.“Perhaps it may all be very good; but why should I worry myself aboutestablishing dispensaries which I shall never make use of, and schools to whichI shall never send my children, to which even the peasants don’t want tosend their children, and to which I’ve no very firm faith that they oughtto send them?” said he.Sergey Ivanovitch was for a minute surprised at this unexpected view of thesubject; but he promptly made a new plan of attack. He was silent for a little,drew out a hook, threw it in again, and turned to his brother smiling.“Come, now.... In the first place, the dispensary is needed. We ourselvessent for the district doctor for Agafea Mihalovna.”“Oh, well, but I fancy her wrist will never be straight again.”“That remains to be proved.... Next, the peasant who can read and writeis as a workman of more use and value to you.”“No, you can ask anyone you like,” Konstantin Levin answered withdecision, “the man that can read and write is much inferior as a workman.And mending the highroads is an impossibility; and as soon as they put upbridges they’re stolen.”“Still, that’s not the point,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,frowning. He disliked contradiction, and still more, arguments that werecontinually skipping from one thing to another, introducing new anddisconnected points, so that there was no knowing to which to reply. “Doyou admit that education is a benefit for the people?”“Yes, I admit it,” said Levin without thinking, and he wasconscious immediately that he had said what he did not think. He felt that ifhe admitted that, it would be proved that he had been talking meaninglessrubbish. How it would be proved he could not tell, but he knew that this wouldinevitably be logically proved to him, and he awaited the proofs.The argument turned out to be far simpler than he had expected.“If you admit that it is a benefit,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,“then, as an honest man, you cannot help caring about it and sympathizingwith the movement, and so wishing to work for it.”“But I still do not admit this movement to be just,” saidKonstantin Levin, reddening a little.“What! But you said just now....”“That’s to say, I don’t admit it’s being either good orpossible.”“That you can’t tell without making the trial.”“Well, supposing that’s so,” said Levin, though he did notsuppose so at all, “supposing that is so, still I don’t see, allthe same, what I’m to worry myself about it for.”“How so?”“No; since we are talking, explain it to me from the philosophical pointof view,” said Levin.“I can’t see where philosophy comes in,” said SergeyIvanovitch, in a tone, Levin fancied, as though he did not admit hisbrother’s right to talk about philosophy. And that irritated Levin.“I’ll tell you, then,” he said with heat, “I imaginethe mainspring of all our actions is, after all, self-interest. Now in thelocal institutions I, as a nobleman, see nothing that could conduce to myprosperity, and the roads are not better and could not be better; my horsescarry me well enough over bad ones. Doctors and dispensaries are no use to me.An arbitrator of disputes is no use to me. I never appeal to him, and nevershall appeal to him. The schools are no good to me, but positively harmful, asI told you. For me the district institutions simply mean the liability to payfourpence halfpenny for every three acres, to drive into the town, sleep withbugs, and listen to all sorts of idiocy and loathsomeness, and self-interestoffers me no inducement.”“Excuse me,” Sergey Ivanovitch interposed with a smile,“self-interest did not induce us to work for the emancipation of theserfs, but we did work for it.”“No!” Konstantin Levin broke in with still greater heat; “theemancipation of the serfs was a different matter. There self-interest did comein. One longed to throw off that yoke that crushed us, all decent people amongus. But to be a town councilor and discuss how many dustmen are needed, and howchimneys shall be constructed in the town in which I don’t live—toserve on a jury and try a peasant who’s stolen a flitch of bacon, andlisten for six hours at a stretch to all sorts of jabber from the counsel forthe defense and the prosecution, and the president cross-examining my oldhalf-witted Alioshka, ‘Do you admit, prisoner in the dock, the fact ofthe removal of the bacon?’ ‘Eh?’”Konstantin Levin had warmed to his subject, and began mimicking the presidentand the half-witted Alioshka: it seemed to him that it was all to the point.But Sergey Ivanovitch shrugged his shoulders.“Well, what do you mean to say, then?”“I simply mean to say that those rights that touch me ... my interest, Ishall always defend to the best of my ability; that when they made raids on usstudents, and the police read our letters, I was ready to defend those rightsto the utmost, to defend my rights to education and freedom. I can understandcompulsory military service, which affects my children, my brothers, andmyself, I am ready to deliberate on what concerns me; but deliberating on howto spend forty thousand roubles of district council money, or judging thehalf-witted Alioshka—I don’t understand, and I can’t doit.”Konstantin Levin spoke as though the floodgates of his speech had burst open.Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.“But tomorrow it’ll be your turn to be tried; would it have suitedyour tastes better to be tried in the old criminal tribunal?”“I’m not going to be tried. I shan’t murder anybody, andI’ve no need of it. Well, I tell you what,” he went on, flying offagain to a subject quite beside the point, “our district self-governmentand all the rest of it—it’s just like the birch branches we stickin the ground on Trinity Day, for instance, to look like a copse which hasgrown up of itself in Europe, and I can’t gush over these birch branchesand believe in them.”Sergey Ivanovitch merely shrugged his shoulders, as though to express hiswonder how the birch branches had come into their argument at that point,though he did really understand at once what his brother meant.“Excuse me, but you know one really can’t argue in that way,”he observed.But Konstantin Levin wanted to justify himself for the failing, of which he wasconscious, of lack of zeal for the public welfare, and he went on.“I imagine,” he said, “that no sort of activity is likely tobe lasting if it is not founded on self-interest, that’s a universalprinciple, a philosophical principle,” he said, repeating the word“philosophical” with determination, as though wishing to show thathe had as much right as anyone else to talk of philosophy.Sergey Ivanovitch smiled. “He too has a philosophy of his own at theservice of his natural tendencies,” he thought.“Come, you’d better let philosophy alone,” he said.“The chief problem of the philosophy of all ages consists just in findingthe indispensable connection which exists between individual and socialinterests. But that’s not to the point; what is to the point is acorrection I must make in your comparison. The birches are not simply stuck in,but some are sown and some are planted, and one must deal carefully with them.It’s only those peoples that have an intuitive sense of what’s ofimportance and significance in their institutions, and know how to value them,that have a future before them—it’s only those peoples that one cantruly call historical.”And Sergey Ivanovitch carried the subject into the regions of philosophicalhistory where Konstantin Levin could not follow him, and showed him all theincorrectness of his view.“As for your dislike of it, excuse my saying so, that’s simply ourRussian sloth and old serf-owner’s ways, and I’m convinced that inyou it’s a temporary error and will pass.”Konstantin was silent. He felt himself vanquished on all sides, but he felt atthe same time that what he wanted to say was unintelligible to his brother.Only he could not make up his mind whether it was unintelligible because he wasnot capable of expressing his meaning clearly, or because his brother would notor could not understand him. But he did not pursue the speculation, and withoutreplying, he fell to musing on a quite different and personal matter.Sergey Ivanovitch wound up the last line, untied the horse, and they drove off.Chapter 4The personal matter that absorbed Levin during his conversation with hisbrother was this. Once in a previous year he had gone to look at the mowing,and being made very angry by the bailiff he had recourse to his favorite meansfor regaining his temper,—he took a scythe from a peasant and beganmowing.He liked the work so much that he had several times tried his hand at mowingsince. He had cut the whole of the meadow in front of his house, and this yearever since the early spring he had cherished a plan for mowing for whole daystogether with the peasants. Ever since his brother’s arrival, he had beenin doubt whether to mow or not. He was loath to leave his brother alone all daylong, and he was afraid his brother would laugh at him about it. But as hedrove into the meadow, and recalled the sensations of mowing, he came neardeciding that he would go mowing. After the irritating discussion with hisbrother, he pondered over this intention again.“I must have physical exercise, or my temper’ll certainly beruined,” he thought, and he determined he would go mowing, howeverawkward he might feel about it with his brother or the peasants.Towards evening Konstantin Levin went to his counting house, gave directions asto the work to be done, and sent about the village to summon the mowers for themorrow, to cut the hay in Kalinov meadow, the largest and best of his grasslands.“And send my scythe, please, to Tit, for him to set it, and bring itround tomorrow. I shall maybe do some mowing myself too,” he said, tryingnot to be embarrassed.The bailiff smiled and said: “Yes, sir.”At tea the same evening Levin said to his brother:“I fancy the fine weather will last. Tomorrow I shall startmowing.”“I’m so fond of that form of field labor,” said SergeyIvanovitch.“I’m awfully fond of it. I sometimes mow myself with the peasants,and tomorrow I want to try mowing the whole day.”Sergey Ivanovitch lifted his head, and looked with interest at his brother.“How do you mean? Just like one of the peasants, all day long?”“Yes, it’s very pleasant,” said Levin.“It’s splendid as exercise, only you’ll hardly be able tostand it,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, without a shade of irony.“I’ve tried it. It’s hard work at first, but you get into it.I dare say I shall manage to keep it up....”“Really! what an idea! But tell me, how do the peasants look at it? Isuppose they laugh in their sleeves at their master’s being such a queerfish?”“No, I don’t think so; but it’s so delightful, and at thesame time such hard work, that one has no time to think about it.”“But how will you do about dining with them? To send you a bottle ofLafitte and roast turkey out there would be a little awkward.”“No, I’ll simply come home at the time of their noondayrest.”Next morning Konstantin Levin got up earlier than usual, but he was detainedgiving directions on the farm, and when he reached the mowing grass the mowerswere already at their second row.From the uplands he could get a view of the shaded cut part of the meadowbelow, with its grayish ridges of cut grass, and the black heaps of coats,taken off by the mowers at the place from which they had started cutting.Gradually, as he rode towards the meadow, the peasants came into sight, some incoats, some in their shirts mowing, one behind another in a long string,swinging their scythes differently. He counted forty-two of them.They were mowing slowly over the uneven, low-lying parts of the meadow, wherethere had been an old dam. Levin recognized some of his own men. Here was oldYermil in a very long white smock, bending forward to swing a scythe; there wasa young fellow, Vaska, who had been a coachman of Levin’s, taking everyrow with a wide sweep. Here, too, was Tit, Levin’s preceptor in the artof mowing, a thin little peasant. He was in front of all, and cut his wide rowwithout bending, as though playing with the scythe.Levin got off his mare, and fastening her up by the roadside went to meet Tit,who took a second scythe out of a bush and gave it to him.“It’s ready, sir; it’s like a razor, cuts of itself,”said Tit, taking off his cap with a smile and giving him the scythe.Levin took the scythe, and began trying it. As they finished their rows, themowers, hot and good-humored, came out into the road one after another, and,laughing a little, greeted the master. They all stared at him, but no one madeany remark, till a tall old man, with a wrinkled, beardless face, wearing ashort sheepskin jacket, came out into the road and accosted him.“Look’ee now, master, once take hold of the rope there’s noletting it go!” he said, and Levin heard smothered laughter among themowers.“I’ll try not to let it go,” he said, taking his stand behindTit, and waiting for the time to begin.“Mind’ee,” repeated the old man.Tit made room, and Levin started behind him. The grass was short close to theroad, and Levin, who had not done any mowing for a long while, and wasdisconcerted by the eyes fastened upon him, cut badly for the first moments,though he swung his scythe vigorously. Behind him he heard voices:“It’s not set right; handle’s too high; see how he has tostoop to it,” said one.“Press more on the heel,” said another.“Never mind, he’ll get on all right,” the old man resumed.“He’s made a start.... You swing it too wide, you’ll tireyourself out.... The master, sure, does his best for himself! But see the grassmissed out! For such work us fellows would catch it!”The grass became softer, and Levin, listening without answering, followed Tit,trying to do the best he could. They moved a hundred paces. Tit kept moving on,without stopping, not showing the slightest weariness, but Levin was alreadybeginning to be afraid he would not be able to keep it up: he was so tired.He felt as he swung his scythe that he was at the very end of his strength, andwas making up his mind to ask Tit to stop. But at that very moment Tit stoppedof his own accord, and stooping down picked up some grass, rubbed his scythe,and began whetting it. Levin straightened himself, and drawing a deep breathlooked round. Behind him came a peasant, and he too was evidently tired, for hestopped at once without waiting to mow up to Levin, and began whetting hisscythe. Tit sharpened his scythe and Levin’s, and they went on. The nexttime it was just the same. Tit moved on with sweep after sweep of his scythe,not stopping nor showing signs of weariness. Levin followed him, trying not toget left behind, and he found it harder and harder: the moment came when hefelt he had no strength left, but at that very moment Tit stopped and whettedthe scythes.So they mowed the first row. And this long row seemed particularly hard work toLevin; but when the end was reached and Tit, shouldering his scythe, began withdeliberate stride returning on the tracks left by his heels in the cut grass,and Levin walked back in the same way over the space he had cut, in spite ofthe sweat that ran in streams over his face and fell in drops down his nose,and drenched his back as though he had been soaked in water, he felt veryhappy. What delighted him particularly was that now he knew he would be able tohold out.His pleasure was only disturbed by his row not being well cut. “I willswing less with my arm and more with my whole body,” he thought,comparing Tit’s row, which looked as if it had been cut with a line, withhis own unevenly and irregularly lying grass.The first row, as Levin noticed, Tit had mowed specially quickly, probablywishing to put his master to the test, and the row happened to be a long one.The next rows were easier, but still Levin had to strain every nerve not todrop behind the peasants.He thought of nothing, wished for nothing, but not to be left behind thepeasants, and to do his work as well as possible. He heard nothing but theswish of scythes, and saw before him Tit’s upright figure mowing away,the crescent-shaped curve of the cut grass, the grass and flower heads slowlyand rhythmically falling before the blade of his scythe, and ahead of him theend of the row, where would come the rest.Suddenly, in the midst of his toil, without understanding what it was or whenceit came, he felt a pleasant sensation of chill on his hot, moist shoulders. Heglanced at the sky in the interval for whetting the scythes. A heavy, loweringstorm cloud had blown up, and big raindrops were falling. Some of the peasantswent to their coats and put them on; others—just like Levinhimself—merely shrugged their shoulders, enjoying the pleasant coolnessof it.Another row, and yet another row, followed—long rows and short rows, withgood grass and with poor grass. Levin lost all sense of time, and could nothave told whether it was late or early now. A change began to come over hiswork, which gave him immense satisfaction. In the midst of his toil there weremoments during which he forgot what he was doing, and it came all easy to him,and at those same moments his row was almost as smooth and well cut asTit’s. But so soon as he recollected what he was doing, and began tryingto do better, he was at once conscious of all the difficulty of his task, andthe row was badly mown.On finishing yet another row he would have gone back to the top of the meadowagain to begin the next, but Tit stopped, and going up to the old man saidsomething in a low voice to him. They both looked at the sun. “What arethey talking about, and why doesn’t he go back?” thought Levin, notguessing that the peasants had been mowing no less than four hours withoutstopping, and it was time for their lunch.“Lunch, sir,” said the old man.“Is it really time? That’s right; lunch, then.”Levin gave his scythe to Tit, and together with the peasants, who were crossingthe long stretch of mown grass, slightly sprinkled with rain, to get theirbread from the heap of coats, he went towards his house. Only then he suddenlyawoke to the fact that he had been wrong about the weather and the rain wasdrenching his hay.“The hay will be spoiled,” he said.“Not a bit of it, sir; mow in the rain, and you’ll rake in fineweather!” said the old man.Levin untied his horse and rode home to his coffee. Sergey Ivanovitch was onlyjust getting up. When he had drunk his coffee, Levin rode back again to themowing before Sergey Ivanovitch had had time to dress and come down to thedining-room.Chapter 5After lunch Levin was not in the same place in the string of mowers as before,but stood between the old man who had accosted him jocosely, and now invitedhim to be his neighbor, and a young peasant, who had only been married in theautumn, and who was mowing this summer for the first time.The old man, holding himself erect, moved in front, with his feet turned out,taking long, regular strides, and with a precise and regular action whichseemed to cost him no more effort than swinging one’s arms in walking, asthough it were in play, he laid down the high, even row of grass. It was asthough it were not he but the sharp scythe of itself swishing through the juicygrass.Behind Levin came the lad Mishka. His pretty, boyish face, with a twist offresh grass bound round his hair, was all working with effort; but wheneveranyone looked at him he smiled. He would clearly have died sooner than own itwas hard work for him.Levin kept between them. In the very heat of the day the mowing did not seemsuch hard work to him. The perspiration with which he was drenched cooled him,while the sun, that burned his back, his head, and his arms, bare to the elbow,gave a vigor and dogged energy to his labor; and more and more often now camethose moments of unconsciousness, when it was possible not to think what onewas doing. The scythe cut of itself. These were happy moments. Still moredelightful were the moments when they reached the stream where the rows ended,and the old man rubbed his scythe with the wet, thick grass, rinsed its bladein the fresh water of the stream, ladled out a little in a tin dipper, andoffered Levin a drink.“What do you say to my home-brew, eh? Good, eh?” said he, winking.And truly Levin had never drunk any liquor so good as this warm water withgreen bits floating in it, and a taste of rust from the tin dipper. Andimmediately after this came the delicious, slow saunter, with his hand on thescythe, during which he could wipe away the streaming sweat, take deep breathsof air, and look about at the long string of mowers and at what was happeningaround in the forest and the country.The longer Levin mowed, the oftener he felt the moments of unconsciousness inwhich it seemed not his hands that swung the scythe, but the scythe mowing ofitself, a body full of life and consciousness of its own, and as though bymagic, without thinking of it, the work turned out regular and well-finished ofitself. These were the most blissful moments.It was only hard work when he had to break off the motion, which had becomeunconscious, and to think; when he had to mow round a hillock or a tuft ofsorrel. The old man did this easily. When a hillock came he changed his action,and at one time with the heel, and at another with the tip of his scythe,clipped the hillock round both sides with short strokes. And while he did thishe kept looking about and watching what came into his view: at one moment hepicked a wild berry and ate it or offered it to Levin, then he flung away atwig with the blade of the scythe, then he looked at a quail’s nest, fromwhich the bird flew just under the scythe, or caught a snake that crossed hispath, and lifting it on the scythe as though on a fork showed it to Levin andthrew it away.For both Levin and the young peasant behind him, such changes of position weredifficult. Both of them, repeating over and over again the same strainedmovement, were in a perfect frenzy of toil, and were incapable of shiftingtheir position and at the same time watching what was before them.Levin did not notice how time was passing. If he had been asked how long he hadbeen working he would have said half an hour—and it was getting on fordinner time. As they were walking back over the cut grass, the old man calledLevin’s attention to the little girls and boys who were coming fromdifferent directions, hardly visible through the long grass, and along the roadtowards the mowers, carrying sacks of bread dragging at their little hands andpitchers of the sour rye-beer, with cloths wrapped round them.“Look’ee, the little emmets crawling!” he said, pointing tothem, and he shaded his eyes with his hand to look at the sun. They mowed twomore rows; the old man stopped.“Come, master, dinner time!” he said briskly. And on reaching thestream the mowers moved off across the lines of cut grass towards their pile ofcoats, where the children who had brought their dinners were sitting waitingfor them. The peasants gathered into groups—those further away under acart, those nearer under a willow bush.Levin sat down by them; he felt disinclined to go away.All constraint with the master had disappeared long ago. The peasants got readyfor dinner. Some washed, the young lads bathed in the stream, others made aplace comfortable for a rest, untied their sacks of bread, and uncovered thepitchers of rye-beer. The old man crumbled up some bread in a cup, stirred itwith the handle of a spoon, poured water on it from the dipper, broke up somemore bread, and having seasoned it with salt, he turned to the east to say hisprayer.“Come, master, taste my sop,” said he, kneeling down before thecup.The sop was so good that Levin gave up the idea of going home. He dined withthe old man, and talked to him about his family affairs, taking the keenestinterest in them, and told him about his own affairs and all the circumstancesthat could be of interest to the old man. He felt much nearer to him than tohis brother, and could not help smiling at the affection he felt for this man.When the old man got up again, said his prayer, and lay down under a bush,putting some grass under his head for a pillow, Levin did the same, and inspite of the clinging flies that were so persistent in the sunshine, and themidges that tickled his hot face and body, he fell asleep at once and onlywaked when the sun had passed to the other side of the bush and reached him.The old man had been awake a long while, and was sitting up whetting thescythes of the younger lads.Levin looked about him and hardly recognized the place, everything was sochanged. The immense stretch of meadow had been mown and was sparkling with apeculiar fresh brilliance, with its lines of already sweet-smelling grass inthe slanting rays of the evening sun. And the bushes about the river had beencut down, and the river itself, not visible before, now gleaming like steel inits bends, and the moving, ascending, peasants, and the sharp wall of grass ofthe unmown part of the meadow, and the hawks hovering over the strippedmeadow—all was perfectly new. Raising himself, Levin began consideringhow much had been cut and how much more could still be done that day.The work done was exceptionally much for forty-two men. They had cut the wholeof the big meadow, which had, in the years of serf labor, taken thirty scythestwo days to mow. Only the corners remained to do, where the rows were short.But Levin felt a longing to get as much mowing done that day as possible, andwas vexed with the sun sinking so quickly in the sky. He felt no weariness; allhe wanted was to get his work done more and more quickly and as much done aspossible.“Could you cut Mashkin Upland too?—what do you think?” hesaid to the old man.“As God wills, the sun’s not high. A little vodka for thelads?”At the afternoon rest, when they were sitting down again, and those who smokedhad lighted their pipes, the old man told the men that “MashkinUpland’s to be cut—there’ll be some vodka.”“Why not cut it? Come on, Tit! We’ll look sharp! We can eat atnight. Come on!” cried voices, and eating up their bread, the mowers wentback to work.“Come, lads, keep it up!” said Tit, and ran on ahead almost at atrot.“Get along, get along!” said the old man, hurrying after him andeasily overtaking him, “I’ll mow you down, look out!”And young and old mowed away, as though they were racing with one another. Buthowever fast they worked, they did not spoil the grass, and the rows were laidjust as neatly and exactly. The little piece left uncut in the corner was mownin five minutes. The last of the mowers were just ending their rows while theforemost snatched up their coats onto their shoulders, and crossed the roadtowards Mashkin Upland.The sun was already sinking into the trees when they went with their jinglingdippers into the wooded ravine of Mashkin Upland. The grass was up to theirwaists in the middle of the hollow, soft, tender, and feathery, spotted hereand there among the trees with wild heart’s-ease.After a brief consultation—whether to take the rows lengthwise ordiagonally—Prohor Yermilin, also a renowned mower, a huge, black-hairedpeasant, went on ahead. He went up to the top, turned back again and startedmowing, and they all proceeded to form in line behind him, going downhillthrough the hollow and uphill right up to the edge of the forest. The sun sankbehind the forest. The dew was falling by now; the mowers were in the sun onlyon the hillside, but below, where a mist was rising, and on the opposite side,they mowed into the fresh, dewy shade. The work went rapidly. The grass cutwith a juicy sound, and was at once laid in high, fragrant rows. The mowersfrom all sides, brought closer together in the short row, kept urging oneanother on to the sound of jingling dippers and clanging scythes, and the hissof the whetstones sharpening them, and good-humored shouts.Levin still kept between the young peasant and the old man. The old man, whohad put on his short sheepskin jacket, was just as good-humored, jocose, andfree in his movements. Among the trees they were continually cutting with theirscythes the so-called “birch mushrooms,” swollen fat in thesucculent grass. But the old man bent down every time he came across amushroom, picked it up and put it in his bosom. “Another present for myold woman,” he said as he did so.Easy as it was to mow the wet, soft grass, it was hard work going up and downthe steep sides of the ravine. But this did not trouble the old man. Swinginghis scythe just as ever, and moving his feet in their big, plaited shoes withfirm, little steps, he climbed slowly up the steep place, and though hisbreeches hanging out below his smock, and his whole frame trembled with effort,he did not miss one blade of grass or one mushroom on his way, and kept makingjokes with the peasants and Levin. Levin walked after him and often thought hemust fall, as he climbed with a scythe up a steep cliff where it would havebeen hard work to clamber without anything. But he climbed up and did what hehad to do. He felt as though some external force were moving him.Chapter 6Mashkin Upland was mown, the last row finished, the peasants had put on theircoats and were gaily trudging home. Levin got on his horse and, partingregretfully from the peasants, rode homewards. On the hillside he looked back;he could not see them in the mist that had risen from the valley; he could onlyhear rough, good-humored voices, laughter, and the sound of clanking scythes.Sergey Ivanovitch had long ago finished dinner, and was drinking iced lemon andwater in his own room, looking through the reviews and papers which he had onlyjust received by post, when Levin rushed into the room, talking merrily, withhis wet and matted hair sticking to his forehead, and his back and chest grimedand moist.“We mowed the whole meadow! Oh, it is nice, delicious! And how have youbeen getting on?” said Levin, completely forgetting the disagreeableconversation of the previous day.“Mercy! what do you look like!” said Sergey Ivanovitch, for thefirst moment looking round with some dissatisfaction. “And the door, doshut the door!” he cried. “You must have let in a dozen atleast.”Sergey Ivanovitch could not endure flies, and in his own room he never openedthe window except at night, and carefully kept the door shut.“Not one, on my honor. But if I have, I’ll catch them. Youwouldn’t believe what a pleasure it is! How have you spent theday?”“Very well. But have you really been mowing the whole day? I expectyou’re as hungry as a wolf. Kouzma has got everything ready foryou.”“No, I don’t feel hungry even. I had something to eat there. ButI’ll go and wash.”“Yes, go along, go along, and I’ll come to you directly,”said Sergey Ivanovitch, shaking his head as he looked at his brother. “Goalong, make haste,” he added smiling, and gathering up his books, heprepared to go too. He, too, felt suddenly good-humored and disinclined toleave his brother’s side. “But what did you do while it wasraining?”“Rain? Why, there was scarcely a drop. I’ll come directly. So youhad a nice day too? That’s first-rate.” And Levin went off tochange his clothes.Five minutes later the brothers met in the dining-room. Although it seemed toLevin that he was not hungry, and he sat down to dinner simply so as not tohurt Kouzma’s feelings, yet when he began to eat the dinner struck him asextraordinarily good. Sergey Ivanovitch watched him with a smile.“Oh, by the way, there’s a letter for you,” said he.“Kouzma, bring it down, please. And mind you shut the doors.”The letter was from Oblonsky. Levin read it aloud. Oblonsky wrote to him fromPetersburg: “I have had a letter from Dolly; she’s at Ergushovo,and everything seems going wrong there. Do ride over and see her, please; helpher with advice; you know all about it. She will be so glad to see you.She’s quite alone, poor thing. My mother-in-law and all of them are stillabroad.”“That’s capital! I will certainly ride over to her,” saidLevin. “Or we’ll go together. She’s such a splendid woman,isn’t she?”“They’re not far from here, then?”“Twenty-five miles. Or perhaps it is thirty. But a capital road. Capital,we’ll drive over.”“I shall be delighted,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, still smiling. Thesight of his younger brother’s appearance had immediately put him in agood humor.“Well, you have an appetite!” he said, looking at his dark-red,sunburnt face and neck bent over the plate.“Splendid! You can’t imagine what an effectual remedy it is forevery sort of foolishness. I want to enrich medicine with a new word:Arbeitskur.”“Well, but you don’t need it, I should fancy.”“No, but for all sorts of nervous invalids.”“Yes, it ought to be tried. I had meant to come to the mowing to look atyou, but it was so unbearably hot that I got no further than the forest. I satthere a little, and went on by the forest to the village, met your old nurse,and sounded her as to the peasants’ view of you. As far as I can makeout, they don’t approve of this. She said: ‘It’s not agentleman’s work.’ Altogether, I fancy that in the people’sideas there are very clear and definite notions of certain, as they call it,‘gentlemanly’ lines of action. And they don’t sanction thegentry’s moving outside bounds clearly laid down in their ideas.”“Maybe so; but anyway it’s a pleasure such as I have never known inmy life. And there’s no harm in it, you know. Is there?” answeredLevin. “I can’t help it if they don’t like it. Though I dobelieve it’s all right. Eh?”“Altogether,” pursued Sergey Ivanovitch, “you’resatisfied with your day?”“Quite satisfied. We cut the whole meadow. And such a splendid old man Imade friends with there! You can’t fancy how delightful he was!”“Well, so you’re content with your day. And so am I. First, Isolved two chess problems, and one a very pretty one—a pawn opening.I’ll show it you. And then—I thought over our conversationyesterday.”“Eh! our conversation yesterday?” said Levin, blissfully droppinghis eyelids and drawing deep breaths after finishing his dinner, and absolutelyincapable of recalling what their conversation yesterday was about.“I think you are partly right. Our difference of opinion amounts to this,that you make the mainspring self-interest, while I suppose that interest inthe common weal is bound to exist in every man of a certain degree ofadvancement. Possibly you are right too, that action founded on materialinterest would be more desirable. You are altogether, as the French say, tooprimesautière a nature; you must have intense, energetic action, ornothing.”Levin listened to his brother and did not understand a single word, and did notwant to understand. He was only afraid his brother might ask him some questionwhich would make it evident he had not heard.“So that’s what I think it is, my dear boy,” said SergeyIvanovitch, touching him on the shoulder.“Yes, of course. But, do you know? I won’t stand up for myview,” answered Levin, with a guilty, childlike smile. “Whateverwas it I was disputing about?” he wondered. “Of course, I’mright, and he’s right, and it’s all first-rate. Only I must goround to the counting house and see to things.” He got up, stretching andsmiling. Sergey Ivanovitch smiled too.“If you want to go out, let’s go together,” he said,disinclined to be parted from his brother, who seemed positively breathing outfreshness and energy. “Come, we’ll go to the counting house, if youhave to go there.”“Oh, heavens!” shouted Levin, so loudly that Sergey Ivanovitch wasquite frightened.“What, what is the matter?”“How’s Agafea Mihalovna’s hand?” said Levin, slappinghimself on the head. “I’d positively forgotten her even.”“It’s much better.”“Well, anyway I’ll run down to her. Before you’ve time to getyour hat on, I’ll be back.”And he ran downstairs, clattering with his heels like a spring-rattle.Chapter 7Stephan Arkadyevitch had gone to Petersburg to perform the most natural andessential official duty—so familiar to everyone in the governmentservice, though incomprehensible to outsiders—that duty, but for whichone could hardly be in government service, of reminding the ministry of hisexistence—and having, for the due performance of this rite, taken all theavailable cash from home, was gaily and agreeably spending his days at theraces and in the summer villas. Meanwhile Dolly and the children had moved intothe country, to cut down expenses as much as possible. She had gone toErgushovo, the estate that had been her dowry, and the one where in spring theforest had been sold. It was nearly forty miles from Levin’s Pokrovskoe.The big, old house at Ergushovo had been pulled down long ago, and the oldprince had had the lodge done up and built on to. Twenty years before, whenDolly was a child, the lodge had been roomy and comfortable, though, like alllodges, it stood sideways to the entrance avenue, and faced the south. But bynow this lodge was old and dilapidated. When Stepan Arkadyevitch had gone downin the spring to sell the forest, Dolly had begged him to look over the houseand order what repairs might be needed. Stepan Arkadyevitch, like allunfaithful husbands indeed, was very solicitous for his wife’s comfort,and he had himself looked over the house, and given instructions abouteverything that he considered necessary. What he considered necessary was tocover all the furniture with cretonne, to put up curtains, to weed the garden,to make a little bridge on the pond, and to plant flowers. But he forgot manyother essential matters, the want of which greatly distressed DaryaAlexandrovna later on.In spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s efforts to be an attentive father andhusband, he never could keep in his mind that he had a wife and children. Hehad bachelor tastes, and it was in accordance with them that he shaped hislife. On his return to Moscow he informed his wife with pride that everythingwas ready, that the house would be a little paradise, and that he advised hermost certainly to go. His wife’s staying away in the country was veryagreeable to Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view: it did the childrengood, it decreased expenses, and it left him more at liberty. DaryaAlexandrovna regarded staying in the country for the summer as essential forthe children, especially for the little girl, who had not succeeded inregaining her strength after the scarlatina, and also as a means of escapingthe petty humiliations, the little bills owing to the wood-merchant, thefishmonger, the shoemaker, which made her miserable. Besides this, she waspleased to go away to the country because she was dreaming of getting hersister Kitty to stay with her there. Kitty was to be back from abroad in themiddle of the summer, and bathing had been prescribed for her. Kitty wrote thatno prospect was so alluring as to spend the summer with Dolly at Ergushovo,full of childish associations for both of them.The first days of her existence in the country were very hard for Dolly. Sheused to stay in the country as a child, and the impression she had retained ofit was that the country was a refuge from all the unpleasantness of the town,that life there, though not luxurious—Dolly could easily make up her mindto that—was cheap and comfortable; that there was plenty of everything,everything was cheap, everything could be got, and children were happy. But nowcoming to the country as the head of a family, she perceived that it was allutterly unlike what she had fancied.The day after their arrival there was a heavy fall of rain, and in the nightthe water came through in the corridor and in the nursery, so that the beds hadto be carried into the drawing-room. There was no kitchen maid to be found; ofthe nine cows, it appeared from the words of the cowherd-woman that some wereabout to calve, others had just calved, others were old, and others againhard-uddered; there was not butter nor milk enough even for the children. Therewere no eggs. They could get no fowls; old, purplish, stringy cocks were allthey had for roasting and boiling. Impossible to get women to scrub thefloors—all were potato-hoeing. Driving was out of the question, becauseone of the horses was restive, and bolted in the shafts. There was no placewhere they could bathe; the whole of the river-bank was trampled by the cattleand open to the road; even walks were impossible, for the cattle strayed intothe garden through a gap in the hedge, and there was one terrible bull, whobellowed, and therefore might be expected to gore somebody. There were noproper cupboards for their clothes; what cupboards there were either would notclose at all, or burst open whenever anyone passed by them. There were no potsand pans; there was no copper in the washhouse, nor even an ironing-board inthe maids’ room.Finding instead of peace and rest all these, from her point of view, fearfulcalamities, Darya Alexandrovna was at first in despair. She exerted herself tothe utmost, felt the hopelessness of the position, and was every instantsuppressing the tears that started into her eyes. The bailiff, a retiredquartermaster, whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had taken a fancy to and had appointedbailiff on account of his handsome and respectful appearance as a hall-porter,showed no sympathy for Darya Alexandrovna’s woes. He said respectfully,“nothing can be done, the peasants are such a wretched lot,” anddid nothing to help her.The position seemed hopeless. But in the Oblonskys’ household, as in allfamilies indeed, there was one inconspicuous but most valuable and usefulperson, Marya Philimonovna. She soothed her mistress, assured her thateverything would come round (it was her expression, and Matvey hadborrowed it from her), and without fuss or hurry proceeded to set to workherself. She had immediately made friends with the bailiff’s wife, and onthe very first day she drank tea with her and the bailiff under the acacias,and reviewed all the circumstances of the position. Very soon MaryaPhilimonovna had established her club, so to say, under the acacias, and thereit was, in this club, consisting of the bailiff’s wife, the villageelder, and the counting-house clerk, that the difficulties of existence weregradually smoothed away, and in a week’s time everything actually hadcome round. The roof was mended, a kitchen maid was found—a crony of thevillage elder’s—hens were bought, the cows began giving milk, thegarden hedge was stopped up with stakes, the carpenter made a mangle, hookswere put in the cupboards, and they ceased to burst open spontaneously, and anironing-board covered with army cloth was placed across from the arm of a chairto the chest of drawers, and there was a smell of flatirons in the maids’room.“Just see, now, and you were quite in despair,” said MaryaPhilimonovna, pointing to the ironing-board. They even rigged up a bathing-shedof straw hurdles. Lily began to bathe, and Darya Alexandrovna began to realize,if only in part, her expectations, if not of a peaceful, at least of acomfortable, life in the country. Peaceful with six children Darya Alexandrovnacould not be. One would fall ill, another might easily become so, a third wouldbe without something necessary, a fourth would show symptoms of a baddisposition, and so on. Rare indeed were the brief periods of peace. But thesecares and anxieties were for Darya Alexandrovna the sole happiness possible.Had it not been for them, she would have been left alone to brood over herhusband who did not love her. And besides, hard though it was for the mother tobear the dread of illness, the illnesses themselves, and the grief of seeingsigns of evil propensities in her children—the children themselves wereeven now repaying her in small joys for her sufferings. Those joys were sosmall that they passed unnoticed, like gold in sand, and at bad moments shecould see nothing but the pain, nothing but sand; but there were good momentstoo when she saw nothing but the joy, nothing but gold.Now in the solitude of the country, she began to be more and more frequentlyaware of those joys. Often, looking at them, she would make every possibleeffort to persuade herself that she was mistaken, that she as a mother waspartial to her children. All the same, she could not help saying to herselfthat she had charming children, all six of them in different ways, but a set ofchildren such as is not often to be met with, and she was happy in them, andproud of them.Chapter 8Towards the end of May, when everything had been more or less satisfactorilyarranged, she received her husband’s answer to her complaints of thedisorganized state of things in the country. He wrote begging her forgivenessfor not having thought of everything before, and promised to come down at thefirst chance. This chance did not present itself, and till the beginning ofJune Darya Alexandrovna stayed alone in the country.On the Sunday in St. Peter’s week Darya Alexandrovna drove to mass forall her children to take the sacrament. Darya Alexandrovna in her intimate,philosophical talks with her sister, her mother, and her friends very oftenastonished them by the freedom of her views in regard to religion. She had astrange religion of transmigration of souls all her own, in which she had firmfaith, troubling herself little about the dogmas of the Church. But in herfamily she was strict in carrying out all that was required by theChurch—and not merely in order to set an example, but with all her heartin it. The fact that the children had not been at the sacrament for nearly ayear worried her extremely, and with the full approval and sympathy of MaryaPhilimonovna she decided that this should take place now in the summer.For several days before, Darya Alexandrovna was busily deliberating on how todress all the children. Frocks were made or altered and washed, seams andflounces were let out, buttons were sewn on, and ribbons got ready. One dress,Tanya’s, which the English governess had undertaken, cost DaryaAlexandrovna much loss of temper. The English governess in altering it had madethe seams in the wrong place, had taken up the sleeves too much, and altogetherspoilt the dress. It was so narrow on Tanya’s shoulders that it was quitepainful to look at her. But Marya Philimonovna had the happy thought of puttingin gussets, and adding a little shoulder-cape. The dress was set right, butthere was nearly a quarrel with the English governess. On the morning, however,all was happily arranged, and towards ten o’clock—the time at whichthey had asked the priest to wait for them for the mass—the children intheir new dresses, with beaming faces, stood on the step before the carriagewaiting for their mother.To the carriage, instead of the restive Raven, they had harnessed, thanks tothe representations of Marya Philimonovna, the bailiff’s horse, Brownie,and Darya Alexandrovna, delayed by anxiety over her own attire, came out andgot in, dressed in a white muslin gown.Darya Alexandrovna had done her hair, and dressed with care and excitement. Inthe old days she had dressed for her own sake to look pretty and be admired.Later on, as she got older, dress became more and more distasteful to her. Shesaw that she was losing her good looks. But now she began to feel pleasure andinterest in dress again. Now she did not dress for her own sake, not for thesake of her own beauty, but simply that as the mother of those exquisitecreatures she might not spoil the general effect. And looking at herself forthe last time in the looking-glass she was satisfied with herself. She lookednice. Not nice as she would have wished to look nice in old days at a ball, butnice for the object which she now had in view.In the church there was no one but the peasants, the servants and theirwomen-folk. But Darya Alexandrovna saw, or fancied she saw, the sensationproduced by her children and her. The children were not only beautiful to lookat in their smart little dresses, but they were charming in the way theybehaved. Aliosha, it is true, did not stand quite correctly; he kept turninground, trying to look at his little jacket from behind; but all the same he waswonderfully sweet. Tanya behaved like a grown-up person, and looked after thelittle ones. And the smallest, Lily, was bewitching in her naïve astonishmentat everything, and it was difficult not to smile when, after taking thesacrament, she said in English, “Please, some more.”On the way home the children felt that something solemn had happened, and werevery sedate.Everything went happily at home too; but at lunch Grisha began whistling, and,what was worse, was disobedient to the English governess, and was forbidden tohave any tart. Darya Alexandrovna would not have let things go so far on such aday had she been present; but she had to support the English governess’sauthority, and she upheld her decision that Grisha should have no tart. Thisrather spoiled the general good humor. Grisha cried, declaring that Nikolinkahad whistled too, and he was not punished, and that he wasn’t crying forthe tart—he didn’t care—but at being unjustly treated. Thiswas really too tragic, and Darya Alexandrovna made up her mind to persuade theEnglish governess to forgive Grisha, and she went to speak to her. But on theway, as she passed the drawing-room, she beheld a scene, filling her heart withsuch pleasure that the tears came into her eyes, and she forgave the delinquentherself.The culprit was sitting at the window in the corner of the drawing-room; besidehim was standing Tanya with a plate. On the pretext of wanting to give somedinner to her dolls, she had asked the governess’s permission to take hershare of tart to the nursery, and had taken it instead to her brother. Whilestill weeping over the injustice of his punishment, he was eating the tart, andkept saying through his sobs, “Eat yourself; let’s eat it together... together.”Tanya had at first been under the influence of her pity for Grisha, then of asense of her noble action, and tears were standing in her eyes too; but she didnot refuse, and ate her share.On catching sight of their mother they were dismayed, but, looking into herface, they saw they were not doing wrong. They burst out laughing, and, withtheir mouths full of tart, they began wiping their smiling lips with theirhands, and smearing their radiant faces all over with tears and jam.“Mercy! Your new white frock! Tanya! Grisha!” said their mother,trying to save the frock, but with tears in her eyes, smiling a blissful,rapturous smile.The new frocks were taken off, and orders were given for the little girls tohave their blouses put on, and the boys their old jackets, and the wagonette tobe harnessed; with Brownie, to the bailiff’s annoyance, again in theshafts, to drive out for mushroom picking and bathing. A roar of delightedshrieks arose in the nursery, and never ceased till they had set off for thebathing-place.They gathered a whole basketful of mushrooms; even Lily found a birch mushroom.It had always happened before that Miss Hoole found them and pointed them outto her; but this time she found a big one quite of herself, and there was ageneral scream of delight, “Lily has found a mushroom!”Then they reached the river, put the horses under the birch trees, and went tothe bathing-place. The coachman, Terenty, fastened the horses, who keptwhisking away the flies, to a tree, and, treading down the grass, lay down inthe shade of a birch and smoked his shag, while the never-ceasing shrieks ofdelight of the children floated across to him from the bathing-place.Though it was hard work to look after all the children and restrain their wildpranks, though it was difficult too to keep in one’s head and not mix upall the stockings, little breeches, and shoes for the different legs, and toundo and to do up again all the tapes and buttons, Darya Alexandrovna, who hadalways liked bathing herself, and believed it to be very good for the children,enjoyed nothing so much as bathing with all the children. To go over all thosefat little legs, pulling on their stockings, to take in her arms and dip thoselittle naked bodies, and to hear their screams of delight and alarm, to see thebreathless faces with wide-open, scared, and happy eyes of all her splashingcherubs, was a great pleasure to her.When half the children had been dressed, some peasant women in holiday dress,out picking herbs, came up to the bathing-shed and stopped shyly. MaryaPhilimonovna called one of them and handed her a sheet and a shirt that haddropped into the water for her to dry them, and Darya Alexandrovna began totalk to the women. At first they laughed behind their hands and did notunderstand her questions, but soon they grew bolder and began to talk, winningDarya Alexandrovna’s heart at once by the genuine admiration of thechildren that they showed.“My, what a beauty! as white as sugar,” said one, admiringTanitchka, and shaking her head; “but thin....”“Yes, she has been ill.”“And so they’ve been bathing you too,” said another to thebaby.“No; he’s only three months old,” answered Darya Alexandrovnawith pride.“You don’t say so!”“And have you any children?”“I’ve had four; I’ve two living—a boy and a girl. Iweaned her last carnival.”“How old is she?”“Why, two years old.”“Why did you nurse her so long?”“It’s our custom; for three fasts....”And the conversation became most interesting to Darya Alexandrovna. What sortof time did she have? What was the matter with the boy? Where was her husband?Did it often happen?Darya Alexandrovna felt disinclined to leave the peasant women, so interestingto her was their conversation, so completely identical were all theirinterests. What pleased her most of all was that she saw clearly what all thewomen admired more than anything was her having so many children, and such fineones. The peasant women even made Darya Alexandrovna laugh, and offended theEnglish governess, because she was the cause of the laughter she did notunderstand. One of the younger women kept staring at the Englishwoman, who wasdressing after all the rest, and when she put on her third petticoat she couldnot refrain from the remark, “My, she keeps putting on and putting on,and she’ll never have done!” she said, and they all went off intoroars.Chapter 9On the drive home, as Darya Alexandrovna, with all her children round her,their heads still wet from their bath, and a kerchief tied over her own head,was getting near the house, the coachman said, “There’s somegentleman coming: the master of Pokrovskoe, I do believe.”Darya Alexandrovna peeped out in front, and was delighted when she recognizedin the gray hat and gray coat the familiar figure of Levin walking to meetthem. She was glad to see him at any time, but at this moment she was speciallyglad he should see her in all her glory. No one was better able to appreciateher grandeur than Levin.Seeing her, he found himself face to face with one of the pictures of hisdaydream of family life.“You’re like a hen with your chickens, Darya Alexandrovna.”“Ah, how glad I am to see you!” she said, holding out her hand tohim.“Glad to see me, but you didn’t let me know. My brother’sstaying with me. I got a note from Stiva that you were here.”“From Stiva?” Darya Alexandrovna asked with surprise.“Yes; he writes that you are here, and that he thinks you might allow meto be of use to you,” said Levin, and as he said it he became suddenlyembarrassed, and, stopping abruptly, he walked on in silence by the wagonette,snapping off the buds of the lime trees and nibbling them. He was embarrassedthrough a sense that Darya Alexandrovna would be annoyed by receiving from anoutsider help that should by rights have come from her own husband. DaryaAlexandrovna certainly did not like this little way of StepanArkadyevitch’s of foisting his domestic duties on others. And she was atonce aware that Levin was aware of this. It was just for this fineness ofperception, for this delicacy, that Darya Alexandrovna liked Levin.“I know, of course,” said Levin, “that that simply means thatyou would like to see me, and I’m exceedingly glad. Though I can fancythat, used to town housekeeping as you are, you must feel in the wilds here,and if there’s anything wanted, I’m altogether at yourdisposal.”“Oh, no!” said Dolly. “At first things were ratheruncomfortable, but now we’ve settled everything capitally—thanks tomy old nurse,” she said, indicating Marya Philimonovna, who, seeing thatthey were speaking of her, smiled brightly and cordially to Levin. She knewhim, and knew that he would be a good match for her young lady, and was verykeen to see the matter settled.“Won’t you get in, sir, we’ll make room this side!” shesaid to him.“No, I’ll walk. Children, who’d like to race the horses withme?” The children knew Levin very little, and could not remember whenthey had seen him, but they experienced in regard to him none of that strangefeeling of shyness and hostility which children so often experience towardshypocritical, grown-up people, and for which they are so often and miserablypunished. Hypocrisy in anything whatever may deceive the cleverest and mostpenetrating man, but the least wide-awake of children recognizes it, and isrevolted by it, however ingeniously it may be disguised. Whatever faults Levinhad, there was not a trace of hypocrisy in him, and so the children showed himthe same friendliness that they saw in their mother’s face. On hisinvitation, the two elder ones at once jumped out to him and ran with him assimply as they would have done with their nurse or Miss Hoole or their mother.Lily, too, began begging to go to him, and her mother handed her to him; he sather on his shoulder and ran along with her.“Don’t be afraid, don’t be afraid, Darya Alexandrovna!”he said, smiling good-humoredly to the mother; “there’s no chanceof my hurting or dropping her.”And, looking at his strong, agile, assiduously careful and needlessly warymovements, the mother felt her mind at rest, and smiled gaily and approvinglyas she watched him.Here, in the country, with children, and with Darya Alexandrovna, with whom hewas in sympathy, Levin was in a mood not infrequent with him, of childlikelight-heartedness that she particularly liked in him. As he ran with thechildren, he taught them gymnastic feats, set Miss Hoole laughing with hisqueer English accent, and talked to Darya Alexandrovna of his pursuits in thecountry.After dinner, Darya Alexandrovna, sitting alone with him on the balcony, beganto speak of Kitty.“You know, Kitty’s coming here, and is going to spend the summerwith me.”“Really,” he said, flushing, and at once, to change theconversation, he said: “Then I’ll send you two cows, shall I? Ifyou insist on a bill you shall pay me five roubles a month; but it’sreally too bad of you.”“No, thank you. We can manage very well now.”“Oh, well, then, I’ll have a look at your cows, and if you’llallow me, I’ll give directions about their food. Everything depends ontheir food.”And Levin, to turn the conversation, explained to Darya Alexandrovna the theoryof cow-keeping, based on the principle that the cow is simply a machine for thetransformation of food into milk, and so on.He talked of this, and passionately longed to hear more of Kitty, and, at thesame time, was afraid of hearing it. He dreaded the breaking up of the inwardpeace he had gained with such effort.“Yes, but still all this has to be looked after, and who is there to lookafter it?” Darya Alexandrovna responded, without interest.She had by now got her household matters so satisfactorily arranged, thanks toMarya Philimonovna, that she was disinclined to make any change in them;besides, she had no faith in Levin’s knowledge of farming. Generalprinciples, as to the cow being a machine for the production of milk, shelooked on with suspicion. It seemed to her that such principles could only be ahindrance in farm management. It all seemed to her a far simpler matter: allthat was needed, as Marya Philimonovna had explained, was to give Brindle andWhitebreast more food and drink, and not to let the cook carry all the kitchenslops to the laundry maid’s cow. That was clear. But general propositionsas to feeding on meal and on grass were doubtful and obscure. And, what wasmost important, she wanted to talk about Kitty.Chapter 10“Kitty writes to me that there’s nothing she longs for so much asquiet and solitude,” Dolly said after the silence that had followed.“And how is she—better?” Levin asked in agitation.“Thank God, she’s quite well again. I never believed her lungs wereaffected.”“Oh, I’m very glad!” said Levin, and Dolly fancied she sawsomething touching, helpless, in his face as he said this and looked silentlyinto her face.“Let me ask you, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” said Darya Alexandrovna,smiling her kindly and rather mocking smile, “why is it you are angrywith Kitty?”“I? I’m not angry with her,” said Levin.“Yes, you are angry. Why was it you did not come to see us nor them whenyou were in Moscow?”“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, blushing up to the roots of hishair, “I wonder really that with your kind heart you don’t feelthis. How it is you feel no pity for me, if nothing else, when youknow....”“What do I know?”“You know I made an offer and that I was refused,” said Levin, andall the tenderness he had been feeling for Kitty a minute before was replacedby a feeling of anger for the slight he had suffered.“What makes you suppose I know?”“Because everybody knows it....”“That’s just where you are mistaken; I did not know it, though Ihad guessed it was so.”“Well, now you know it.”“All I knew was that something had happened that made her dreadfullymiserable, and that she begged me never to speak of it. And if she would nottell me, she would certainly not speak of it to anyone else. But what did passbetween you? Tell me.”“I have told you.”“When was it?”“When I was at their house the last time.”“Do you know that,” said Darya Alexandrovna, “I am awfully,awfully sorry for her. You suffer only from pride....”“Perhaps so,” said Levin, “but....”She interrupted him.“But she, poor girl ... I am awfully, awfully sorry for her. Now I see itall.”“Well, Darya Alexandrovna, you must excuse me,” he said, gettingup. “Good-bye, Darya Alexandrovna, till we meet again.”“No, wait a minute,” she said, clutching him by the sleeve.“Wait a minute, sit down.”“Please, please, don’t let us talk of this,” he said, sittingdown, and at the same time feeling rise up and stir within his heart a hope hehad believed to be buried.“If I did not like you,” she said, and tears came into her eyes;“if I did not know you, as I do know you....”The feeling that had seemed dead revived more and more, rose up and tookpossession of Levin’s heart.“Yes, I understand it all now,” said Darya Alexandrovna. “Youcan’t understand it; for you men, who are free and make your own choice,it’s always clear whom you love. But a girl’s in a position ofsuspense, with all a woman’s or maiden’s modesty, a girl who seesyou men from afar, who takes everything on trust,—a girl may have, andoften has, such a feeling that she cannot tell what to say.”“Yes, if the heart does not speak....”“No, the heart does speak; but just consider: you men have views about agirl, you come to the house, you make friends, you criticize, you wait to seeif you have found what you love, and then, when you are sure you love her, youmake an offer....”“Well, that’s not quite it.”“Anyway you make an offer, when your love is ripe or when the balance hascompletely turned between the two you are choosing from. But a girl is notasked. She is expected to make her choice, and yet she cannot choose, she canonly answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’”“Yes, to choose between me and Vronsky,” thought Levin, and thedead thing that had come to life within him died again, and only weighed on hisheart and set it aching.“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, “that’s how one choosesa new dress or some purchase or other, not love. The choice has been made, andso much the better.... And there can be no repeating it.”“Ah, pride, pride!” said Darya Alexandrovna, as though despisinghim for the baseness of this feeling in comparison with that other feelingwhich only women know. “At the time when you made Kitty an offer she wasjust in a position in which she could not answer. She was in doubt. Doubtbetween you and Vronsky. Him she was seeing every day, and you she had not seenfor a long while. Supposing she had been older ... I, for instance, in herplace could have felt no doubt. I always disliked him, and so it has turnedout.”Levin recalled Kitty’s answer. She had said: “No, that cannotbe....”“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said dryly, “I appreciate yourconfidence in me; I believe you are making a mistake. But whether I am right orwrong, that pride you so despise makes any thought of Katerina Alexandrovna outof the question for me,—you understand, utterly out of thequestion.”“I will only say one thing more: you know that I am speaking of mysister, whom I love as I love my own children. I don’t say she cared foryou, all I meant to say is that her refusal at that moment provesnothing.”“I don’t know!” said Levin, jumping up. “If you onlyknew how you are hurting me. It’s just as if a child of yours were dead,and they were to say to you: He would have been like this and like that, and hemight have lived, and how happy you would have been in him. But he’sdead, dead, dead!...”“How absurd you are!” said Darya Alexandrovna, looking withmournful tenderness at Levin’s excitement. “Yes, I see it all moreand more clearly,” she went on musingly. “So you won’t cometo see us, then, when Kitty’s here?”“No, I shan’t come. Of course I won’t avoid meeting KaterinaAlexandrovna, but as far as I can, I will try to save her the annoyance of mypresence.”“You are very, very absurd,” repeated Darya Alexandrovna, lookingwith tenderness into his face. “Very well then, let it be as though wehad not spoken of this. What have you come for, Tanya?” she said inFrench to the little girl who had come in.“Where’s my spade, mamma?”“I speak French, and you must too.”The little girl tried to say it in French, but could not remember the Frenchfor spade; the mother prompted her, and then told her in French where to lookfor the spade. And this made a disagreeable impression on Levin.Everything in Darya Alexandrovna’s house and children struck him now asby no means so charming as a little while before. “And what does she talkFrench with the children for?” he thought; “how unnatural and falseit is! And the children feel it so: Learning French and unlearningsincerity,” he thought to himself, unaware that Darya Alexandrovna hadthought all that over twenty times already, and yet, even at the cost of someloss of sincerity, believed it necessary to teach her children French in thatway.“But why are you going? Do stay a little.”Levin stayed to tea; but his good-humor had vanished, and he felt ill at ease.After tea he went out into the hall to order his horses to be put in, and, whenhe came back, he found Darya Alexandrovna greatly disturbed, with a troubledface, and tears in her eyes. While Levin had been outside, an incident hadoccurred which had utterly shattered all the happiness she had been feelingthat day, and her pride in her children. Grisha and Tanya had been fightingover a ball. Darya Alexandrovna, hearing a scream in the nursery, ran in andsaw a terrible sight. Tanya was pulling Grisha’s hair, while he, with aface hideous with rage, was beating her with his fists wherever he could get ather. Something snapped in Darya Alexandrovna’s heart when she saw this.It was as if darkness had swooped down upon her life; she felt that thesechildren of hers, that she was so proud of, were not merely most ordinary, butpositively bad, ill-bred children, with coarse, brutalpropensities—wicked children.She could not talk or think of anything else, and she could not speak to Levinof her misery.Levin saw she was unhappy and tried to comfort her, saying that it showednothing bad, that all children fight; but, even as he said it, he was thinkingin his heart: “No, I won’t be artificial and talk French with mychildren; but my children won’t be like that. All one has to do is notspoil children, not to distort their nature, and they’ll be delightful.No, my children won’t be like that.”He said good-bye and drove away, and she did not try to keep him.Chapter 11In the middle of July the elder of the village on Levin’s sister’sestate, about fifteen miles from Pokrovskoe, came to Levin to report on howthings were going there and on the hay. The chief source of income on hissister’s estate was from the riverside meadows. In former years the hayhad been bought by the peasants for twenty roubles the three acres. When Levintook over the management of the estate, he thought on examining the grasslandsthat they were worth more, and he fixed the price at twenty-five roubles thethree acres. The peasants would not give that price, and, as Levin suspected,kept off other purchasers. Then Levin had driven over himself, and arranged tohave the grass cut, partly by hired labor, partly at a payment of a certainproportion of the crop. His own peasants put every hindrance they could in theway of this new arrangement, but it was carried out, and the first year themeadows had yielded a profit almost double. The previous year—which wasthe third year—the peasants had maintained the same opposition to thearrangement, and the hay had been cut on the same system. This year thepeasants were doing all the mowing for a third of the hay crop, and the villageelder had come now to announce that the hay had been cut, and that, fearingrain, they had invited the counting-house clerk over, had divided the crop inhis presence, and had raked together eleven stacks as the owner’s share.From the vague answers to his question how much hay had been cut on theprincipal meadow, from the hurry of the village elder who had made thedivision, not asking leave, from the whole tone of the peasant, Levin perceivedthat there was something wrong in the division of the hay, and made up his mindto drive over himself to look into the matter.Arriving for dinner at the village, and leaving his horse at the cottage of anold friend of his, the husband of his brother’s wet-nurse, Levin went tosee the old man in his bee-house, wanting to find out from him the truth aboutthe hay. Parmenitch, a talkative, comely old man, gave Levin a very warmwelcome, showed him all he was doing, told him everything about his bees andthe swarms of that year; but gave vague and unwilling answers to Levin’sinquiries about the mowing. This confirmed Levin still more in his suspicions.He went to the hay fields and examined the stacks. The haystacks could notpossibly contain fifty wagon-loads each, and to convict the peasants Levinordered the wagons that had carried the hay to be brought up directly, to liftone stack, and carry it into the barn. There turned out to be only thirty-twoloads in the stack. In spite of the village elder’s assertions about thecompressibility of hay, and its having settled down in the stacks, and hisswearing that everything had been done in the fear of God, Levin stuck to hispoint that the hay had been divided without his orders, and that, therefore, hewould not accept that hay as fifty loads to a stack. After a prolonged disputethe matter was decided by the peasants taking these eleven stacks, reckoningthem as fifty loads each. The arguments and the division of the haycocks lastedthe whole afternoon. When the last of the hay had been divided, Levin,intrusting the superintendence of the rest to the counting-house clerk, satdown on a haycock marked off by a stake of willow, and looked admiringly at themeadow swarming with peasants.In front of him, in the bend of the river beyond the marsh, moved abright-colored line of peasant women, and the scattered hay was being rapidlyformed into gray winding rows over the pale green stubble. After the women camethe men with pitchforks, and from the gray rows there were growing up broad,high, soft haycocks. To the left, carts were rumbling over the meadow that hadbeen already cleared, and one after another the haycocks vanished, flung up inhuge forkfuls, and in their place there were rising heavy cartloads of fragranthay hanging over the horses’ hind-quarters.“What weather for haying! What hay it’ll be!” said an oldman, squatting down beside Levin. “It’s tea, not hay! It’slike scattering grain to the ducks, the way they pick it up!” he added,pointing to the growing haycocks. “Since dinner time they’ve carrieda good half of it.”“The last load, eh?” he shouted to a young peasant, who drove by,standing in the front of an empty cart, shaking the cord reins.“The last, dad!” the lad shouted back, pulling in the horse, and,smiling, he looked round at a bright, rosy-checked peasant girl who sat in thecart smiling too, and drove on.“Who’s that? Your son?” asked Levin.“My baby,” said the old man with a tender smile.“What a fine fellow!”“The lad’s all right.”“Married already?”“Yes, it’s two years last St. Philip’s day.”“Any children?”“Children indeed! Why, for over a year he was innocent as a babe himself,and bashful too,” answered the old man. “Well, the hay! It’sas fragrant as tea!” he repeated, wishing to change the subject.Levin looked more attentively at Ivan Parmenov and his wife. They were loadinga haycock onto the cart not far from him. Ivan Parmenov was standing on thecart, taking, laying in place, and stamping down the huge bundles of hay, whichhis pretty young wife deftly handed up to him, at first in armfuls, and then onthe pitchfork. The young wife worked easily, merrily, and dexterously. Theclose-packed hay did not once break away off her fork. First she gathered ittogether, stuck the fork into it, then with a rapid, supple movement leaned thewhole weight of her body on it, and at once with a bend of her back under thered belt she drew herself up, and arching her full bosom under the white smock,with a smart turn swung the fork in her arms, and flung the bundle of hay highonto the cart. Ivan, obviously doing his best to save her every minute ofunnecessary labor, made haste, opening his arms to clutch the bundle and lay itin the cart. As she raked together what was left of the hay, the young wifeshook off the bits of hay that had fallen on her neck, and straightening thered kerchief that had dropped forward over her white brow, not browned like herface by the sun, she crept under the cart to tie up the load. Ivan directed herhow to fasten the cord to the cross-piece, and at something she said he laughedaloud. In the expressions of both faces was to be seen vigorous, young, freshlyawakened love.Chapter 12The load was tied on. Ivan jumped down and took the quiet, sleek horse by thebridle. The young wife flung the rake up on the load, and with a bold step,swinging her arms, she went to join the women, who were forming a ring for thehaymakers’ dance. Ivan drove off to the road and fell into line with theother loaded carts. The peasant women, with their rakes on their shoulders, gaywith bright flowers, and chattering with ringing, merry voices, walked behindthe hay cart. One wild untrained female voice broke into a song, and sang italone through a verse, and then the same verse was taken up and repeated byhalf a hundred strong healthy voices, of all sorts, coarse and fine, singing inunison.The women, all singing, began to come close to Levin, and he felt as though astorm were swooping down upon him with a thunder of merriment. The stormswooped down, enveloped him and the haycock on which he was lying, and theother haycocks, and the wagon-loads, and the whole meadow and distant fieldsall seemed to be shaking and singing to the measures of this wild merry songwith its shouts and whistles and clapping. Levin felt envious of this healthand mirthfulness; he longed to take part in the expression of this joy of life.But he could do nothing, and had to lie and look on and listen. When thepeasants, with their singing, had vanished out of sight and hearing, a wearyfeeling of despondency at his own isolation, his physical inactivity, hisalienation from this world, came over Levin.Some of the very peasants who had been most active in wrangling with him overthe hay, some whom he had treated with contumely, and who had tried to cheathim, those very peasants had greeted him good-humoredly, and evidently had not,were incapable of having any feeling of rancor against him, any regret, anyrecollection even of having tried to deceive him. All that was drowned in a seaof merry common labor. God gave the day, God gave the strength. And the day andthe strength were consecrated to labor, and that labor was its own reward. Forwhom the labor? What would be its fruits? These were idleconsiderations—beside the point.Often Levin had admired this life, often he had a sense of envy of the men wholed this life; but today for the first time, especially under the influence ofwhat he had seen in the attitude of Ivan Parmenov to his young wife, the ideapresented itself definitely to his mind that it was in his power to exchangethe dreary, artificial, idle, and individualistic life he was leading for thislaborious, pure, and socially delightful life.The old man who had been sitting beside him had long ago gone home; the peoplehad all separated. Those who lived near had gone home, while those who camefrom far were gathered into a group for supper, and to spend the night in themeadow. Levin, unobserved by the peasants, still lay on the haycock, and stilllooked on and listened and mused. The peasants who remained for the night inthe meadow scarcely slept all the short summer night. At first there was thesound of merry talk and laughing all together over the supper, then singingagain and laughter.All the long day of toil had left no trace in them but lightness of heart.Before the early dawn all was hushed. Nothing was to be heard but the nightsounds of the frogs that never ceased in the marsh, and the horses snorting inthe mist that rose over the meadow before the morning. Rousing himself, Levingot up from the haycock, and looking at the stars, he saw that the night wasover.“Well, what am I going to do? How am I to set about it?” he said tohimself, trying to express to himself all the thoughts and feelings he hadpassed through in that brief night. All the thoughts and feelings he had passedthrough fell into three separate trains of thought. One was the renunciation ofhis old life, of his utterly useless education. This renunciation gave himsatisfaction, and was easy and simple. Another series of thoughts and mentalimages related to the life he longed to live now. The simplicity, the purity,the sanity of this life he felt clearly, and he was convinced he would find init the content, the peace, and the dignity, of the lack of which he was somiserably conscious. But a third series of ideas turned upon the question howto effect this transition from the old life to the new. And there nothing tookclear shape for him. “Have a wife? Have work and the necessity of work?Leave Pokrovskoe? Buy land? Become a member of a peasant community? Marry apeasant girl? How am I to set about it?” he asked himself again, andcould not find an answer. “I haven’t slept all night, though, and Ican’t think it out clearly,” he said to himself. “I’llwork it out later. One thing’s certain, this night has decided my fate.All my old dreams of home life were absurd, not the real thing,” he toldhimself. “It’s all ever so much simpler and better....”“How beautiful!” he thought, looking at the strange, as it were,mother-of-pearl shell of white fleecy cloudlets resting right over his head inthe middle of the sky. “How exquisite it all is in this exquisite night!And when was there time for that cloud-shell to form? Just now I looked at thesky, and there was nothing in it—only two white streaks. Yes, and soimperceptibly too my views of life changed!”He went out of the meadow and walked along the highroad towards the village. Aslight wind arose, and the sky looked gray and sullen. The gloomy moment hadcome that usually precedes the dawn, the full triumph of light over darkness.Shrinking from the cold, Levin walked rapidly, looking at the ground.“What’s that? Someone coming,” he thought, catching thetinkle of bells, and lifting his head. Forty paces from him a carriage withfour horses harnessed abreast was driving towards him along the grassy road onwhich he was walking. The shaft-horses were tilted against the shafts by theruts, but the dexterous driver sitting on the box held the shaft over the ruts,so that the wheels ran on the smooth part of the road.This was all Levin noticed, and without wondering who it could be, he gazedabsently at the coach.In the coach was an old lady dozing in one corner, and at the window, evidentlyonly just awake, sat a young girl holding in both hands the ribbons of a whitecap. With a face full of light and thought, full of a subtle, complex innerlife, that was remote from Levin, she was gazing beyond him at the glow of thesunrise.At the very instant when this apparition was vanishing, the truthful eyesglanced at him. She recognized him, and her face lighted up with wonderingdelight.He could not be mistaken. There were no other eyes like those in the world.There was only one creature in the world that could concentrate for him all thebrightness and meaning of life. It was she. It was Kitty. He understood thatshe was driving to Ergushovo from the railway station. And everything that hadbeen stirring Levin during that sleepless night, all the resolutions he hadmade, all vanished at once. He recalled with horror his dreams of marrying apeasant girl. There only, in the carriage that had crossed over to the otherside of the road, and was rapidly disappearing, there only could he find thesolution of the riddle of his life, which had weighed so agonizingly upon himof late.She did not look out again. The sound of the carriage-springs was no longeraudible, the bells could scarcely be heard. The barking of dogs showed thecarriage had reached the village, and all that was left was the empty fieldsall round, the village in front, and he himself isolated and apart from it all,wandering lonely along the deserted highroad.He glanced at the sky, expecting to find there the cloud shell he had beenadmiring and taking as the symbol of the ideas and feelings of that night.There was nothing in the sky in the least like a shell. There, in the remoteheights above, a mysterious change had been accomplished. There was no trace ofshell, and there was stretched over fully half the sky an even cover of tinyand ever tinier cloudlets. The sky had grown blue and bright; and with the samesoftness, but with the same remoteness, it met his questioning gaze.“No,” he said to himself, “however good that life ofsimplicity and toil may be, I cannot go back to it. I love her.”Chapter 13None but those who were most intimate with Alexey Alexandrovitch knew that,while on the surface the coldest and most reasonable of men, he had oneweakness quite opposed to the general trend of his character. AlexeyAlexandrovitch could not hear or see a child or woman crying without beingmoved. The sight of tears threw him into a state of nervous agitation, and heutterly lost all power of reflection. The chief secretary of his department andhis private secretary were aware of this, and used to warn women who came withpetitions on no account to give way to tears, if they did not want to ruintheir chances. “He will get angry, and will not listen to you,”they used to say. And as a fact, in such cases the emotional disturbance set upin Alexey Alexandrovitch by the sight of tears found expression in hasty anger.“I can do nothing. Kindly leave the room!” he would commonly cry insuch cases.When returning from the races Anna had informed him of her relations withVronsky, and immediately afterwards had burst into tears, hiding her face inher hands, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for all the fury aroused in him against her,was aware at the same time of a rush of that emotional disturbance alwaysproduced in him by tears. Conscious of it, and conscious that any expression ofhis feelings at that minute would be out of keeping with the position, he triedto suppress every manifestation of life in himself, and so neither stirred norlooked at her. This was what had caused that strange expression of deathlikerigidity in his face which had so impressed Anna.When they reached the house he helped her to get out of the carriage, andmaking an effort to master himself, took leave of her with his usual urbanity,and uttered that phrase that bound him to nothing; he said that tomorrow hewould let her know his decision.His wife’s words, confirming his worst suspicions, had sent a cruel pangto the heart of Alexey Alexandrovitch. That pang was intensified by the strangefeeling of physical pity for her set up by her tears. But when he was all alonein the carriage Alexey Alexandrovitch, to his surprise and delight, feltcomplete relief both from this pity and from the doubts and agonies ofjealousy.He experienced the sensations of a man who has had a tooth out after sufferinglong from toothache. After a fearful agony and a sense of something huge,bigger than the head itself, being torn out of his jaw, the sufferer, hardlyable to believe in his own good luck, feels all at once that what has so longpoisoned his existence and enchained his attention, exists no longer, and thathe can live and think again, and take interest in other things besides histooth. This feeling Alexey Alexandrovitch was experiencing. The agony had beenstrange and terrible, but now it was over; he felt that he could live again andthink of something other than his wife.“No honor, no heart, no religion; a corrupt woman. I always knew it andalways saw it, though I tried to deceive myself to spare her,” he said tohimself. And it actually seemed to him that he always had seen it: he recalledincidents of their past life, in which he had never seen anything wrongbefore—now these incidents proved clearly that she had always been acorrupt woman. “I made a mistake in linking my life to hers; but therewas nothing wrong in my mistake, and so I cannot be unhappy. It’s not Ithat am to blame,” he told himself, “but she. But I have nothing todo with her. She does not exist for me....”Everything relating to her and her son, towards whom his sentiments were asmuch changed as towards her, ceased to interest him. The only thing thatinterested him now was the question of in what way he could best, with mostpropriety and comfort for himself, and thus with most justice, extricatehimself from the mud with which she had spattered him in her fall, and thenproceed along his path of active, honorable, and useful existence.“I cannot be made unhappy by the fact that a contemptible woman hascommitted a crime. I have only to find the best way out of the difficultposition in which she has placed me. And I shall find it,” he said tohimself, frowning more and more. “I’m not the first nor thelast.” And to say nothing of historical instances dating from the“Fair Helen” of Menelaus, recently revived in the memory of all, awhole list of contemporary examples of husbands with unfaithful wives in thehighest society rose before Alexey Alexandrovitch’s imagination.“Daryalov, Poltavsky, Prince Karibanov, Count Paskudin, Dram.... Yes,even Dram, such an honest, capable fellow ... Semyonov, Tchagin,Sigonin,” Alexey Alexandrovitch remembered. “Admitting that acertain quite irrational ridicule falls to the lot of these men, yet Inever saw anything but a misfortune in it, and always felt sympathy forit,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, though indeed this was notthe fact, and he had never felt sympathy for misfortunes of that kind, but themore frequently he had heard of instances of unfaithful wives betraying theirhusbands, the more highly he had thought of himself. “It is a misfortunewhich may befall anyone. And this misfortune has befallen me. The only thing tobe done is to make the best of the position.”And he began passing in review the methods of proceeding of men who had been inthe same position that he was in.“Daryalov fought a duel....”The duel had particularly fascinated the thoughts of Alexey Alexandrovitch inhis youth, just because he was physically a coward, and was himself well awareof the fact. Alexey Alexandrovitch could not without horror contemplate theidea of a pistol aimed at himself, and had never made use of any weapon in hislife. This horror had in his youth set him pondering on dueling, and picturinghimself in a position in which he would have to expose his life to danger.Having attained success and an established position in the world, he had longago forgotten this feeling; but the habitual bent of feeling reasserted itself,and dread of his own cowardice proved even now so strong that AlexeyAlexandrovitch spent a long while thinking over the question of dueling in allits aspects, and hugging the idea of a duel, though he was fully awarebeforehand that he would never under any circumstances fight one.“There’s no doubt our society is still so barbarous (it’s notthe same in England) that very many”—and among these were thosewhose opinion Alexey Alexandrovitch particularly valued—“lookfavorably on the duel; but what result is attained by it? Suppose I call himout,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on to himself, and vividly picturing thenight he would spend after the challenge, and the pistol aimed at him, heshuddered, and knew that he never would do it—“suppose I call himout. Suppose I am taught,” he went on musing, “to shoot; I pressthe trigger,” he said to himself, closing his eyes, “and it turnsout I have killed him,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said to himself, and heshook his head as though to dispel such silly ideas. “What sense is therein murdering a man in order to define one’s relation to a guilty wife andson? I should still just as much have to decide what I ought to do with her.But what is more probable and what would doubtless occur—I should bekilled or wounded. I, the innocent person, should be the victim—killed orwounded. It’s even more senseless. But apart from that, a challenge tofight would be an act hardly honest on my side. Don’t I know perfectlywell that my friends would never allow me to fight a duel—would neverallow the life of a statesman, needed by Russia, to be exposed to danger?Knowing perfectly well beforehand that the matter would never come to realdanger, it would amount to my simply trying to gain a certain sham reputationby such a challenge. That would be dishonest, that would be false, that wouldbe deceiving myself and others. A duel is quite irrational, and no one expectsit of me. My aim is simply to safeguard my reputation, which is essential forthe uninterrupted pursuit of my public duties.” Official duties, whichhad always been of great consequence in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s eyes,seemed of special importance to his mind at this moment. Considering andrejecting the duel, Alexey Alexandrovitch turned to divorce—anothersolution selected by several of the husbands he remembered. Passing in mentalreview all the instances he knew of divorces (there were plenty of them in thevery highest society with which he was very familiar), Alexey Alexandrovitchcould not find a single example in which the object of divorce was that whichhe had in view. In all these instances the husband had practically ceded orsold his unfaithful wife, and the very party which, being in fault, had not theright to contract a fresh marriage, had formed counterfeit, pseudo-matrimonialties with a self-styled husband. In his own case, Alexey Alexandrovitch sawthat a legal divorce, that is to say, one in which only the guilty wife wouldbe repudiated, was impossible of attainment. He saw that the complex conditionsof the life they led made the coarse proofs of his wife’s guilt, requiredby the law, out of the question; he saw that a certain refinement in that lifewould not admit of such proofs being brought forward, even if he had them, andthat to bring forward such proofs would damage him in the public estimationmore than it would her.An attempt at divorce could lead to nothing but a public scandal, which wouldbe a perfect godsend to his enemies for calumny and attacks on his highposition in society. His chief object, to define the position with the leastamount of disturbance possible, would not be attained by divorce either.Moreover, in the event of divorce, or even of an attempt to obtain a divorce,it was obvious that the wife broke off all relations with the husband and threwin her lot with the lover. And in spite of the complete, as he supposed,contempt and indifference he now felt for his wife, at the bottom of his heartAlexey Alexandrovitch still had one feeling left in regard to her—adisinclination to see her free to throw in her lot with Vronsky, so that hercrime would be to her advantage. The mere notion of this so exasperated AlexeyAlexandrovitch, that directly it rose to his mind he groaned with inward agony,and got up and changed his place in the carriage, and for a long while after,he sat with scowling brows, wrapping his numbed and bony legs in the fleecyrug.“Apart from formal divorce, One might still do like Karibanov, Paskudin,and that good fellow Dram—that is, separate from one’s wife,”he went on thinking, when he had regained his composure. But this step toopresented the same drawback of public scandal as a divorce, and what was more,a separation, quite as much as a regular divorce, flung his wife into the armsof Vronsky. “No, it’s out of the question, out of thequestion!” he said again, twisting his rug about him again. “Icannot be unhappy, but neither she nor he ought to be happy.”The feeling of jealousy, which had tortured him during the period ofuncertainty, had passed away at the instant when the tooth had been with agonyextracted by his wife’s words. But that feeling had been replaced byanother, the desire, not merely that she should not be triumphant, but that sheshould get due punishment for her crime. He did not acknowledge this feeling,but at the bottom of his heart he longed for her to suffer for having destroyedhis peace of mind—his honor. And going once again over the conditionsinseparable from a duel, a divorce, a separation, and once again rejectingthem, Alexey Alexandrovitch felt convinced that there was only onesolution,—to keep her with him, concealing what had happened from theworld, and using every measure in his power to break off the intrigue, andstill more—though this he did not admit to himself—to punish her.“I must inform her of my conclusion, that thinking over the terribleposition in which she has placed her family, all other solutions will be worsefor both sides than an external status quo, and that such I agree toretain, on the strict condition of obedience on her part to my wishes, that isto say, cessation of all intercourse with her lover.” When this decisionhad been finally adopted, another weighty consideration occurred to AlexeyAlexandrovitch in support of it. “By such a course only shall I be actingin accordance with the dictates of religion,” he told himself. “Inadopting this course, I am not casting off a guilty wife, but giving her achance of amendment; and, indeed, difficult as the task will be to me, I shalldevote part of my energies to her reformation and salvation.”Though Alexey Alexandrovitch was perfectly aware that he could not exert anymoral influence over his wife, that such an attempt at reformation could leadto nothing but falsity; though in passing through these difficult moments hehad not once thought of seeking guidance in religion, yet now, when hisconclusion corresponded, as it seemed to him, with the requirements ofreligion, this religious sanction to his decision gave him completesatisfaction, and to some extent restored his peace of mind. He was pleased tothink that, even in such an important crisis in life, no one would be able tosay that he had not acted in accordance with the principles of that religionwhose banner he had always held aloft amid the general coolness andindifference. As he pondered over subsequent developments, AlexeyAlexandrovitch did not see, indeed, why his relations with his wife should notremain practically the same as before. No doubt, she could never regain hisesteem, but there was not, and there could not be, any sort of reason that hisexistence should be troubled, and that he should suffer because she was a badand faithless wife. “Yes, time will pass; time, which arranges allthings, and the old relations will be reestablished,” AlexeyAlexandrovitch told himself; “so far reestablished, that is, that I shallnot be sensible of a break in the continuity of my life. She is bound to beunhappy, but I am not to blame, and so I cannot be unhappy.”Chapter 14As he neared Petersburg, Alexey Alexandrovitch not only adhered entirely to hisdecision, but was even composing in his head the letter he would write to hiswife. Going into the porter’s room, Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at theletters and papers brought from his office, and directed that they should bebrought to him in his study.“The horses can be taken out and I will see no one,” he said inanswer to the porter, with a certain pleasure, indicative of his agreeableframe of mind, emphasizing the words, “see no one.”In his study Alexey Alexandrovitch walked up and down twice, and stopped at animmense writing-table, on which six candles had already been lighted by thevalet who had preceded him. He cracked his knuckles and sat down, sorting outhis writing appurtenances. Putting his elbows on the table, he bent his head onone side, thought a minute, and began to write, without pausing for a second.He wrote without using any form of address to her, and wrote in French, makinguse of the plural “vous,” which has not the same note ofcoldness as the corresponding Russian form.  “At our last conversation, I notified you of my intention to communicateto you my decision in regard to the subject of that conversation. Havingcarefully considered everything, I am writing now with the object of fulfillingthat promise. My decision is as follows. Whatever your conduct may have been, Ido not consider myself justified in breaking the ties in which we are bound bya Higher Power. The family cannot be broken up by a whim, a caprice, or even bythe sin of one of the partners in the marriage, and our life must go on as ithas done in the past. This is essential for me, for you, and for our son. I amfully persuaded that you have repented and do repent of what has called forththe present letter, and that you will cooperate with me in eradicating thecause of our estrangement, and forgetting the past. In the contrary event, youcan conjecture what awaits you and your son. All this I hope to discuss more indetail in a personal interview. As the season is drawing to a close, I wouldbeg you to return to Petersburg as quickly as possible, not later than Tuesday.All necessary preparations shall be made for your arrival here. I beg you tonote that I attach particular significance to compliance with this request.A. Karenin“P.S.—I enclose the money which may be needed for yourexpenses.”  He read the letter through and felt pleased with it, and especially that he hadremembered to enclose money: there was not a harsh word, not a reproach in it,nor was there undue indulgence. Most of all, it was a golden bridge for return.Folding the letter and smoothing it with a massive ivory knife, and putting itin an envelope with the money, he rang the bell with the gratification italways afforded him to use the well arranged appointments of his writing-table.“Give this to the courier to be delivered to Anna Arkadyevna tomorrow atthe summer villa,” he said, getting up.“Certainly, your excellency; tea to be served in the study?”Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be brought to the study, and playing withthe massive paper-knife, he moved to his easy chair, near which there had beenplaced ready for him a lamp and the French work on Egyptian hieroglyphics thathe had begun. Over the easy chair there hung in a gold frame an oval portraitof Anna, a fine painting by a celebrated artist. Alexey Alexandrovitch glancedat it. The unfathomable eyes gazed ironically and insolently at him.Insufferably insolent and challenging was the effect in AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s eyes of the black lace about the head, admirably touchedin by the painter, the black hair and handsome white hand with one fingerlifted, covered with rings. After looking at the portrait for a minute, AlexeyAlexandrovitch shuddered so that his lips quivered and he uttered the sound“brrr,” and turned away. He made haste to sit down in his easychair and opened the book. He tried to read, but he could not revive the veryvivid interest he had felt before in Egyptian hieroglyphics. He looked at thebook and thought of something else. He thought not of his wife, but of acomplication that had arisen in his official life, which at the timeconstituted the chief interest of it. He felt that he had penetrated moredeeply than ever before into this intricate affair, and that he had originateda leading idea—he could say it without self-flattery—calculated toclear up the whole business, to strengthen him in his official career, todiscomfit his enemies, and thereby to be of the greatest benefit to thegovernment. Directly the servant had set the tea and left the room, AlexeyAlexandrovitch got up and went to the writing-table. Moving into the middle ofthe table a portfolio of papers, with a scarcely perceptible smile ofself-satisfaction, he took a pencil from a rack and plunged into the perusal ofa complex report relating to the present complication. The complication was ofthis nature: Alexey Alexandrovitch’s characteristic quality as apolitician, that special individual qualification that every rising functionarypossesses, the qualification that with his unflagging ambition, his reserve,his honesty, and with his self-confidence had made his career, was his contemptfor red tape, his cutting down of correspondence, his direct contact, whereverpossible, with the living fact, and his economy. It happened that the famousCommission of the 2nd of June had set on foot an inquiry into the irrigation oflands in the Zaraisky province, which fell under Alexey Alexandrovitch’sdepartment, and was a glaring example of fruitless expenditure and paperreforms. Alexey Alexandrovitch was aware of the truth of this. The irrigationof these lands in the Zaraisky province had been initiated by the predecessorof Alexey Alexandrovitch’s predecessor. And vast sums of money hadactually been spent and were still being spent on this business, and utterlyunproductively, and the whole business could obviously lead to nothingwhatever. Alexey Alexandrovitch had perceived this at once on entering office,and would have liked to lay hands on the Board of Irrigation. But at first,when he did not yet feel secure in his position, he knew it would affect toomany interests, and would be injudicious. Later on he had been engrossed inother questions, and had simply forgotten the Board of Irrigation. It went ofitself, like all such boards, by the mere force of inertia. (Many people gainedtheir livelihood by the Board of Irrigation, especially one highlyconscientious and musical family: all the daughters played on stringedinstruments, and Alexey Alexandrovitch knew the family and had stood godfatherto one of the elder daughters.) The raising of this question by a hostiledepartment was in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s opinion a dishonorableproceeding, seeing that in every department there were things similar andworse, which no one inquired into, for well-known reasons of officialetiquette. However, now that the glove had been thrown down to him, he hadboldly picked it up and demanded the appointment of a special commission toinvestigate and verify the working of the Board of Irrigation of the lands inthe Zaraisky province. But in compensation he gave no quarter to the enemyeither. He demanded the appointment of another special commission to inquireinto the question of the Native Tribes Organization Committee. The question ofthe Native Tribes had been brought up incidentally in the Commission of the 2ndof June, and had been pressed forward actively by Alexey Alexandrovitch as oneadmitting of no delay on account of the deplorable condition of the nativetribes. In the commission this question had been a ground of contention betweenseveral departments. The department hostile to Alexey Alexandrovitch provedthat the condition of the native tribes was exceedingly flourishing, that theproposed reconstruction might be the ruin of their prosperity, and that ifthere were anything wrong, it arose mainly from the failure on the part ofAlexey Alexandrovitch’s department to carry out the measures prescribedby law. Now Alexey Alexandrovitch intended to demand: First, that a newcommission should be formed which should be empowered to investigate thecondition of the native tribes on the spot; secondly, if it should appear thatthe condition of the native tribes actually was such as it appeared to be fromthe official documents in the hands of the committee, that another newscientific commission should be appointed to investigate the deplorablecondition of the native tribes from the—(1) political, (2)administrative, (3) economic, (4) ethnographical, (5) material, and (6)religious points of view; thirdly, that evidence should be required from therival department of the measures that had been taken during the last ten yearsby that department for averting the disastrous conditions in which the nativetribes were now placed; and fourthly and finally, that that department explainwhy it had, as appeared from the evidence before the committee, from No. 17,015and 18,038, from December 5, 1863, and June 7, 1864, acted in directcontravention of the intent of the law T... Act 18, and the note to Act 36. Aflash of eagerness suffused the face of Alexey Alexandrovitch as he rapidlywrote out a synopsis of these ideas for his own benefit. Having filled a sheetof paper, he got up, rang, and sent a note to the chief secretary of hisdepartment to look up certain necessary facts for him. Getting up and walkingabout the room, he glanced again at the portrait, frowned, and smiledcontemptuously. After reading a little more of the book on Egyptianhieroglyphics, and renewing his interest in it, Alexey Alexandrovitch went tobed at eleven o’clock, and recollecting as he lay in bed the incidentwith his wife, he saw it now in by no means such a gloomy light.Chapter 15Though Anna had obstinately and with exasperation contradicted Vronsky when hetold her their position was impossible, at the bottom of her heart she regardedher own position as false and dishonorable, and she longed with her whole soulto change it. On the way home from the races she had told her husband the truthin a moment of excitement, and in spite of the agony she had suffered in doingso, she was glad of it. After her husband had left her, she told herself thatshe was glad, that now everything was made clear, and at least there would beno more lying and deception. It seemed to her beyond doubt that her positionwas now made clear forever. It might be bad, this new position, but it would beclear; there would be no indefiniteness or falsehood about it. The pain she hadcaused herself and her husband in uttering those words would be rewarded now byeverything being made clear, she thought. That evening she saw Vronsky, but shedid not tell him of what had passed between her and her husband, though, tomake the position definite, it was necessary to tell him.When she woke up next morning the first thing that rose to her mind was whatshe had said to her husband, and those words seemed to her so awful that shecould not conceive now how she could have brought herself to utter thosestrange, coarse words, and could not imagine what would come of it. But thewords were spoken, and Alexey Alexandrovitch had gone away without sayinganything. “I saw Vronsky and did not tell him. At the very instant he wasgoing away I would have turned him back and told him, but I changed my mind,because it was strange that I had not told him the first minute. Why was it Iwanted to tell him and did not tell him?” And in answer to this questiona burning blush of shame spread over her face. She knew what had kept her fromit, she knew that she had been ashamed. Her position, which had seemed to hersimplified the night before, suddenly struck her now as not only not simple,but as absolutely hopeless. She felt terrified at the disgrace, of which shehad not ever thought before. Directly she thought of what her husband would do,the most terrible ideas came to her mind. She had a vision of being turned outof the house, of her shame being proclaimed to all the world. She asked herselfwhere she should go when she was turned out of the house, and she could notfind an answer.When she thought of Vronsky, it seemed to her that he did not love her, that hewas already beginning to be tired of her, that she could not offer herself tohim, and she felt bitter against him for it. It seemed to her that the wordsthat she had spoken to her husband, and had continually repeated in herimagination, she had said to everyone, and everyone had heard them. She couldnot bring herself to look those of her own household in the face. She could notbring herself to call her maid, and still less go downstairs and see her sonand his governess.The maid, who had been listening at her door for a long while, came into herroom of her own accord. Anna glanced inquiringly into her face, and blushedwith a scared look. The maid begged her pardon for coming in, saying that shehad fancied the bell rang. She brought her clothes and a note. The note wasfrom Betsy. Betsy reminded her that Liza Merkalova and Baroness Shtoltz werecoming to play croquet with her that morning with their adorers, Kaluzhsky andold Stremov. “Come, if only as a study in morals. I shall expectyou,” she finished.Anna read the note and heaved a deep sigh.“Nothing, I need nothing,” she said to Annushka, who wasrearranging the bottles and brushes on the dressing table. “You can go.I’ll dress at once and come down. I need nothing.”Annushka went out, but Anna did not begin dressing, and sat in the sameposition, her head and hands hanging listlessly, and every now and then sheshivered all over, seemed as though she would make some gesture, utter someword, and sank back into lifelessness again. She repeated continually,“My God! my God!” But neither “God” nor“my” had any meaning to her. The idea of seeking help in herdifficulty in religion was as remote from her as seeking help from AlexeyAlexandrovitch himself, although she had never had doubts of the faith in whichshe had been brought up. She knew that the support of religion was possibleonly upon condition of renouncing what made up for her the whole meaning oflife. She was not simply miserable, she began to feel alarm at the newspiritual condition, never experienced before, in which she found herself. Shefelt as though everything were beginning to be double in her soul, just asobjects sometimes appear double to over-tired eyes. She hardly knew at timeswhat it was she feared, and what she hoped for. Whether she feared or desiredwhat had happened, or what was going to happen, and exactly what she longedfor, she could not have said.“Ah, what am I doing!” she said to herself, feeling a sudden thrillof pain in both sides of her head. When she came to herself, she saw that shewas holding her hair in both hands, each side of her temples, and pulling it.She jumped up, and began walking about.“The coffee is ready, and mademoiselle and Seryozha are waiting,”said Annushka, coming back again and finding Anna in the same position.“Seryozha? What about Seryozha?” Anna asked, with sudden eagerness,recollecting her son’s existence for the first time that morning.“He’s been naughty, I think,” answered Annushka with a smile.“In what way?”“Some peaches were lying on the table in the corner room. I think heslipped in and ate one of them on the sly.”The recollection of her son suddenly roused Anna from the helpless condition inwhich she found herself. She recalled the partly sincere, though greatlyexaggerated, rôle of the mother living for her child, which she had taken up oflate years, and she felt with joy that in the plight in which she found herselfshe had a support, quite apart from her relation to her husband or to Vronsky.This support was her son. In whatever position she might be placed, she couldnot lose her son. Her husband might put her to shame and turn her out, Vronskymight grow cold to her and go on living his own life apart (she thought of himagain with bitterness and reproach); she could not leave her son. She had anaim in life. And she must act; act to secure this relation to her son, so thathe might not be taken from her. Quickly indeed, as quickly as possible, shemust take action before he was taken from her. She must take her son and goaway. Here was the one thing she had to do now. She needed consolation. Shemust be calm, and get out of this insufferable position. The thought ofimmediate action binding her to her son, of going away somewhere with him, gaveher this consolation.She dressed quickly, went downstairs, and with resolute steps walked into thedrawing-room, where she found, as usual, waiting for her, the coffee, Seryozha,and his governess. Seryozha, all in white, with his back and head bent, wasstanding at a table under a looking-glass, and with an expression of intenseconcentration which she knew well, and in which he resembled his father, he wasdoing something to the flowers he carried.The governess had a particularly severe expression. Seryozha screamed shrilly,as he often did, “Ah, mamma!” and stopped, hesitating whether to goto greet his mother and put down the flowers, or to finish making the wreathand go with the flowers.The governess, after saying good-morning, began a long and detailed account ofSeryozha’s naughtiness, but Anna did not hear her; she was consideringwhether she would take her with her or not. “No, I won’t takeher,” she decided. “I’ll go alone with my child.”“Yes, it’s very wrong,” said Anna, and taking her son by theshoulder she looked at him, not severely, but with a timid glance thatbewildered and delighted the boy, and she kissed him. “Leave him tome,” she said to the astonished governess, and not letting go of her son,she sat down at the table, where coffee was set ready for her.“Mamma! I ... I ... didn’t....” he said, trying to make outfrom her expression what was in store for him in regard to the peaches.“Seryozha,” she said, as soon as the governess had left the room,“that was wrong, but you’ll never do it again, will you?... Youlove me?”She felt that the tears were coming into her eyes. “Can I help lovinghim?” she said to herself, looking deeply into his scared and at the sametime delighted eyes. “And can he ever join his father in punishing me? Isit possible he will not feel for me?” Tears were already flowing down herface, and to hide them she got up abruptly and almost ran out on to theterrace.After the thunder showers of the last few days, cold, bright weather had setin. The air was cold in the bright sun that filtered through the freshly washedleaves.She shivered, both from the cold and from the inward horror which had clutchedher with fresh force in the open air.“Run along, run along to Mariette,” she said to Seryozha, who hadfollowed her out, and she began walking up and down on the straw matting of theterrace. “Can it be that they won’t forgive me, won’tunderstand how it all couldn’t be helped?” she said to herself.Standing still, and looking at the tops of the aspen trees waving in the wind,with their freshly washed, brightly shining leaves in the cold sunshine, sheknew that they would not forgive her, that everyone and everything would bemerciless to her now as was that sky, that green. And again she felt thateverything was split in two in her soul. “I mustn’t, mustn’tthink,” she said to herself. “I must get ready. To go where? When?Whom to take with me? Yes, to Moscow by the evening train. Annushka andSeryozha, and only the most necessary things. But first I must write to themboth.” She went quickly indoors into her boudoir, sat down at the table,and wrote to her husband:—“After what has happened, I cannot remainany longer in your house. I am going away, and taking my son with me. Idon’t know the law, and so I don’t know with which of the parentsthe son should remain; but I take him with me because I cannot live withouthim. Be generous, leave him to me.”Up to this point she wrote rapidly and naturally, but the appeal to hisgenerosity, a quality she did not recognize in him, and the necessity ofwinding up the letter with something touching, pulled her up. “Of myfault and my remorse I cannot speak, because....”She stopped again, finding no connection in her ideas. “No,” shesaid to herself, “there’s no need of anything,” and tearingup the letter, she wrote it again, leaving out the allusion to generosity, andsealed it up.Another letter had to be written to Vronsky. “I have told myhusband,” she wrote, and she sat a long while unable to write more. Itwas so coarse, so unfeminine. “And what more am I to write to him?”she said to herself. Again a flush of shame spread over her face; she recalledhis composure, and a feeling of anger against him impelled her to tear thesheet with the phrase she had written into tiny bits. “No need ofanything,” she said to herself, and closing her blotting-case she wentupstairs, told the governess and the servants that she was going that day toMoscow, and at once set to work to pack up her things.Chapter 16All the rooms of the summer villa were full of porters, gardeners, and footmengoing to and fro carrying out things. Cupboards and chests were open; twicethey had sent to the shop for cord; pieces of newspaper were tossing about onthe floor. Two trunks, some bags and strapped-up rugs, had been carried downinto the hall. The carriage and two hired cabs were waiting at the steps. Anna,forgetting her inward agitation in the work of packing, was standing at a tablein her boudoir, packing her traveling bag, when Annushka called her attentionto the rattle of some carriage driving up. Anna looked out of the window andsaw Alexey Alexandrovitch’s courier on the steps, ringing at the frontdoor bell.“Run and find out what it is,” she said, and with a calm sense ofbeing prepared for anything, she sat down in a low chair, folding her hands onher knees. A footman brought in a thick packet directed in AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s hand.“The courier has orders to wait for an answer,” he said.“Very well,” she said, and as soon as he had left the room she toreopen the letter with trembling fingers. A roll of unfolded notes done up in awrapper fell out of it. She disengaged the letter and began reading it at theend. “Preparations shall be made for your arrival here ... I attachparticular significance to compliance....” she read. She ran on, thenback, read it all through, and once more read the letter all through again fromthe beginning. When she had finished, she felt that she was cold all over, andthat a fearful calamity, such as she had not expected, had burst upon her.In the morning she had regretted that she had spoken to her husband, and wishedfor nothing so much as that those words could be unspoken. And here this letterregarded them as unspoken, and gave her what she had wanted. But now thisletter seemed to her more awful than anything she had been able to conceive.“He’s right!” she said; “of course, he’s alwaysright; he’s a Christian, he’s generous! Yes, vile, base creature!And no one understands it except me, and no one ever will; and I can’texplain it. They say he’s so religious, so high-principled, so upright,so clever; but they don’t see what I’ve seen. They don’t knowhow he has crushed my life for eight years, crushed everything that was livingin me—he has not once even thought that I’m a live woman who musthave love. They don’t know how at every step he’s humiliated me,and been just as pleased with himself. Haven’t I striven, striven withall my strength, to find something to give meaning to my life? Haven’t Istruggled to love him, to love my son when I could not love my husband? But thetime came when I knew that I couldn’t cheat myself any longer, that I wasalive, that I was not to blame, that God has made me so that I must love andlive. And now what does he do? If he’d killed me, if he’d killedhim, I could have borne anything, I could have forgiven anything; but, no,he.... How was it I didn’t guess what he would do? He’s doing justwhat’s characteristic of his mean character. He’ll keep himself inthe right, while me, in my ruin, he’ll drive still lower to worse ruinyet....”She recalled the words from the letter. “You can conjecture what awaitsyou and your son....” “That’s a threat to take away my child,and most likely by their stupid law he can. But I know very well why he saysit. He doesn’t believe even in my love for my child, or he despises it(just as he always used to ridicule it). He despises that feeling in me, but heknows that I won’t abandon my child, that I can’t abandon my child,that there could be no life for me without my child, even with him whom I love;but that if I abandoned my child and ran away from him, I should be acting likethe most infamous, basest of women. He knows that, and knows that I amincapable of doing that.”She recalled another sentence in the letter. “Our life must go on as ithas done in the past....” “That life was miserable enough in theold days; it has been awful of late. What will it be now? And he knows allthat; he knows that I can’t repent that I breathe, that I love; he knowsthat it can lead to nothing but lying and deceit; but he wants to go ontorturing me. I know him; I know that he’s at home and is happy indeceit, like a fish swimming in the water. No, I won’t give him thathappiness. I’ll break through the spiderweb of lies in which he wants tocatch me, come what may. Anything’s better than lying and deceit.”“But how? My God! my God! Was ever a woman so miserable as Iam?...”“No; I will break through it, I will break through it!” she cried,jumping up and keeping back her tears. And she went to the writing-table towrite him another letter. But at the bottom of her heart she felt that she wasnot strong enough to break through anything, that she was not strong enough toget out of her old position, however false and dishonorable it might be.She sat down at the writing-table, but instead of writing she clasped her handson the table, and, laying her head on them, burst into tears, with sobs andheaving breast like a child crying. She was weeping that her dream of herposition being made clear and definite had been annihilated forever. She knewbeforehand that everything would go on in the old way, and far worse, indeed,than in the old way. She felt that the position in the world that she enjoyed,and that had seemed to her of so little consequence in the morning, that thisposition was precious to her, that she would not have the strength to exchangeit for the shameful position of a woman who has abandoned husband and child tojoin her lover; that however much she might struggle, she could not be strongerthan herself. She would never know freedom in love, but would remain forever aguilty wife, with the menace of detection hanging over her at every instant;deceiving her husband for the sake of a shameful connection with a man livingapart and away from her, whose life she could never share. She knew that thiswas how it would be, and at the same time it was so awful that she could noteven conceive what it would end in. And she cried without restraint, aschildren cry when they are punished.The sound of the footman’s steps forced her to rouse herself, and, hidingher face from him, she pretended to be writing.“The courier asks if there’s an answer,” the footmanannounced.“An answer? Yes,” said Anna. “Let him wait. I’llring.”“What can I write?” she thought. “What can I decide uponalone? What do I know? What do I want? What is there I care for?” Againshe felt that her soul was beginning to be split in two. She was terrifiedagain at this feeling, and clutched at the first pretext for doing somethingwhich might divert her thoughts from herself. “I ought to seeAlexey” (so she called Vronsky in her thoughts); “no one but he cantell me what I ought to do. I’ll go to Betsy’s, perhaps I shall seehim there,” she said to herself, completely forgetting that when she hadtold him the day before that she was not going to Princess Tverskaya’s,he had said that in that case he should not go either. She went up to thetable, wrote to her husband, “I have received yourletter.—A.”; and, ringing the bell, gave it to the footman.“We are not going,” she said to Annushka, as she came in.“Not going at all?”“No; don’t unpack till tomorrow, and let the carriage wait.I’m going to the princess’s.”“Which dress am I to get ready?”Chapter 17The croquet party to which the Princess Tverskaya had invited Anna was toconsist of two ladies and their adorers. These two ladies were the chiefrepresentatives of a select new Petersburg circle, nicknamed, in imitation ofsome imitation, les sept merveilles du monde. These ladies belonged to acircle which, though of the highest society, was utterly hostile to that inwhich Anna moved. Moreover, Stremov, one of the most influential people inPetersburg, and the elderly admirer of Liza Merkalova, was AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s enemy in the political world. From all theseconsiderations Anna had not meant to go, and the hints in PrincessTverskaya’s note referred to her refusal. But now Anna was eager to go,in the hope of seeing Vronsky.Anna arrived at Princess Tverskaya’s earlier than the other guests.At the same moment as she entered, Vronsky’s footman, with side-whiskerscombed out like a Kammerjunker, went in too. He stopped at the door,and, taking off his cap, let her pass. Anna recognized him, and only thenrecalled that Vronsky had told her the day before that he would not come. Mostlikely he was sending a note to say so.As she took off her outer garment in the hall, she heard the footman,pronouncing his “r’s” even like a Kammerjunker,say, “From the count for the princess,” and hand the note.She longed to question him as to where his master was. She longed to turn backand send him a letter to come and see her, or to go herself to see him. Butneither the first nor the second nor the third course was possible. Already sheheard bells ringing to announce her arrival ahead of her, and PrincessTverskaya’s footman was standing at the open door waiting for her to goforward into the inner rooms.“The princess is in the garden; they will inform her immediately. Wouldyou be pleased to walk into the garden?” announced another footman inanother room.The position of uncertainty, of indecision, was still the same as athome—worse, in fact, since it was impossible to take any step, impossibleto see Vronsky, and she had to remain here among outsiders, in company souncongenial to her present mood. But she was wearing a dress that she knewsuited her. She was not alone; all around was that luxurious setting ofidleness that she was used to, and she felt less wretched than at home. She wasnot forced to think what she was to do. Everything would be done of itself. Onmeeting Betsy coming towards her in a white gown that struck her by itselegance, Anna smiled at her just as she always did. Princess Tverskaya waswalking with Tushkevitch and a young lady, a relation, who, to the great joy ofher parents in the provinces, was spending the summer with the fashionableprincess.There was probably something unusual about Anna, for Betsy noticed it at once.“I slept badly,” answered Anna, looking intently at the footman whocame to meet them, and, as she supposed, brought Vronsky’s note.“How glad I am you’ve come!” said Betsy. “I’mtired, and was just longing to have some tea before they come. You mightgo”—she turned to Tushkevitch—“with Masha, and try thecroquet ground over there where they’ve been cutting it. We shall havetime to talk a little over tea; we’ll have a cozy chat, eh?” shesaid in English to Anna, with a smile, pressing the hand with which she held aparasol.“Yes, especially as I can’t stay very long with you. I’mforced to go on to old Madame Vrede. I’ve been promising to go for acentury,” said Anna, to whom lying, alien as it was to her nature, hadbecome not merely simple and natural in society, but a positive source ofsatisfaction. Why she said this, which she had not thought of a second before,she could not have explained. She had said it simply from the reflection thatas Vronsky would not be here, she had better secure her own freedom, and try tosee him somehow. But why she had spoken of old Madame Vrede, whom she had to goand see, as she had to see many other people, she could not have explained; andyet, as it afterwards turned out, had she contrived the most cunning devices tomeet Vronsky, she could have thought of nothing better.“No. I’m not going to let you go for anything,” answeredBetsy, looking intently into Anna’s face. “Really, if I were notfond of you, I should feel offended. One would think you were afraid my societywould compromise you. Tea in the little dining-room, please,” she said,half closing her eyes, as she always did when addressing the footman.Taking the note from him, she read it.“Alexey’s playing us false,” she said in French; “hewrites that he can’t come,” she added in a tone as simple andnatural as though it could never enter her head that Vronsky could meananything more to Anna than a game of croquet. Anna knew that Betsy kneweverything, but, hearing how she spoke of Vronsky before her, she almost feltpersuaded for a minute that she knew nothing.“Ah!” said Anna indifferently, as though not greatly interested inthe matter, and she went on smiling: “How can you or your friendscompromise anyone?”This playing with words, this hiding of a secret, had a great fascination forAnna, as, indeed, it has for all women. And it was not the necessity ofconcealment, not the aim with which the concealment was contrived, but theprocess of concealment itself which attracted her.“I can’t be more Catholic than the Pope,” she said.“Stremov and Liza Merkalova, why, they’re the cream of the cream ofsociety. Besides, they’re received everywhere, andI”—she laid special stress on the I—“have neverbeen strict and intolerant. It’s simply that I haven’t thetime.”“No; you don’t care, perhaps, to meet Stremov? Let him and AlexeyAlexandrovitch tilt at each other in the committee—that’s no affairof ours. But in the world, he’s the most amiable man I know, and adevoted croquet player. You shall see. And, in spite of his absurd position asLiza’s lovesick swain at his age, you ought to see how he carries off theabsurd position. He’s very nice. Sappho Shtoltz you don’t know? Oh,that’s a new type, quite new.”Betsy said all this, and, at the same time, from her good-humored, shrewdglance, Anna felt that she partly guessed her plight, and was hatchingsomething for her benefit. They were in the little boudoir.“I must write to Alexey though,” and Betsy sat down to the table,scribbled a few lines, and put the note in an envelope.“I’m telling him to come to dinner. I’ve one lady extra todinner with me, and no man to take her in. Look what I’ve said, will thatpersuade him? Excuse me, I must leave you for a minute. Would you seal it up,please, and send it off?” she said from the door; “I have to givesome directions.”Without a moment’s thought, Anna sat down to the table with Betsy’sletter, and, without reading it, wrote below: “It’s essential forme to see you. Come to the Vrede garden. I shall be there at sixo’clock.” She sealed it up, and, Betsy coming back, in her presencehanded the note to be taken.At tea, which was brought them on a little tea-table in the cool littledrawing-room, the cozy chat promised by Princess Tverskaya before the arrivalof her visitors really did come off between the two women. They criticized thepeople they were expecting, and the conversation fell upon Liza Merkalova.“She’s very sweet, and I always liked her,” said Anna.“You ought to like her. She raves about you. Yesterday she came up to meafter the races and was in despair at not finding you. She says you’re areal heroine of romance, and that if she were a man she would do all sorts ofmad things for your sake. Stremov says she does that as it is.”“But do tell me, please, I never could make it out,” said Anna,after being silent for some time, speaking in a tone that showed she was notasking an idle question, but that what she was asking was of more importance toher than it should have been; “do tell me, please, what are her relationswith Prince Kaluzhsky, Mishka, as he’s called? I’ve met them solittle. What does it mean?”Betsy smiled with her eyes, and looked intently at Anna.“It’s a new manner,” she said. “They’ve alladopted that manner. They’ve flung their caps over the windmills. Butthere are ways and ways of flinging them.”“Yes, but what are her relations precisely with Kaluzhsky?”Betsy broke into unexpectedly mirthful and irrepressible laughter, a thingwhich rarely happened with her.“You’re encroaching on Princess Myakaya’s special domain now.That’s the question of an enfant terrible,” and Betsyobviously tried to restrain herself, but could not, and went off into peals ofthat infectious laughter that people laugh who do not laugh often.“You’d better ask them,” she brought out, between tears oflaughter.“No; you laugh,” said Anna, laughing too in spite of herself,“but I never could understand it. I can’t understand thehusband’s rôle in it.”“The husband? Liza Merkalova’s husband carries her shawl, and isalways ready to be of use. But anything more than that in reality, no one caresto inquire. You know in decent society one doesn’t talk or think even ofcertain details of the toilet. That’s how it is with this.”“Will you be at Madame Rolandak’s fête?” asked Anna, tochange the conversation.“I don’t think so,” answered Betsy, and, without looking ather friend, she began filling the little transparent cups with fragrant tea.Putting a cup before Anna, she took out a cigarette, and, fitting it into asilver holder, she lighted it.“It’s like this, you see: I’m in a fortunate position,”she began, quite serious now, as she took up her cup. “I understand you,and I understand Liza. Liza now is one of those naïve natures that, likechildren, don’t know what’s good and what’s bad. Anyway, shedidn’t comprehend it when she was very young. And now she’s awarethat the lack of comprehension suits her. Now, perhaps, she doesn’t knowon purpose,” said Betsy, with a subtle smile. “But, anyway, itsuits her. The very same thing, don’t you see, may be looked attragically, and turned into a misery, or it may be looked at simply and evenhumorously. Possibly you are inclined to look at things too tragically.”“How I should like to know other people just as I know myself!”said Anna, seriously and dreamily. “Am I worse than other people, orbetter? I think I’m worse.”“Enfant terrible, enfant terrible!” repeated Betsy.“But here they are.”Chapter 18They heard the sound of steps and a man’s voice, then a woman’svoice and laughter, and immediately thereafter there walked in the expectedguests: Sappho Shtoltz, and a young man beaming with excess of health, theso-called Vaska. It was evident that ample supplies of beefsteak, truffles, andBurgundy never failed to reach him at the fitting hour. Vaska bowed to the twoladies, and glanced at them, but only for one second. He walked after Sapphointo the drawing-room, and followed her about as though he were chained to her,keeping his sparkling eyes fixed on her as though he wanted to eat her. SapphoShtoltz was a blonde beauty with black eyes. She walked with smart little stepsin high-heeled shoes, and shook hands with the ladies vigorously like a man.Anna had never met this new star of fashion, and was struck by her beauty, theexaggerated extreme to which her dress was carried, and the boldness of hermanners. On her head there was such a superstructure of soft, goldenhair—her own and false mixed—that her head was equal in size to theelegantly rounded bust, of which so much was exposed in front. The impulsiveabruptness of her movements was such that at every step the lines of her kneesand the upper part of her legs were distinctly marked under her dress, and thequestion involuntarily rose to the mind where in the undulating, piled-upmountain of material at the back the real body of the woman, so small andslender, so naked in front, and so hidden behind and below, really came to anend.Betsy made haste to introduce her to Anna.“Only fancy, we all but ran over two soldiers,” she began tellingthem at once, using her eyes, smiling and twitching away her tail, which sheflung back at one stroke all on one side. “I drove here with Vaska....Ah, to be sure, you don’t know each other.” And mentioning hissurname she introduced the young man, and reddening a little, broke into aringing laugh at her mistake—that is, at her having called him Vaska to astranger. Vaska bowed once more to Anna, but he said nothing to her. Headdressed Sappho: “You’ve lost your bet. We got here first. Payup,” said he, smiling.Sappho laughed still more festively.“Not just now,” said she.“Oh, all right, I’ll have it later.”“Very well, very well. Oh, yes.” She turned suddenly to PrincessBetsy: “I am a nice person ... I positively forgot it ... I’vebrought you a visitor. And here he comes.” The unexpected young visitor,whom Sappho had invited, and whom she had forgotten, was, however, a personageof such consequence that, in spite of his youth, both the ladies rose on hisentrance.He was a new admirer of Sappho’s. He now dogged her footsteps, likeVaska.Soon after Prince Kaluzhsky arrived, and Liza Merkalova with Stremov. LizaMerkalova was a thin brunette, with an Oriental, languid type of face,and—as everyone used to say—exquisite enigmatic eyes. The tone ofher dark dress (Anna immediately observed and appreciated the fact) was inperfect harmony with her style of beauty. Liza was as soft and enervated asSappho was smart and abrupt.But to Anna’s taste Liza was far more attractive. Betsy had said to Annathat she had adopted the pose of an innocent child, but when Anna saw her, shefelt that this was not the truth. She really was both innocent and corrupt, buta sweet and passive woman. It is true that her tone was the same asSappho’s; that like Sappho, she had two men, one young and one old,tacked onto her, and devouring her with their eyes. But there was something inher higher than what surrounded her. There was in her the glow of the realdiamond among glass imitations. This glow shone out in her exquisite, trulyenigmatic eyes. The weary, and at the same time passionate, glance of thoseeyes, encircled by dark rings, impressed one by its perfect sincerity. Everyonelooking into those eyes fancied he knew her wholly, and knowing her, could notbut love her. At the sight of Anna, her whole face lighted up at once with asmile of delight.“Ah, how glad I am to see you!” she said, going up to her.“Yesterday at the races all I wanted was to get to you, but you’dgone away. I did so want to see you, yesterday especially. Wasn’t itawful?” she said, looking at Anna with eyes that seemed to lay bare allher soul.“Yes; I had no idea it would be so thrilling,” said Anna, blushing.The company got up at this moment to go into the garden.“I’m not going,” said Liza, smiling and settling herselfclose to Anna. “You won’t go either, will you? Who wants to playcroquet?”“Oh, I like it,” said Anna.“There, how do you manage never to be bored by things? It’sdelightful to look at you. You’re alive, but I’m bored.”“How can you be bored? Why, you live in the liveliest set inPetersburg,” said Anna.“Possibly the people who are not of our set are even more bored; butwe—I certainly—are not happy, but awfully, awfully bored.”Sappho smoking a cigarette went off into the garden with the two young men.Betsy and Stremov remained at the tea-table.“What, bored!” said Betsy. “Sappho says they did enjoythemselves tremendously at your house last night.”“Ah, how dreary it all was!” said Liza Merkalova. “We alldrove back to my place after the races. And always the same people, always thesame. Always the same thing. We lounged about on sofas all the evening. What isthere to enjoy in that? No; do tell me how you manage never to be bored?”she said, addressing Anna again. “One has but to look at you and onesees, here’s a woman who may be happy or unhappy, but isn’t bored.Tell me how you do it?”“I do nothing,” answered Anna, blushing at these searchingquestions.“That’s the best way,” Stremov put in. Stremov was a man offifty, partly gray, but still vigorous-looking, very ugly, but with acharacteristic and intelligent face. Liza Merkalova was his wife’s niece,and he spent all his leisure hours with her. On meeting Anna Karenina, as hewas Alexey Alexandrovitch’s enemy in the government, he tried, like ashrewd man and a man of the world, to be particularly cordial with her, thewife of his enemy.“‘Nothing,’” he put in with a subtle smile,“that’s the very best way. I told you long ago,” he said,turning to Liza Merkalova, “that if you don’t want to be bored, youmustn’t think you’re going to be bored. It’s just as youmustn’t be afraid of not being able to fall asleep, if you’reafraid of sleeplessness. That’s just what Anna Arkadyevna has justsaid.”“I should be very glad if I had said it, for it’s not only cleverbut true,” said Anna, smiling.“No, do tell me why it is one can’t go to sleep, and onecan’t help being bored?”“To sleep well one ought to work, and to enjoy oneself one ought to worktoo.”“What am I to work for when my work is no use to anybody? And Ican’t and won’t knowingly make a pretense about it.”“You’re incorrigible,” said Stremov, not looking at her, andhe spoke again to Anna. As he rarely met Anna, he could say nothing butcommonplaces to her, but he said those commonplaces as to when she wasreturning to Petersburg, and how fond Countess Lidia Ivanovna was of her, withan expression which suggested that he longed with his whole soul to please herand show his regard for her and even more than that.Tushkevitch came in, announcing that the party were awaiting the other playersto begin croquet.“No, don’t go away, please don’t,” pleaded LizaMerkalova, hearing that Anna was going. Stremov joined in her entreaties.“It’s too violent a transition,” he said, “to go fromsuch company to old Madame Vrede. And besides, you will only give her a chancefor talking scandal, while here you arouse none but such different feelings ofthe highest and most opposite kind,” he said to her.Anna pondered for an instant in uncertainty. This shrewd man’s flatteringwords, the naïve, childlike affection shown her by Liza Merkalova, and all thesocial atmosphere she was used to,—it was all so easy, and what was instore for her was so difficult, that she was for a minute in uncertaintywhether to remain, whether to put off a little longer the painful moment ofexplanation. But remembering what was in store for her alone at home, if shedid not come to some decision, remembering that gesture—terrible even inmemory—when she had clutched her hair in both hands—she saidgood-bye and went away.Chapter 19In spite of Vronsky’s apparently frivolous life in society, he was a manwho hated irregularity. In early youth in the Corps of Pages, he hadexperienced the humiliation of a refusal, when he had tried, being indifficulties, to borrow money, and since then he had never once put himself inthe same position again.In order to keep his affairs in some sort of order, he used about five times ayear (more or less frequently, according to circumstances) to shut himself upalone and put all his affairs into definite shape. This he used to call his dayof reckoning or faire la lessive.On waking up the day after the races, Vronsky put on a white linen coat, andwithout shaving or taking his bath, he distributed about the table moneys,bills, and letters, and set to work. Petritsky, who knew he was ill-tempered onsuch occasions, on waking up and seeing his comrade at the writing-table,quietly dressed and went out without getting in his way.Every man who knows to the minutest details all the complexity of theconditions surrounding him, cannot help imagining that the complexity of theseconditions, and the difficulty of making them clear, is something exceptionaland personal, peculiar to himself, and never supposes that others aresurrounded by just as complicated an array of personal affairs as he is. Soindeed it seemed to Vronsky. And not without inward pride, and not withoutreason, he thought that any other man would long ago have been in difficulties,would have been forced to some dishonorable course, if he had found himself insuch a difficult position. But Vronsky felt that now especially it wasessential for him to clear up and define his position if he were to avoidgetting into difficulties.What Vronsky attacked first as being the easiest was his pecuniary position.Writing out on note paper in his minute hand all that he owed, he added up theamount and found that his debts amounted to seventeen thousand and some oddhundreds, which he left out for the sake of clearness. Reckoning up his moneyand his bank book, he found that he had left one thousand eight hundredroubles, and nothing coming in before the New Year. Reckoning over again hislist of debts, Vronsky copied it, dividing it into three classes. In the firstclass he put the debts which he would have to pay at once, or for which he mustin any case have the money ready so that on demand for payment there could notbe a moment’s delay in paying. Such debts amounted to about fourthousand: one thousand five hundred for a horse, and two thousand five hundredas surety for a young comrade, Venovsky, who had lost that sum to a cardsharperin Vronsky’s presence. Vronsky had wanted to pay the money at the time(he had that amount then), but Venovsky and Yashvin had insisted that theywould pay and not Vronsky, who had not played. That was so far well, butVronsky knew that in this dirty business, though his only share in it wasundertaking by word of mouth to be surety for Venovsky, it was absolutelynecessary for him to have the two thousand five hundred roubles so as to beable to fling it at the swindler, and have no more words with him. And so forthis first and most important division he must have four thousand roubles. Thesecond class—eight thousand roubles—consisted of less importantdebts. These were principally accounts owing in connection with his racehorses, to the purveyor of oats and hay, the English saddler, and so on. Hewould have to pay some two thousand roubles on these debts too, in order to bequite free from anxiety. The last class of debts—to shops, to hotels, tohis tailor—were such as need not be considered. So that he needed atleast six thousand roubles for current expenses, and he only had one thousandeight hundred. For a man with one hundred thousand roubles of revenue, whichwas what everyone fixed as Vronsky’s income, such debts, one wouldsuppose, could hardly be embarrassing; but the fact was that he was far fromhaving one hundred thousand. His father’s immense property, which aloneyielded a yearly income of two hundred thousand, was left undivided between thebrothers. At the time when the elder brother, with a mass of debts, marriedPrincess Varya Tchirkova, the daughter of a Decembrist without any fortunewhatever, Alexey had given up to his elder brother almost the whole income fromhis father’s estate, reserving for himself only twenty-five thousand ayear from it. Alexey had said at the time to his brother that that sum would besufficient for him until he married, which he probably never would do. And hisbrother, who was in command of one of the most expensive regiments, and wasonly just married, could not decline the gift. His mother, who had her ownseparate property, had allowed Alexey every year twenty thousand in addition tothe twenty-five thousand he had reserved, and Alexey had spent it all. Of latehis mother, incensed with him on account of his love affair and his leavingMoscow, had given up sending him the money. And in consequence of this,Vronsky, who had been in the habit of living on the scale of forty-fivethousand a year, having only received twenty thousand that year, found himselfnow in difficulties. To get out of these difficulties, he could not apply tohis mother for money. Her last letter, which he had received the day before,had particularly exasperated him by the hints in it that she was quite ready tohelp him to succeed in the world and in the army, but not to lead a life whichwas a scandal to all good society. His mother’s attempt to buy him stunghim to the quick and made him feel colder than ever to her. But he could notdraw back from the generous word when it was once uttered, even though he feltnow, vaguely foreseeing certain eventualities in his intrigue with MadameKarenina, that this generous word had been spoken thoughtlessly, and that eventhough he were not married he might need all the hundred thousand of income.But it was impossible to draw back. He had only to recall his brother’swife, to remember how that sweet, delightful Varya sought, at every convenientopportunity, to remind him that she remembered his generosity and appreciatedit, to grasp the impossibility of taking back his gift. It was as impossible asbeating a woman, stealing, or lying. One thing only could and ought to be done,and Vronsky determined upon it without an instant’s hesitation: to borrowmoney from a money-lender, ten thousand roubles, a proceeding which presentedno difficulty, to cut down his expenses generally, and to sell his race horses.Resolving on this, he promptly wrote a note to Rolandak, who had more than oncesent to him with offers to buy horses from him. Then he sent for the Englishmanand the money-lender, and divided what money he had according to the accountshe intended to pay. Having finished this business, he wrote a cold and cuttinganswer to his mother. Then he took out of his notebook three notes ofAnna’s, read them again, burned them, and remembering their conversationon the previous day, he sank into meditation.Chapter 20Vronsky’s life was particularly happy in that he had a code ofprinciples, which defined with unfailing certitude what he ought and what heought not to do. This code of principles covered only a very small circle ofcontingencies, but then the principles were never doubtful, and Vronsky, as henever went outside that circle, had never had a moment’s hesitation aboutdoing what he ought to do. These principles laid down as invariable rules: thatone must pay a cardsharper, but need not pay a tailor; that one must never tella lie to a man, but one may to a woman; that one must never cheat anyone, butone may a husband; that one must never pardon an insult, but one may give oneand so on. These principles were possibly not reasonable and not good, but theywere of unfailing certainty, and so long as he adhered to them, Vronsky feltthat his heart was at peace and he could hold his head up. Only quite lately inregard to his relations with Anna, Vronsky had begun to feel that his code ofprinciples did not fully cover all possible contingencies, and to foresee inthe future difficulties and perplexities for which he could find no guidingclue.His present relation to Anna and to her husband was to his mind clear andsimple. It was clearly and precisely defined in the code of principles by whichhe was guided.She was an honorable woman who had bestowed her love upon him, and he lovedher, and therefore she was in his eyes a woman who had a right to the same, oreven more, respect than a lawful wife. He would have had his hand chopped offbefore he would have allowed himself by a word, by a hint, to humiliate her, oreven to fall short of the fullest respect a woman could look for.His attitude to society, too, was clear. Everyone might know, might suspect it,but no one might dare to speak of it. If any did so, he was ready to force allwho might speak to be silent and to respect the non-existent honor of the womanhe loved.His attitude to the husband was the clearest of all. From the moment that Annaloved Vronsky, he had regarded his own right over her as the one thingunassailable. Her husband was simply a superfluous and tiresome person. Nodoubt he was in a pitiable position, but how could that be helped? The onething the husband had a right to was to demand satisfaction with a weapon inhis hand, and Vronsky was prepared for this at any minute.But of late new inner relations had arisen between him and her, whichfrightened Vronsky by their indefiniteness. Only the day before she had toldhim that she was with child. And he felt that this fact and what she expectedof him called for something not fully defined in that code of principles bywhich he had hitherto steered his course in life. And he had been indeed caughtunawares, and at the first moment when she spoke to him of her position, hisheart had prompted him to beg her to leave her husband. He had said that, butnow thinking things over he saw clearly that it would be better to manage toavoid that; and at the same time, as he told himself so, he was afraid whetherit was not wrong.“If I told her to leave her husband, that must mean uniting her life withmine; am I prepared for that? How can I take her away now, when I have nomoney? Supposing I could arrange.... But how can I take her away whileI’m in the service? If I say that—I ought to be prepared to do it,that is, I ought to have the money and to retire from the army.”And he grew thoughtful. The question whether to retire from the service or notbrought him to the other and perhaps the chief though hidden interest of hislife, of which none knew but he.Ambition was the old dream of his youth and childhood, a dream which he did notconfess even to himself, though it was so strong that now this passion was evendoing battle with his love. His first steps in the world and in the service hadbeen successful, but two years before he had made a great mistake. Anxious toshow his independence and to advance, he had refused a post that had beenoffered him, hoping that this refusal would heighten his value; but it turnedout that he had been too bold, and he was passed over. And having, whether heliked or not, taken up for himself the position of an independent man, hecarried it off with great tact and good sense, behaving as though he bore nogrudge against anyone, did not regard himself as injured in any way, and caredfor nothing but to be left alone since he was enjoying himself. In reality hehad ceased to enjoy himself as long ago as the year before, when he went awayto Moscow. He felt that this independent attitude of a man who might have doneanything, but cared to do nothing, was already beginning to pall, that manypeople were beginning to fancy that he was not really capable of anything butbeing a straightforward, good-natured fellow. His connection with MadameKarenina, by creating so much sensation and attracting general attention, hadgiven him a fresh distinction which soothed his gnawing worm of ambition for awhile, but a week before that worm had been roused up again with fresh force.The friend of his childhood, a man of the same set, of the same coterie, hiscomrade in the Corps of Pages, Serpuhovskoy, who had left school with him andhad been his rival in class, in gymnastics, in their scrapes and their dreamsof glory, had come back a few days before from Central Asia, where he hadgained two steps up in rank, and an order rarely bestowed upon generals soyoung.As soon as he arrived in Petersburg, people began to talk about him as a newlyrisen star of the first magnitude. A schoolfellow of Vronsky’s and of thesame age, he was a general and was expecting a command, which might haveinfluence on the course of political events; while Vronsky, independent andbrilliant and beloved by a charming woman though he was, was simply a cavalrycaptain who was readily allowed to be as independent as ever he liked.“Of course I don’t envy Serpuhovskoy and never could envy him; buthis advancement shows me that one has only to watch one’s opportunity,and the career of a man like me may be very rapidly made. Three years ago hewas in just the same position as I am. If I retire, I burn my ships. If Iremain in the army, I lose nothing. She said herself she did not wish to changeher position. And with her love I cannot feel envious of Serpuhovskoy.”And slowly twirling his mustaches, he got up from the table and walked aboutthe room. His eyes shone particularly brightly, and he felt in that confident,calm, and happy frame of mind which always came after he had thoroughly facedhis position. Everything was straight and clear, just as after former days ofreckoning. He shaved, took a cold bath, dressed and went out.Chapter 21“We’ve come to fetch you. Your lessive lasted a good timetoday,” said Petritsky. “Well, is it over?”“It is over,” answered Vronsky, smiling with his eyes only, andtwirling the tips of his mustaches as circumspectly as though after the perfectorder into which his affairs had been brought any over-bold or rapid movementmight disturb it.“You’re always just as if you’d come out of a bath afterit,” said Petritsky. “I’ve come from Gritsky’s”(that was what they called the colonel); “they’re expectingyou.”Vronsky, without answering, looked at his comrade, thinking of something else.“Yes; is that music at his place?” he said, listening to thefamiliar sounds of polkas and waltzes floating across to him.“What’s the fête?”“Serpuhovskoy’s come.”“Aha!” said Vronsky, “why, I didn’t know.”The smile in his eyes gleamed more brightly than ever.Having once made up his mind that he was happy in his love, that he sacrificedhis ambition to it—having anyway taken up this position, Vronsky wasincapable of feeling either envious of Serpuhovskoy or hurt with him for notcoming first to him when he came to the regiment. Serpuhovskoy was a goodfriend, and he was delighted he had come.“Ah, I’m very glad!”The colonel, Demin, had taken a large country house. The whole party were inthe wide lower balcony. In the courtyard the first objects that metVronsky’s eyes were a band of singers in white linen coats, standing neara barrel of vodka, and the robust, good-humored figure of the colonelsurrounded by officers. He had gone out as far as the first step of the balconyand was loudly shouting across the band that played Offenbach’squadrille, waving his arms and giving some orders to a few soldiers standing onone side. A group of soldiers, a quartermaster, and several subalterns came upto the balcony with Vronsky. The colonel returned to the table, went out againonto the steps with a tumbler in his hand, and proposed the toast, “Tothe health of our former comrade, the gallant general, Prince Serpuhovskoy.Hurrah!”The colonel was followed by Serpuhovskoy, who came out onto the steps smiling,with a glass in his hand.“You always get younger, Bondarenko,” he said to the rosy-checked,smart-looking quartermaster standing just before him, still youngish lookingthough doing his second term of service.It was three years since Vronsky had seen Serpuhovskoy. He looked more robust,had let his whiskers grow, but was still the same graceful creature, whose faceand figure were even more striking from their softness and nobility than theirbeauty. The only change Vronsky detected in him was that subdued, continualradiance of beaming content which settles on the faces of men who aresuccessful and are sure of the recognition of their success by everyone.Vronsky knew that radiant air, and immediately observed it in Serpuhovskoy.As Serpuhovskoy came down the steps he saw Vronsky. A smile of pleasure lightedup his face. He tossed his head upwards and waved the glass in his hand,greeting Vronsky, and showing him by the gesture that he could not come to himbefore the quartermaster, who stood craning forward his lips ready to bekissed.“Here he is!” shouted the colonel. “Yashvin told me you werein one of your gloomy tempers.”Serpuhovskoy kissed the moist, fresh lips of the gallant-looking quartermaster,and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief, went up to Vronsky.“How glad I am!” he said, squeezing his hand and drawing him on oneside.“You look after him,” the colonel shouted to Yashvin, pointing toVronsky; and he went down below to the soldiers.“Why weren’t you at the races yesterday? I expected to see youthere,” said Vronsky, scrutinizing Serpuhovskoy.“I did go, but late. I beg your pardon,” he added, and he turned tothe adjutant: “Please have this divided from me, each man as much as itruns to.” And he hurriedly took notes for three hundred roubles from hispocketbook, blushing a little.“Vronsky! Have anything to eat or drink?” asked Yashvin. “Hi,something for the count to eat! Ah, here it is: have a glass!”The fête at the colonel’s lasted a long while. There was a great deal ofdrinking. They tossed Serpuhovskoy in the air and caught him again severaltimes. Then they did the same to the colonel. Then, to the accompaniment of theband, the colonel himself danced with Petritsky. Then the colonel, who began toshow signs of feebleness, sat down on a bench in the courtyard and begandemonstrating to Yashvin the superiority of Russia over Prussia, especially incavalry attack, and there was a lull in the revelry for a moment. Serpuhovskoywent into the house to the bathroom to wash his hands and found Vronsky there;Vronsky was drenching his head with water. He had taken off his coat and puthis sunburnt, hairy neck under the tap, and was rubbing it and his head withhis hands. When he had finished, Vronsky sat down by Serpuhovskoy. They bothsat down in the bathroom on a lounge, and a conversation began which was veryinteresting to both of them.“I’ve always been hearing about you through my wife,” saidSerpuhovskoy. “I’m glad you’ve been seeing her prettyoften.”“She’s friendly with Varya, and they’re the only women inPetersburg I care about seeing,” answered Vronsky, smiling. He smiledbecause he foresaw the topic the conversation would turn on, and he was glad ofit.“The only ones?” Serpuhovskoy queried, smiling.“Yes; and I heard news of you, but not only through your wife,”said Vronsky, checking his hint by a stern expression of face. “I wasgreatly delighted to hear of your success, but not a bit surprised. I expectedeven more.”Serpuhovskoy smiled. Such an opinion of him was obviously agreeable to him, andhe did not think it necessary to conceal it.“Well, I on the contrary expected less—I’ll own frankly. ButI’m glad, very glad. I’m ambitious; that’s my weakness, and Iconfess to it.”“Perhaps you wouldn’t confess to it if you hadn’t beensuccessful,” said Vronsky.“I don’t suppose so,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling again.“I won’t say life wouldn’t be worth living without it, but itwould be dull. Of course I may be mistaken, but I fancy I have a certaincapacity for the line I’ve chosen, and that power of any sort in myhands, if it is to be, will be better than in the hands of a good many people Iknow,” said Serpuhovskoy, with beaming consciousness of success;“and so the nearer I get to it, the better pleased I am.”“Perhaps that is true for you, but not for everyone. I used to think sotoo, but here I live and think life worth living not only for that.”“There it’s out! here it comes!” said Serpuhovskoy, laughing.“Ever since I heard about you, about your refusal, I began.... Of course,I approved of what you did. But there are ways of doing everything. And I thinkyour action was good in itself, but you didn’t do it quite in the way youought to have done.”“What’s done can’t be undone, and you know I never go back onwhat I’ve done. And besides, I’m very well off.”“Very well off—for the time. But you’re not satisfied withthat. I wouldn’t say this to your brother. He’s a nice child, likeour host here. There he goes!” he added, listening to the roar of“hurrah!”—“and he’s happy, but that does notsatisfy you.”“I didn’t say it did satisfy me.”“Yes, but that’s not the only thing. Such men as you arewanted.”“By whom?”“By whom? By society, by Russia. Russia needs men; she needs a party, orelse everything goes and will go to the dogs.”“How do you mean? Bertenev’s party against the Russiancommunists?”“No,” said Serpuhovskoy, frowning with vexation at being suspectedof such an absurdity. “Tout ça est une blague. That’s alwaysbeen and always will be. There are no communists. But intriguing people have toinvent a noxious, dangerous party. It’s an old trick. No, what’swanted is a powerful party of independent men like you and me.”“But why so?” Vronsky mentioned a few men who were in power.“Why aren’t they independent men?”“Simply because they have not, or have not had from birth, an independentfortune; they’ve not had a name, they’ve not been close to the sunand center as we have. They can be bought either by money or by favor. And theyhave to find a support for themselves in inventing a policy. And they bringforward some notion, some policy that they don’t believe in, that doesharm; and the whole policy is really only a means to a government house and somuch income. Cela n’est pas plus fin que ça, when you get a peepat their cards. I may be inferior to them, stupider perhaps, though Idon’t see why I should be inferior to them. But you and I have oneimportant advantage over them for certain, in being more difficult to buy. Andsuch men are more needed than ever.”Vronsky listened attentively, but he was not so much interested by the meaningof the words as by the attitude of Serpuhovskoy who was already contemplating astruggle with the existing powers, and already had his likes and dislikes inthat higher world, while his own interest in the governing world did not gobeyond the interests of his regiment. Vronsky felt, too, how powerfulSerpuhovskoy might become through his unmistakable faculty for thinking thingsout and for taking things in, through his intelligence and gift of words, sorarely met with in the world in which he moved. And, ashamed as he was of thefeeling, he felt envious.“Still I haven’t the one thing of most importance for that,”he answered; “I haven’t the desire for power. I had it once, butit’s gone.”“Excuse me, that’s not true,” said Serpuhovskoy, smiling.“Yes, it is true, it is true ... now!” Vronsky added, to betruthful.“Yes, it’s true now, that’s another thing; but thatnow won’t last forever.”“Perhaps,” answered Vronsky.“You say perhaps,” Serpuhovskoy went on, as though guessinghis thoughts, “but I say for certain. And that’s what Iwanted to see you for. Your action was just what it should have been. I seethat, but you ought not to keep it up. I only ask you to give me carteblanche. I’m not going to offer you my protection ... though, indeed,why shouldn’t I protect you?—you’ve protected me oftenenough! I should hope our friendship rises above all that sort of thing.Yes,” he said, smiling to him as tenderly as a woman, “give mecarte blanche, retire from the regiment, and I’ll draw you upwardsimperceptibly.”“But you must understand that I want nothing,” said Vronsky,“except that all should be as it is.”Serpuhovskoy got up and stood facing him.“You say that all should be as it is. I understand what that means. Butlisten: we’re the same age, you’ve known a greater number of womenperhaps than I have.” Serpohovskoy’s smile and gestures toldVronsky that he mustn’t be afraid, that he would be tender and careful intouching the sore place. “But I’m married, and believe me, ingetting to know thoroughly one’s wife, if one loves her, as someone hassaid, one gets to know all women better than if one knew thousands ofthem.”“We’re coming directly!” Vronsky shouted to an officer, wholooked into the room and called them to the colonel.Vronsky was longing now to hear to the end and know what Serpuhovskey would sayto him.“And here’s my opinion for you. Women are the chief stumbling blockin a man’s career. It’s hard to love a woman and do anything.There’s only one way of having love conveniently without its being ahindrance—that’s marriage. How, how am I to tell you what Imean?” said Serpuhovskoy, who liked similes. “Wait a minute, wait aminute! Yes, just as you can only carry a fardeau and do something withyour hands, when the fardeau is tied on your back, and that’smarriage. And that’s what I felt when I was married. My hands weresuddenly set free. But to drag that fardeau about with you withoutmarriage, your hands will always be so full that you can do nothing. Look atMazankov, at Krupov. They’ve ruined their careers for the sake ofwomen.”“What women!” said Vronsky, recalling the Frenchwoman and theactress with whom the two men he had mentioned were connected.“The firmer the woman’s footing in society, the worse it is.That’s much the same as—not merely carrying the fardeau inyour arms—but tearing it away from someone else.”“You have never loved,” Vronsky said softly, looking straightbefore him and thinking of Anna.“Perhaps. But you remember what I’ve said to you. And anotherthing, women are all more materialistic than men. We make something immense outof love, but they are always terre-à-terre.”“Directly, directly!” he cried to a footman who came in. But thefootman had not come to call them again, as he supposed. The footman broughtVronsky a note.“A man brought it from Princess Tverskaya.”Vronsky opened the letter, and flushed crimson.“My head’s begun to ache; I’m going home,” he said toSerpuhovskoy.“Oh, good-bye then. You give me carte blanche!”“We’ll talk about it later on; I’ll look you up inPetersburg.”Chapter 22It was six o’clock already, and so, in order to be there quickly, and atthe same time not to drive with his own horses, known to everyone, Vronsky gotinto Yashvin’s hired fly, and told the driver to drive as quickly aspossible. It was a roomy, old-fashioned fly, with seats for four. He sat in onecorner, stretched his legs out on the front seat, and sank into meditation.A vague sense of the order into which his affairs had been brought, a vaguerecollection of the friendliness and flattery of Serpuhovskoy, who hadconsidered him a man that was needed, and most of all, the anticipation of theinterview before him—all blended into a general, joyous sense of life.This feeling was so strong that he could not help smiling. He dropped his legs,crossed one leg over the other knee, and taking it in his hand, felt thespringy muscle of the calf, where it had been grazed the day before by hisfall, and leaning back he drew several deep breaths.“I’m happy, very happy!” he said to himself. He had oftenbefore had this sense of physical joy in his own body, but he had never felt sofond of himself, of his own body, as at that moment. He enjoyed the slight achein his strong leg, he enjoyed the muscular sensation of movement in his chestas he breathed. The bright, cold August day, which had made Anna feel sohopeless, seemed to him keenly stimulating, and refreshed his face and neckthat still tingled from the cold water. The scent of brilliantine on hiswhiskers struck him as particularly pleasant in the fresh air. Everything hesaw from the carriage window, everything in that cold pure air, in the palelight of the sunset, was as fresh, and gay, and strong as he was himself: theroofs of the houses shining in the rays of the setting sun, the sharp outlinesof fences and angles of buildings, the figures of passers-by, the carriagesthat met him now and then, the motionless green of the trees and grass, thefields with evenly drawn furrows of potatoes, and the slanting shadows thatfell from the houses, and trees, and bushes, and even from the rows ofpotatoes—everything was bright like a pretty landscape just finished andfreshly varnished.“Get on, get on!” he said to the driver, putting his head out ofthe window, and pulling a three-rouble note out of his pocket he handed it tothe man as he looked round. The driver’s hand fumbled with something atthe lamp, the whip cracked, and the carriage rolled rapidly along the smoothhighroad.“I want nothing, nothing but this happiness,” he thought, staringat the bone button of the bell in the space between the windows, and picturingto himself Anna just as he had seen her last time. “And as I go on, Ilove her more and more. Here’s the garden of the Vrede Villa. Whereaboutswill she be? Where? How? Why did she fix on this place to meet me, and why doesshe write in Betsy’s letter?” he thought, wondering now for thefirst time at it. But there was now no time for wonder. He called to the driverto stop before reaching the avenue, and opening the door, jumped out of thecarriage as it was moving, and went into the avenue that led up to the house.There was no one in the avenue; but looking round to the right he caught sightof her. Her face was hidden by a veil, but he drank in with glad eyes thespecial movement in walking, peculiar to her alone, the slope of the shoulders,and the setting of the head, and at once a sort of electric shock ran all overhim. With fresh force, he felt conscious of himself from the springy motions ofhis legs to the movements of his lungs as he breathed, and something set hislips twitching.Joining him, she pressed his hand tightly.“You’re not angry that I sent for you? I absolutely had to seeyou,” she said; and the serious and set line of her lips, which he sawunder the veil, transformed his mood at once.“I angry! But how have you come, where from?”“Never mind,” she said, laying her hand on his, “come along,I must talk to you.”He saw that something had happened, and that the interview would not be ajoyous one. In her presence he had no will of his own: without knowing thegrounds of her distress, he already felt the same distress unconsciouslypassing over him.“What is it? what?” he asked her, squeezing her hand with hiselbow, and trying to read her thoughts in her face.She walked on a few steps in silence, gathering up her courage; then suddenlyshe stopped.“I did not tell you yesterday,” she began, breathing quickly andpainfully, “that coming home with Alexey Alexandrovitch I told himeverything ... told him I could not be his wife, that ... and told himeverything.”He heard her, unconsciously bending his whole figure down to her as thoughhoping in this way to soften the hardness of her position for her. But directlyshe had said this he suddenly drew himself up, and a proud and hard expressioncame over his face.“Yes, yes, that’s better, a thousand times better! I know howpainful it was,” he said. But she was not listening to his words, she wasreading his thoughts from the expression of his face. She could not guess thatthat expression arose from the first idea that presented itself toVronsky—that a duel was now inevitable. The idea of a duel had nevercrossed her mind, and so she put a different interpretation on this passingexpression of hardness.When she got her husband’s letter, she knew then at the bottom of herheart that everything would go on in the old way, that she would not have thestrength of will to forego her position, to abandon her son, and to join herlover. The morning spent at Princess Tverskaya’s had confirmed her stillmore in this. But this interview was still of the utmost gravity for her. Shehoped that this interview would transform her position, and save her. If onhearing this news he were to say to her resolutely, passionately, without aninstant’s wavering: “Throw up everything and come with me!”she would give up her son and go away with him. But this news had not producedwhat she had expected in him; he simply seemed as though he were resenting someaffront.“It was not in the least painful to me. It happened of itself,” shesaid irritably; “and see....” she pulled her husband’s letterout of her glove.“I understand, I understand,” he interrupted her, taking theletter, but not reading it, and trying to soothe her. “The one thing Ilonged for, the one thing I prayed for, was to cut short this position, so asto devote my life to your happiness.”“Why do you tell me that?” she said. “Do you suppose I candoubt it? If I doubted....”“Who’s that coming?” said Vronsky suddenly, pointing to twoladies walking towards them. “Perhaps they know us!” and hehurriedly turned off, drawing her after him into a side path.“Oh, I don’t care!” she said. Her lips were quivering. And hefancied that her eyes looked with strange fury at him from under the veil.“I tell you that’s not the point—I can’t doubt that;but see what he writes to me. Read it.” She stood still again.Again, just as at the first moment of hearing of her rupture with her husband,Vronsky, on reading the letter, was unconsciously carried away by the naturalsensation aroused in him by his own relation to the betrayed husband. Now whilehe held his letter in his hands, he could not help picturing the challenge,which he would most likely find at home today or tomorrow, and the duel itself,in which, with the same cold and haughty expression that his face was assumingat this moment he would await the injured husband’s shot, after havinghimself fired into the air. And at that instant there flashed across his mindthe thought of what Serpuhovskoy had just said to him, and what he had himselfbeen thinking in the morning—that it was better not to bindhimself—and he knew that this thought he could not tell her.Having read the letter, he raised his eyes to her, and there was nodetermination in them. She saw at once that he had been thinking about itbefore by himself. She knew that whatever he might say to her, he would not sayall he thought. And she knew that her last hope had failed her. This was notwhat she had been reckoning on.“You see the sort of man he is,” she said, with a shaking voice;“he....”“Forgive me, but I rejoice at it,” Vronsky interrupted. “ForGod’s sake, let me finish!” he added, his eyes imploring her togive him time to explain his words. “I rejoice, because things cannot,cannot possibly remain as he supposes.”“Why can’t they?” Anna said, restraining her tears, andobviously attaching no sort of consequence to what he said. She felt that herfate was sealed.Vronsky meant that after the duel—inevitable, he thought—thingscould not go on as before, but he said something different.“It can’t go on. I hope that now you will leave him. Ihope”—he was confused, and reddened—“that you will letme arrange and plan our life. Tomorrow....” he was beginning.She did not let him go on.“But my child!” she shrieked. “You see what he writes! Ishould have to leave him, and I can’t and won’t do that.”“But, for God’s sake, which is better?—leave your child, orkeep up this degrading position?”“To whom is it degrading?”“To all, and most of all to you.”“You say degrading ... don’t say that. Those words have no meaningfor me,” she said in a shaking voice. She did not want him now to saywhat was untrue. She had nothing left her but his love, and she wanted to lovehim. “Don’t you understand that from the day I loved you everythinghas changed for me? For me there is one thing, and one thing only—yourlove. If that’s mine, I feel so exalted, so strong, that nothing can behumiliating to me. I am proud of my position, because ... proud of being ...proud....” She could not say what she was proud of. Tears of shame anddespair choked her utterance. She stood still and sobbed.He felt, too, something swelling in his throat and twitching in his nose, andfor the first time in his life he felt on the point of weeping. He could nothave said exactly what it was touched him so. He felt sorry for her, and hefelt he could not help her, and with that he knew that he was to blame for herwretchedness, and that he had done something wrong.“Is not a divorce possible?” he said feebly. She shook her head,not answering. “Couldn’t you take your son, and still leavehim?”“Yes; but it all depends on him. Now I must go to him,” she saidshortly. Her presentiment that all would again go on in the old way had notdeceived her.“On Tuesday I shall be in Petersburg, and everything can besettled.”“Yes,” she said. “But don’t let us talk any more ofit.”Anna’s carriage, which she had sent away, and ordered to come back to thelittle gate of the Vrede garden, drove up. Anna said good-bye to Vronsky, anddrove home.Chapter 23On Monday there was the usual sitting of the Commission of the 2nd of June.Alexey Alexandrovitch walked into the hall where the sitting was held, greetedthe members and the president, as usual, and sat down in his place, putting hishand on the papers laid ready before him. Among these papers lay the necessaryevidence and a rough outline of the speech he intended to make. But he did notreally need these documents. He remembered every point, and did not think itnecessary to go over in his memory what he would say. He knew that when thetime came, and when he saw his enemy facing him, and studiously endeavoring toassume an expression of indifference, his speech would flow of itself betterthan he could prepare it now. He felt that the import of his speech was of suchmagnitude that every word of it would have weight. Meantime, as he listened tothe usual report, he had the most innocent and inoffensive air. No one, lookingat his white hands, with their swollen veins and long fingers, so softlystroking the edges of the white paper that lay before him, and at the air ofweariness with which his head drooped on one side, would have suspected that ina few minutes a torrent of words would flow from his lips that would arouse afearful storm, set the members shouting and attacking one another, and forcethe president to call for order. When the report was over, AlexeyAlexandrovitch announced in his subdued, delicate voice that he had severalpoints to bring before the meeting in regard to the Commission for theReorganization of the Native Tribes. All attention was turned upon him. AlexeyAlexandrovitch cleared his throat, and not looking at his opponent, butselecting, as he always did while he was delivering his speeches, the firstperson sitting opposite him, an inoffensive little old man, who never had anopinion of any sort in the Commission, began to expound his views. When hereached the point about the fundamental and radical law, his opponent jumped upand began to protest. Stremov, who was also a member of the Commission, andalso stung to the quick, began defending himself, and altogether a stormysitting followed; but Alexey Alexandrovitch triumphed, and his motion wascarried, three new commissions were appointed, and the next day in a certainPetersburg circle nothing else was talked of but this sitting. AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s success had been even greater than he had anticipated.Next morning, Tuesday, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on waking up, recollected withpleasure his triumph of the previous day, and he could not help smiling, thoughhe tried to appear indifferent, when the chief secretary of his department,anxious to flatter him, informed him of the rumors that had reached himconcerning what had happened in the Commission.Absorbed in business with the chief secretary, Alexey Alexandrovitch hadcompletely forgotten that it was Tuesday, the day fixed by him for the returnof Anna Arkadyevna, and he was surprised and received a shock of annoyance whena servant came in to inform him of her arrival.Anna had arrived in Petersburg early in the morning; the carriage had been sentto meet her in accordance with her telegram, and so Alexey Alexandrovitch mighthave known of her arrival. But when she arrived, he did not meet her. She wastold that he had not yet gone out, but was busy with his secretary. She sentword to her husband that she had come, went to her own room, and occupiedherself in sorting out her things, expecting he would come to her. But an hourpassed; he did not come. She went into the dining-room on the pretext of givingsome directions, and spoke loudly on purpose, expecting him to come out there;but he did not come, though she heard him go to the door of his study as heparted from the chief secretary. She knew that he usually went out quickly tohis office, and she wanted to see him before that, so that their attitude toone another might be defined.She walked across the drawing-room and went resolutely to him. When she wentinto his study he was in official uniform, obviously ready to go out, sittingat a little table on which he rested his elbows, looking dejectedly before him.She saw him before he saw her, and she saw that he was thinking of her.On seeing her, he would have risen, but changed his mind, then his face flushedhotly—a thing Anna had never seen before, and he got up quickly and wentto meet her, looking not at her eyes, but above them at her forehead and hair.He went up to her, took her by the hand, and asked her to sit down.“I am very glad you have come,” he said, sitting down beside her,and obviously wishing to say something, he stuttered. Several times he tried tobegin to speak, but stopped. In spite of the fact that, preparing herself formeeting him, she had schooled herself to despise and reproach him, she did notknow what to say to him, and she felt sorry for him. And so the silence lastedfor some time. “Is Seryozha quite well?” he said, and not waitingfor an answer, he added: “I shan’t be dining at home today, and Ihave got to go out directly.”“I had thought of going to Moscow,” she said.“No, you did quite, quite right to come,” he said, and was silentagain.Seeing that he was powerless to begin the conversation, she began herself.“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, looking at him and not droppingher eyes under his persistent gaze at her hair, “I’m a guiltywoman, I’m a bad woman, but I am the same as I was, as I told you then,and I have come to tell you that I can change nothing.”“I have asked you no question about that,” he said, all at once,resolutely and with hatred looking her straight in the face; “that was asI had supposed.” Under the influence of anger he apparently regainedcomplete possession of all his faculties. “But as I told you then, andhave written to you,” he said in a thin, shrill voice, “I repeatnow, that I am not bound to know this. I ignore it. Not all wives are so kindas you, to be in such a hurry to communicate such agreeable news to theirhusbands.” He laid special emphasis on the word “agreeable.”“I shall ignore it so long as the world knows nothing of it, so long asmy name is not disgraced. And so I simply inform you that our relations must bejust as they have always been, and that only in the event of your compromisingme I shall be obliged to take steps to secure my honor.”“But our relations cannot be the same as always,” Anna began in atimid voice, looking at him with dismay.When she saw once more those composed gestures, heard that shrill, childish,and sarcastic voice, her aversion for him extinguished her pity for him, andshe felt only afraid, but at all costs she wanted to make clear her position.“I cannot be your wife while I....” she began.He laughed a cold and malignant laugh.“The manner of life you have chosen is reflected, I suppose, in yourideas. I have too much respect or contempt, or both ... I respect your past anddespise your present ... that I was far from the interpretation you put on mywords.”Anna sighed and bowed her head.“Though indeed I fail to comprehend how, with the independence youshow,” he went on, getting hot, “—announcing your infidelityto your husband and seeing nothing reprehensible in it, apparently—youcan see anything reprehensible in performing a wife’s duties in relationto your husband.”“Alexey Alexandrovitch! What is it you want of me?”“I want you not to meet that man here, and to conduct yourself so thatneither the world nor the servants can reproach you ... not to see him.That’s not much, I think. And in return you will enjoy all the privilegesof a faithful wife without fulfilling her duties. That’s all I have tosay to you. Now it’s time for me to go. I’m not dining athome.” He got up and moved towards the door.Anna got up too. Bowing in silence, he let her pass before him.Chapter 24The night spent by Levin on the haycock did not pass without result for him.The way in which he had been managing his land revolted him and had lost allattraction for him. In spite of the magnificent harvest, never had there been,or, at least, never it seemed to him, had there been so many hindrances and somany quarrels between him and the peasants as that year, and the origin ofthese failures and this hostility was now perfectly comprehensible to him. Thedelight he had experienced in the work itself, and the consequent greaterintimacy with the peasants, the envy he felt of them, of their life, the desireto adopt that life, which had been to him that night not a dream but anintention, the execution of which he had thought out in detail—all thishad so transformed his view of the farming of the land as he had managed it,that he could not take his former interest in it, and could not help seeingthat unpleasant relation between him and the workpeople which was thefoundation of it all. The herd of improved cows such as Pava, the whole landploughed over and enriched, the nine level fields surrounded with hedges, thetwo hundred and forty acres heavily manured, the seed sown in drills, and allthe rest of it—it was all splendid if only the work had been done forthemselves, or for themselves and comrades—people in sympathy with them.But he saw clearly now (his work on a book of agriculture, in which the chiefelement in husbandry was to have been the laborer, greatly assisted him inthis) that the sort of farming he was carrying on was nothing but a cruel andstubborn struggle between him and the laborers, in which there was on oneside—his side—a continual intense effort to change everything to apattern he considered better; on the other side, the natural order of things.And in this struggle he saw that with immense expenditure of force on his side,and with no effort or even intention on the other side, all that was attainedwas that the work did not go to the liking of either side, and that splendidtools, splendid cattle and land were spoiled with no good to anyone. Worst ofall, the energy expended on this work was not simply wasted. He could not helpfeeling now, since the meaning of this system had become clear to him, that theaim of his energy was a most unworthy one. In reality, what was the struggleabout? He was struggling for every farthing of his share (and he could not helpit, for he had only to relax his efforts, and he would not have had the moneyto pay his laborers’ wages), while they were only struggling to be ableto do their work easily and agreeably, that is to say, as they were used todoing it. It was for his interests that every laborer should work as hard aspossible, and that while doing so he should keep his wits about him, so as totry not to break the winnowing machines, the horse rakes, the thrashingmachines, that he should attend to what he was doing. What the laborer wantedwas to work as pleasantly as possible, with rests, and above all, carelesslyand heedlessly, without thinking. That summer Levin saw this at every step. Hesent the men to mow some clover for hay, picking out the worst patches wherethe clover was overgrown with grass and weeds and of no use for seed; again andagain they mowed the best acres of clover, justifying themselves by thepretense that the bailiff had told them to, and trying to pacify him with theassurance that it would be splendid hay; but he knew that it was owing to thoseacres being so much easier to mow. He sent out a hay machine for pitching thehay—it was broken at the first row because it was dull work for a peasantto sit on the seat in front with the great wings waving above him. And he wastold, “Don’t trouble, your honor, sure, the womenfolks will pitchit quick enough.” The ploughs were practically useless, because it neveroccurred to the laborer to raise the share when he turned the plough, andforcing it round, he strained the horses and tore up the ground, and Levin wasbegged not to mind about it. The horses were allowed to stray into the wheatbecause not a single laborer would consent to be night-watchman, and in spiteof orders to the contrary, the laborers insisted on taking turns for nightduty, and Ivan, after working all day long, fell asleep, and was very penitentfor his fault, saying, “Do what you will to me, your honor.”They killed three of the best calves by letting them into the clover aftermathwithout care as to their drinking, and nothing would make the men believe thatthey had been blown out by the clover, but they told him, by way ofconsolation, that one of his neighbors had lost a hundred and twelve head ofcattle in three days. All this happened, not because anyone felt ill-will toLevin or his farm; on the contrary, he knew that they liked him, thought him asimple gentleman (their highest praise); but it happened simply because allthey wanted was to work merrily and carelessly, and his interests were not onlyremote and incomprehensible to them, but fatally opposed to their most justclaims. Long before, Levin had felt dissatisfaction with his own position inregard to the land. He saw where his boat leaked, but he did not look for theleak, perhaps purposely deceiving himself. (Nothing would be left him if helost faith in it.) But now he could deceive himself no longer. The farming ofthe land, as he was managing it, had become not merely unattractive butrevolting to him, and he could take no further interest in it.To this now was joined the presence, only twenty-five miles off, of KittyShtcherbatskaya, whom he longed to see and could not see. Darya AlexandrovnaOblonskaya had invited him, when he was over there, to come; to come with theobject of renewing his offer to her sister, who would, so she gave him tounderstand, accept him now. Levin himself had felt on seeing KittyShtcherbatskaya that he had never ceased to love her; but he could not go overto the Oblonskys’, knowing she was there. The fact that he had made heran offer, and she had refused him, had placed an insuperable barrier betweenher and him. “I can’t ask her to be my wife merely because shecan’t be the wife of the man she wanted to marry,” he said tohimself. The thought of this made him cold and hostile to her. “I shouldnot be able to speak to her without a feeling of reproach; I could not look ather without resentment; and she will only hate me all the more, as she’sbound to. And besides, how can I now, after what Darya Alexandrovna told me, goto see them? Can I help showing that I know what she told me? And me to gomagnanimously to forgive her, and have pity on her! Me go through a performancebefore her of forgiving, and deigning to bestow my love on her!... What inducedDarya Alexandrovna to tell me that? By chance I might have seen her, theneverything would have happened of itself; but, as it is, it’s out of thequestion, out of the question!”Darya Alexandrovna sent him a letter, asking him for a side-saddle forKitty’s use. “I’m told you have a side-saddle,” shewrote to him; “I hope you will bring it over yourself.”This was more than he could stand. How could a woman of any intelligence, ofany delicacy, put her sister in such a humiliating position! He wrote tennotes, and tore them all up, and sent the saddle without any reply. To writethat he would go was impossible, because he could not go; to write that hecould not come because something prevented him, or that he would be away, thatwas still worse. He sent the saddle without an answer, and with a sense ofhaving done something shameful; he handed over all the now revolting businessof the estate to the bailiff, and set off next day to a remote district to seehis friend Sviazhsky, who had splendid marshes for grouse in his neighborhood,and had lately written to ask him to keep a long-standing promise to stay withhim. The grouse-marsh, in the Surovsky district, had long tempted Levin, but hehad continually put off this visit on account of his work on the estate. Now hewas glad to get away from the neighborhood of the Shtcherbatskys, and stillmore from his farm work, especially on a shooting expedition, which always introuble served as the best consolation.Chapter 25In the Surovsky district there was no railway nor service of post horses, andLevin drove there with his own horses in his big, old-fashioned carriage.He stopped halfway at a well-to-do peasant’s to feed his horses. A bald,well-preserved old man, with a broad, red beard, gray on his cheeks, opened thegate, squeezing against the gatepost to let the three horses pass. Directingthe coachman to a place under the shed in the big, clean, tidy yard, withcharred, old-fashioned ploughs in it, the old man asked Levin to come into theparlor. A cleanly dressed young woman, with clogs on her bare feet, wasscrubbing the floor in the new outer room. She was frightened of the dog, thatran in after Levin, and uttered a shriek, but began laughing at her own frightat once when she was told the dog would not hurt her. Pointing Levin with herbare arm to the door into the parlor, she bent down again, hiding her handsomeface, and went on scrubbing.“Would you like the samovar?” she asked.“Yes, please.”The parlor was a big room, with a Dutch stove, and a screen dividing it intotwo. Under the holy pictures stood a table painted in patterns, a bench, andtwo chairs. Near the entrance was a dresser full of crockery. The shutters wereclosed, there were few flies, and it was so clean that Levin was anxious thatLaska, who had been running along the road and bathing in puddles, should notmuddy the floor, and ordered her to a place in the corner by the door. Afterlooking round the parlor, Levin went out in the back yard. The good-lookingyoung woman in clogs, swinging the empty pails on the yoke, ran on before himto the well for water.“Look sharp, my girl!” the old man shouted after her,good-humoredly, and he went up to Levin. “Well, sir, are you going toNikolay Ivanovitch Sviazhsky? His honor comes to us too,” he began,chatting, leaning his elbows on the railing of the steps. In the middle of theold man’s account of his acquaintance with Sviazhsky, the gates creakedagain, and laborers came into the yard from the fields, with wooden ploughs andharrows. The horses harnessed to the ploughs and harrows were sleek and fat.The laborers were obviously of the household: two were young men in cottonshirts and caps, the two others were hired laborers in homespun shirts, one anold man, the other a young fellow. Moving off from the steps, the old man wentup to the horses and began unharnessing them.“What have they been ploughing?” asked Levin.“Ploughing up the potatoes. We rent a bit of land too. Fedot, don’tlet out the gelding, but take it to the trough, and we’ll put the otherin harness.”“Oh, father, the ploughshares I ordered, has he brought themalong?” asked the big, healthy-looking fellow, obviously the oldman’s son.“There ... in the outer room,” answered the old man, bundlingtogether the harness he had taken off, and flinging it on the ground.“You can put them on, while they have dinner.”The good-looking young woman came into the outer room with the full pailsdragging at her shoulders. More women came on the scene from somewhere, youngand handsome, middle-aged, old and ugly, with children and without children.The samovar was beginning to sing; the laborers and the family, having disposedof the horses, came in to dinner. Levin, getting his provisions out of hiscarriage, invited the old man to take tea with him.“Well, I have had some today already,” said the old man, obviouslyaccepting the invitation with pleasure. “But just a glass forcompany.”Over their tea Levin heard all about the old man’s farming. Ten yearsbefore, the old man had rented three hundred acres from the lady who ownedthem, and a year ago he had bought them and rented another three hundred from aneighboring landowner. A small part of the land—the worst part—helet out for rent, while a hundred acres of arable land he cultivated himselfwith his family and two hired laborers. The old man complained that things weredoing badly. But Levin saw that he simply did so from a feeling of propriety,and that his farm was in a flourishing condition. If it had been unsuccessfulhe would not have bought land at thirty-five roubles the acre, he would nothave married his three sons and a nephew, he would not have rebuilt twice afterfires, and each time on a larger scale. In spite of the old man’scomplaints, it was evident that he was proud, and justly proud, of hisprosperity, proud of his sons, his nephew, his sons’ wives, his horsesand his cows, and especially of the fact that he was keeping all this farminggoing. From his conversation with the old man, Levin thought he was not averseto new methods either. He had planted a great many potatoes, and his potatoes,as Levin had seen driving past, were already past flowering and beginning todie down, while Levin’s were only just coming into flower. He earthed uphis potatoes with a modern plough borrowed from a neighboring landowner. Hesowed wheat. The trifling fact that, thinning out his rye, the old man used therye he thinned out for his horses, specially struck Levin. How many times hadLevin seen this splendid fodder wasted, and tried to get it saved; but alwaysit had turned out to be impossible. The peasant got this done, and he could notsay enough in praise of it as food for the beasts.“What have the wenches to do? They carry it out in bundles to theroadside, and the cart brings it away.”“Well, we landowners can’t manage well with our laborers,”said Levin, handing him a glass of tea.“Thank you,” said the old man, and he took the glass, but refusedsugar, pointing to a lump he had left. “They’re simpledestruction,” said he. “Look at Sviazhsky’s, for instance. Weknow what the land’s like—first-rate, yet there’s not much ofa crop to boast of. It’s not looked after enough—that’s allit is!”“But you work your land with hired laborers?”“We’re all peasants together. We go into everything ourselves. If aman’s no use, he can go, and we can manage by ourselves.”“Father, Finogen wants some tar,” said the young woman in theclogs, coming in.“Yes, yes, that’s how it is, sir!” said the old man, gettingup, and crossing himself deliberately, he thanked Levin and went out.When Levin went into the kitchen to call his coachman he saw the whole familyat dinner. The women were standing up waiting on them. The young,sturdy-looking son was telling something funny with his mouth full of pudding,and they were all laughing, the woman in the clogs, who was pouring cabbagesoup into a bowl, laughing most merrily of all.Very probably the good-looking face of the young woman in the clogs had a gooddeal to do with the impression of well-being this peasant household made uponLevin, but the impression was so strong that Levin could never get rid of it.And all the way from the old peasant’s to Sviazhsky’s he keptrecalling this peasant farm as though there were something in this impressionthat demanded his special attention.Chapter 26Sviazhsky was the marshal of his district. He was five years older than Levin,and had long been married. His sister-in-law, a young girl Levin liked verymuch, lived in his house; and Levin knew that Sviazhsky and his wife would havegreatly liked to marry the girl to him. He knew this with certainty, asso-called eligible young men always know it, though he could never have broughthimself to speak of it to anyone; and he knew too that, although he wanted toget married, and although by every token this very attractive girl would makean excellent wife, he could no more have married her, even if he had not beenin love with Kitty Shtcherbatskaya, than he could have flown up to the sky. Andthis knowledge poisoned the pleasure he had hoped to find in the visit toSviazhsky.On getting Sviazhsky’s letter with the invitation for shooting, Levin hadimmediately thought of this; but in spite of it he had made up his mind thatSviazhsky’s having such views for him was simply his own groundlesssupposition, and so he would go, all the same. Besides, at the bottom of hisheart he had a desire to try himself, put himself to the test in regard to thisgirl. The Sviazhskys’ home-life was exceedingly pleasant, and Sviazhskyhimself, the best type of man taking part in local affairs that Levin knew, wasvery interesting to him.Sviazhsky was one of those people, always a source of wonder to Levin, whoseconvictions, very logical though never original, go one way by themselves,while their life, exceedingly definite and firm in its direction, goes its wayquite apart and almost always in direct contradiction to their convictions.Sviazhsky was an extremely advanced man. He despised the nobility, and believedthe mass of the nobility to be secretly in favor of serfdom, and onlyconcealing their views from cowardice. He regarded Russia as a ruined country,rather after the style of Turkey, and the government of Russia as so bad thathe never permitted himself to criticize its doings seriously, and yet he was afunctionary of that government and a model marshal of nobility, and when hedrove about he always wore the cockade of office and the cap with the red band.He considered human life only tolerable abroad, and went abroad to stay atevery opportunity, and at the same time he carried on a complex and improvedsystem of agriculture in Russia, and with extreme interest followed everythingand knew everything that was being done in Russia. He considered the Russianpeasant as occupying a stage of development intermediate between the ape andthe man, and at the same time in the local assemblies no one was readier toshake hands with the peasants and listen to their opinion. He believed neitherin God nor the devil, but was much concerned about the question of theimprovement of the clergy and the maintenance of their revenues, and tookspecial trouble to keep up the church in his village.On the woman question he was on the side of the extreme advocates of completeliberty for women, and especially their right to labor. But he lived with hiswife on such terms that their affectionate childless home life was theadmiration of everyone, and arranged his wife’s life so that she didnothing and could do nothing but share her husband’s efforts that hertime should pass as happily and as agreeably as possible.If it had not been a characteristic of Levin’s to put the most favorableinterpretation on people, Sviazhsky’s character would have presented nodoubt or difficulty to him: he would have said to himself, “a fool or aknave,” and everything would have seemed clear. But he could not say“a fool,” because Sviazhsky was unmistakably clever, and moreover,a highly cultivated man, who was exceptionally modest over his culture. Therewas not a subject he knew nothing of. But he did not display his knowledgeexcept when he was compelled to do so. Still less could Levin say that he was aknave, as Sviazhsky was unmistakably an honest, good-hearted, sensible man, whoworked good-humoredly, keenly, and perseveringly at his work; he was held inhigh honor by everyone about him, and certainly he had never consciously done,and was indeed incapable of doing, anything base.Levin tried to understand him, and could not understand him, and looked at himand his life as at a living enigma.Levin and he were very friendly, and so Levin used to venture to soundSviazhsky, to try to get at the very foundation of his view of life; but it wasalways in vain. Every time Levin tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambersof Sviazhsky’s mind, which were hospitably open to all, he noticed thatSviazhsky was slightly disconcerted; faint signs of alarm were visible in hiseyes, as though he were afraid Levin would understand him, and he would givehim a kindly, good-humored repulse.Just now, since his disenchantment with farming, Levin was particularly glad tostay with Sviazhsky. Apart from the fact that the sight of this happy andaffectionate couple, so pleased with themselves and everyone else, and theirwell-ordered home had always a cheering effect on Levin, he felt a longing, nowthat he was so dissatisfied with his own life, to get at that secret inSviazhsky that gave him such clearness, definiteness, and good courage in life.Moreover, Levin knew that at Sviazhsky’s he should meet the landowners ofthe neighborhood, and it was particularly interesting for him just now to hearand take part in those rural conversations concerning crops, laborers’wages, and so on, which, he was aware, are conventionally regarded as somethingvery low, but which seemed to him just now to constitute the one subject ofimportance. “It was not, perhaps, of importance in the days of serfdom,and it may not be of importance in England. In both cases the conditions ofagriculture are firmly established; but among us now, when everything has beenturned upside down and is only just taking shape, the question what form theseconditions will take is the one question of importance in Russia,”thought Levin.The shooting turned out to be worse than Levin had expected. The marsh was dryand there were no grouse at all. He walked about the whole day and only broughtback three birds, but to make up for that—he brought back, as he alwaysdid from shooting, an excellent appetite, excellent spirits, and that keen,intellectual mood which with him always accompanied violent physical exertion.And while out shooting, when he seemed to be thinking of nothing at all,suddenly the old man and his family kept coming back to his mind, and theimpression of them seemed to claim not merely his attention, but the solutionof some question connected with them.In the evening at tea, two landowners who had come about some businessconnected with a wardship were of the party, and the interesting conversationLevin had been looking forward to sprang up.Levin was sitting beside his hostess at the tea table, and was obliged to keepup a conversation with her and her sister, who was sitting opposite him. MadameSviazhskaya was a round-faced, fair-haired, rather short woman, all smiles anddimples. Levin tried through her to get a solution of the weighty enigma herhusband presented to his mind; but he had not complete freedom of ideas,because he was in an agony of embarrassment. This agony of embarrassment wasdue to the fact that the sister-in-law was sitting opposite to him, in a dress,specially put on, as he fancied, for his benefit, cut particularly open, in theshape of a trapeze, on her white bosom. This quadrangular opening, in spite ofthe bosom’s being very white, or just because it was very white, deprivedLevin of the full use of his faculties. He imagined, probably mistakenly, thatthis low-necked bodice had been made on his account, and felt that he had noright to look at it, and tried not to look at it; but he felt that he was toblame for the very fact of the low-necked bodice having been made. It seemed toLevin that he had deceived someone, that he ought to explain something, butthat to explain it was impossible, and for that reason he was continuallyblushing, was ill at ease and awkward. His awkwardness infected the prettysister-in-law too. But their hostess appeared not to observe this, and keptpurposely drawing her into the conversation.“You say,” she said, pursuing the subject that had been started,“that my husband cannot be interested in what’s Russian. It’squite the contrary; he is always in cheerful spirits abroad, but not as he ishere. Here, he feels in his proper place. He has so much to do, and he has thefaculty of interesting himself in everything. Oh, you’ve not been to seeour school, have you?”“I’ve seen it.... The little house covered with ivy, isn’tit?”“Yes; that’s Nastia’s work,” she said, indicating hersister.“You teach in it yourself?” asked Levin, trying to look above theopen neck, but feeling that wherever he looked in that direction he should seeit.“Yes; I used to teach in it myself, and do teach still, but we have afirst-rate schoolmistress now. And we’ve started gymnasticexercises.”“No, thank you, I won’t have any more tea,” said Levin, andconscious of doing a rude thing, but incapable of continuing the conversation,he got up, blushing. “I hear a very interesting conversation,” headded, and walked to the other end of the table, where Sviazhsky was sittingwith the two gentlemen of the neighborhood. Sviazhsky was sitting sideways,with one elbow on the table, and a cup in one hand, while with the other handhe gathered up his beard, held it to his nose and let it drop again, as thoughhe were smelling it. His brilliant black eyes were looking straight at theexcited country gentleman with gray whiskers, and apparently he derivedamusement from his remarks. The gentleman was complaining of the peasants. Itwas evident to Levin that Sviazhsky knew an answer to this gentleman’scomplaints, which would at once demolish his whole contention, but that in hisposition he could not give utterance to this answer, and listened, not withoutpleasure, to the landowner’s comic speeches.The gentleman with the gray whiskers was obviously an inveterate adherent ofserfdom and a devoted agriculturist, who had lived all his life in the country.Levin saw proofs of this in his dress, in the old-fashioned threadbare coat,obviously not his everyday attire, in his shrewd, deep-set eyes, in hisidiomatic, fluent Russian, in the imperious tone that had become habitual fromlong use, and in the resolute gestures of his large, red, sunburnt hands, withan old betrothal ring on the little finger.Chapter 27“If I’d only the heart to throw up what’s been set going ...such a lot of trouble wasted ... I’d turn my back on the whole business,sell up, go off like Nikolay Ivanovitch ... to hear La BelleHélène,” said the landowner, a pleasant smile lighting up his shrewdold face.“But you see you don’t throw it up,” said Nikolay IvanovitchSviazhsky; “so there must be something gained.”“The only gain is that I live in my own house, neither bought nor hired.Besides, one keeps hoping the people will learn sense. Though, instead of that,you’d never believe it—the drunkenness, the immorality! They keepchopping and changing their bits of land. Not a sight of a horse or a cow. Thepeasant’s dying of hunger, but just go and take him on as a laborer,he’ll do his best to do you a mischief, and then bring you up before thejustice of the peace.”“But then you make complaints to the justice too,” said Sviazhsky.“I lodge complaints? Not for anything in the world! Such a talking, andsuch a to-do, that one would have cause to regret it. At the works, forinstance, they pocketed the advance-money and made off. What did the justicedo? Why, acquitted them. Nothing keeps them in order but their own communalcourt and their village elder. He’ll flog them in the good old style! Butfor that there’d be nothing for it but to give it all up and runaway.”Obviously the landowner was chaffing Sviazhsky, who, far from resenting it, wasapparently amused by it.“But you see we manage our land without such extreme measures,”said he, smiling: “Levin and I and this gentleman.”He indicated the other landowner.“Yes, the thing’s done at Mihail Petrovitch’s, but ask himhow it’s done. Do you call that a rational system?” said thelandowner, obviously rather proud of the word “rational.”“My system’s very simple,” said Mihail Petrovitch,“thank God. All my management rests on getting the money ready for theautumn taxes, and the peasants come to me, ‘Father, master, helpus!’ Well, the peasants are all one’s neighbors; one feels forthem. So one advances them a third, but one says: ‘Remember, lads, I havehelped you, and you must help me when I need it—whether it’s thesowing of the oats, or the haycutting, or the harvest’; and well, oneagrees, so much for each taxpayer—though there are dishonest ones amongthem too, it’s true.”Levin, who had long been familiar with these patriarchal methods, exchangedglances with Sviazhsky and interrupted Mihail Petrovitch, turning again to thegentleman with the gray whiskers.“Then what do you think?” he asked; “what system is one toadopt nowadays?”“Why, manage like Mihail Petrovitch, or let the land for half the crop orfor rent to the peasants; that one can do—only that’s just how thegeneral prosperity of the country is being ruined. Where the land withserf-labor and good management gave a yield of nine to one, on the half-cropsystem it yields three to one. Russia has been ruined by theemancipation!”Sviazhsky looked with smiling eyes at Levin, and even made a faint gesture ofirony to him; but Levin did not think the landowner’s words absurd, heunderstood them better than he did Sviazhsky. A great deal more of what thegentleman with the gray whiskers said to show in what way Russia was ruined bythe emancipation struck him indeed as very true, new to him, and quiteincontestable. The landowner unmistakably spoke his own individualthought—a thing that very rarely happens—and a thought to which hehad been brought not by a desire of finding some exercise for an idle brain,but a thought which had grown up out of the conditions of his life, which hehad brooded over in the solitude of his village, and had considered in everyaspect.“The point is, don’t you see, that progress of every sort is onlymade by the use of authority,” he said, evidently wishing to show he wasnot without culture. “Take the reforms of Peter, of Catherine, ofAlexander. Take European history. And progress in agriculture more thananything else—the potato, for instance, that was introduced among us byforce. The wooden plough too wasn’t always used. It was introduced maybein the days before the Empire, but it was probably brought in by force. Now, inour own day, we landowners in the serf times used various improvements in ourhusbandry: drying machines and thrashing machines, and carting manure and allthe modern implements—all that we brought into use by our authority, andthe peasants opposed it at first, and ended by imitating us. Now, by theabolition of serfdom we have been deprived of our authority; and so ourhusbandry, where it had been raised to a high level, is bound to sink to themost savage primitive condition. That’s how I see it.”“But why so? If it’s rational, you’ll be able to keep up thesame system with hired labor,” said Sviazhsky.“We’ve no power over them. With whom am I going to work the system,allow me to ask?”“There it is—the labor force—the chief element inagriculture,” thought Levin.“With laborers.”“The laborers won’t work well, and won’t work with goodimplements. Our laborer can do nothing but get drunk like a pig, and whenhe’s drunk he ruins everything you give him. He makes the horses ill withtoo much water, cuts good harness, barters the tires of the wheels for drink,drops bits of iron into the thrashing machine, so as to break it. He loathesthe sight of anything that’s not after his fashion. And that’s howit is the whole level of husbandry has fallen. Lands gone out of cultivation,overgrown with weeds, or divided among the peasants, and where millions ofbushels were raised you get a hundred thousand; the wealth of the country hasdecreased. If the same thing had been done, but with care that....”And he proceeded to unfold his own scheme of emancipation by means of whichthese drawbacks might have been avoided.This did not interest Levin, but when he had finished, Levin went back to hisfirst position, and, addressing Sviazhsky, and trying to draw him intoexpressing his serious opinion:—“That the standard of culture is falling, and that with our presentrelations to the peasants there is no possibility of farming on a rationalsystem to yield a profit—that’s perfectly true,” said he.“I don’t believe it,” Sviazhsky replied quite seriously;“all I see is that we don’t know how to cultivate the land, andthat our system of agriculture in the serf days was by no means too high, buttoo low. We have no machines, no good stock, no efficient supervision; wedon’t even know how to keep accounts. Ask any landowner; he won’tbe able to tell you what crop’s profitable, and what’s not.”“Italian bookkeeping,” said the gentleman of the gray whiskersironically. “You may keep your books as you like, but if they spoileverything for you, there won’t be any profit.”“Why do they spoil things? A poor thrashing machine, or your Russianpresser, they will break, but my steam press they don’t break. A wretchedRussian nag they’ll ruin, but keep good dray-horses—theywon’t ruin them. And so it is all round. We must raise our farming to ahigher level.”“Oh, if one only had the means to do it, Nikolay Ivanovitch! It’sall very well for you; but for me, with a son to keep at the university, ladsto be educated at the high school—how am I going to buy thesedray-horses?”“Well, that’s what the land banks are for.”“To get what’s left me sold by auction? No, thank you.”“I don’t agree that it’s necessary or possible to raise thelevel of agriculture still higher,” said Levin. “I devote myself toit, and I have means, but I can do nothing. As to the banks, I don’t knowto whom they’re any good. For my part, anyway, whatever I’ve spentmoney on in the way of husbandry, it has been a loss: stock—a loss,machinery—a loss.”“That’s true enough,” the gentleman with the gray whiskerschimed in, positively laughing with satisfaction.“And I’m not the only one,” pursued Levin. “I mix withall the neighboring landowners, who are cultivating their land on a rationalsystem; they all, with rare exceptions, are doing so at a loss. Come, tell ushow does your land do—does it pay?” said Levin, and at once inSviazhsky’s eyes he detected that fleeting expression of alarm which hehad noticed whenever he had tried to penetrate beyond the outer chambers ofSviazhsky’s mind.Moreover, this question on Levin’s part was not quite in good faith.Madame Sviazhskaya had just told him at tea that they had that summer invited aGerman expert in bookkeeping from Moscow, who for a consideration of fivehundred roubles had investigated the management of their property, and foundthat it was costing them a loss of three thousand odd roubles. She did notremember the precise sum, but it appeared that the German had worked it out tothe fraction of a farthing.The gray-whiskered landowner smiled at the mention of the profits ofSviazhsky’s famling, obviously aware how much gain his neighbor andmarshal was likely to be making.“Possibly it does not pay,” answered Sviazhsky. “That merelyproves either that I’m a bad manager, or that I’ve sunk my capitalfor the increase of my rents.”“Oh, rent!” Levin cried with horror. “Rent there may be inEurope, where land has been improved by the labor put into it, but with us allthe land is deteriorating from the labor put into it—in other wordsthey’re working it out; so there’s no question of rent.”“How no rent? It’s a law.”“Then we’re outside the law; rent explains nothing for us, butsimply muddles us. No, tell me how there can be a theory of rent?...”“Will you have some junket? Masha, pass us some junket orraspberries.” He turned to his wife. “Extraordinarily late theraspberries are lasting this year.”And in the happiest frame of mind Sviazhsky got up and walked off, apparentlysupposing the conversation to have ended at the very point when to Levin itseemed that it was only just beginning.Having lost his antagonist, Levin continued the conversation with thegray-whiskered landowner, trying to prove to him that all the difficulty arisesfrom the fact that we don’t find out the peculiarities and habits of ourlaborer; but the landowner, like all men who think independently and inisolation, was slow in taking in any other person’s idea, andparticularly partial to his own. He stuck to it that the Russian peasant is aswine and likes swinishness, and that to get him out of his swinishness onemust have authority, and there is none; one must have the stick, and we havebecome so liberal that we have all of a sudden replaced the stick that servedus for a thousand years by lawyers and model prisons, where the worthless,stinking peasant is fed on good soup and has a fixed allowance of cubic feet ofair.“What makes you think,” said Levin, trying to get back to thequestion, “that it’s impossible to find some relation to thelaborer in which the labor would become productive?”“That never could be so with the Russian peasantry; we’ve no powerover them,” answered the landowner.“How can new conditions be found?” said Sviazhsky. Having eatensome junket and lighted a cigarette, he came back to the discussion. “Allpossible relations to the labor force have been defined and studied,” hesaid. “The relic of barbarism, the primitive commune with each guaranteefor all, will disappear of itself; serfdom has been abolished—thereremains nothing but free labor, and its forms are fixed and ready made, andmust be adopted. Permanent hands, day-laborers, rammers—you can’tget out of those forms.”“But Europe is dissatisfied with these forms.”“Dissatisfied, and seeking new ones. And will find them, in allprobability.”“That’s just what I was meaning,” answered Levin. “Whyshouldn’t we seek them for ourselves?”“Because it would be just like inventing afresh the means forconstructing railways. They are ready, invented.”“But if they don’t do for us, if they’re stupid?” saidLevin.And again he detected the expression of alarm in the eyes of Sviazhsky.“Oh, yes; we’ll bury the world under our caps! We’ve foundthe secret Europe was seeking for! I’ve heard all that; but, excuse me,do you know all that’s been done in Europe on the question of theorganization of labor?”“No, very little.”“That question is now absorbing the best minds in Europe. TheSchulze-Delitsch movement.... And then all this enormous literature of thelabor question, the most liberal Lassalle movement ... the Mulhausenexperiment? That’s a fact by now, as you’re probably aware.”“I have some idea of it, but very vague.”“No, you only say that; no doubt you know all about it as well as I do.I’m not a professor of sociology, of course, but it interested me, andreally, if it interests you, you ought to study it.”“But what conclusion have they come to?”“Excuse me....”The two neighbors had risen, and Sviazhsky, once more checking Levin in hisinconvenient habit of peeping into what was beyond the outer chambers of hismind, went to see his guests out.Chapter 28Levin was insufferably bored that evening with the ladies; he was stirred as hehad never been before by the idea that the dissatisfaction he was feeling withhis system of managing his land was not an exceptional case, but the generalcondition of things in Russia; that the organization of some relation of thelaborers to the soil in which they would work, as with the peasant he had methalf-way to the Sviazhskys’, was not a dream, but a problem which must besolved. And it seemed to him that the problem could be solved, and that heought to try and solve it.After saying good-night to the ladies, and promising to stay the whole of thenext day, so as to make an expedition on horseback with them to see aninteresting ruin in the crown forest, Levin went, before going to bed, into hishost’s study to get the books on the labor question that Sviazhsky hadoffered him. Sviazhsky’s study was a huge room, surrounded by bookcasesand with two tables in it—one a massive writing-table, standing in themiddle of the room, and the other a round table, covered with recent numbers ofreviews and journals in different languages, ranged like the rays of a starround the lamp. On the writing-table was a stand of drawers marked with goldlettering, and full of papers of various sorts.Sviazhsky took out the books, and sat down in a rocking-chair.“What are you looking at there?” he said to Levin, who was standingat the round table looking through the reviews.“Oh, yes, there’s a very interesting article here,” saidSviazhsky of the review Levin was holding in his hand. “Itappears,” he went on, with eager interest, “that Friedrich was not,after all, the person chiefly responsible for the partition of Poland. It isproved....”And with his characteristic clearness, he summed up those new, very important,and interesting revelations. Although Levin was engrossed at the moment by hisideas about the problem of the land, he wondered, as he heard Sviazhsky:“What is there inside of him? And why, why is he interested in thepartition of Poland?” When Sviazhsky had finished, Levin could not helpasking: “Well, and what then?” But there was nothing to follow. Itwas simply interesting that it had been proved to be so and so. But Sviazhskydid not explain, and saw no need to explain why it was interesting to him.“Yes, but I was very much interested by your irritable neighbor,”said Levin, sighing. “He’s a clever fellow, and said a lot that wastrue.”“Oh, get along with you! An inveterate supporter of serfdom at heart,like all of them!” said Sviazhsky.“Whose marshal you are.”“Yes, only I marshal them in the other direction,” said Sviazhsky,laughing.“I’ll tell you what interests me very much,” said Levin.“He’s right that our system, that’s to say of rationalfarming, doesn’t answer, that the only thing that answers is themoney-lender system, like that meek-looking gentleman’s, or else the verysimplest.... Whose fault is it?”“Our own, of course. Besides, it’s not true that it doesn’tanswer. It answers with Vassiltchikov.”“A factory....”“But I really don’t know what it is you are surprised at. Thepeople are at such a low stage of rational and moral development, thatit’s obvious they’re bound to oppose everything that’sstrange to them. In Europe, a rational system answers because the people areeducated; it follows that we must educate the people—that’sall.”“But how are we to educate the people?”“To educate the people three things are needed: schools, and schools, andschools.”“But you said yourself the people are at such a low stage of materialdevelopment: what help are schools for that?”“Do you know, you remind me of the story of the advice given to the sickman—You should try purgative medicine. Taken: worse. Try leeches. Triedthem: worse. Well, then, there’s nothing left but to pray to God. Triedit: worse. That’s just how it is with us. I say political economy; yousay—worse. I say socialism: worse. Education: worse.”“But how do schools help matters?”“They give the peasant fresh wants.”“Well, that’s a thing I’ve never understood,” Levinreplied with heat. “In what way are schools going to help the people toimprove their material position? You say schools, education, will give themfresh wants. So much the worse, since they won’t be capable of satisfyingthem. And in what way a knowledge of addition and subtraction and the catechismis going to improve their material condition, I never could make out. The daybefore yesterday, I met a peasant woman in the evening with a little baby, andasked her where she was going. She said she was going to the wise woman; herboy had screaming fits, so she was taking him to be doctored. I asked,‘Why, how does the wise woman cure screaming fits?’ ‘She putsthe child on the hen-roost and repeats some charm....’”“Well, you’re saying it yourself! What’s wanted to preventher taking her child to the hen-roost to cure it of screaming fits isjust....” Sviazhsky said, smiling good-humoredly.“Oh, no!” said Levin with annoyance; “that method ofdoctoring I merely meant as a simile for doctoring the people with schools. Thepeople are poor and ignorant—that we see as surely as the peasant womansees the baby is ill because it screams. But in what way this trouble ofpoverty and ignorance is to be cured by schools is as incomprehensible as howthe hen-roost affects the screaming. What has to be cured is what makes himpoor.”“Well, in that, at least, you’re in agreement with Spencer, whomyou dislike so much. He says, too, that education may be the consequence ofgreater prosperity and comfort, of more frequent washing, as he says, but notof being able to read and write....”“Well, then, I’m very glad—or the contrary, very sorry, thatI’m in agreement with Spencer; only I’ve known it a long while.Schools can do no good; what will do good is an economic organization in whichthe people will become richer, will have more leisure—and then there willbe schools.”“Still, all over Europe now schools are obligatory.”“And how far do you agree with Spencer yourself about it?” askedLevin.But there was a gleam of alarm in Sviazhsky’s eyes, and he said smiling:“No; that screaming story is positively capital! Did you really hear ityourself?”Levin saw that he was not to discover the connection between this man’slife and his thoughts. Obviously he did not care in the least what hisreasoning led him to; all he wanted was the process of reasoning. And he didnot like it when the process of reasoning brought him into a blind alley. Thatwas the only thing he disliked, and avoided by changing the conversation tosomething agreeable and amusing.All the impressions of the day, beginning with the impression made by the oldpeasant, which served, as it were, as the fundamental basis of all theconceptions and ideas of the day, threw Levin into violent excitement. Thisdear good Sviazhsky, keeping a stock of ideas simply for social purposes, andobviously having some other principles hidden from Levin, while with the crowd,whose name is legion, he guided public opinion by ideas he did not share; thatirascible country gentleman, perfectly correct in the conclusions that he hadbeen worried into by life, but wrong in his exasperation against a whole class,and that the best class in Russia; his own dissatisfaction with the work he hadbeen doing, and the vague hope of finding a remedy for all this—all wasblended in a sense of inward turmoil, and anticipation of some solution near athand.Left alone in the room assigned him, lying on a spring mattress that yieldedunexpectedly at every movement of his arm or his leg, Levin did not fall asleepfor a long while. Not one conversation with Sviazhsky, though he had said agreat deal that was clever, had interested Levin; but the conclusions of theirascible landowner required consideration. Levin could not help recallingevery word he had said, and in imagination amending his own replies.“Yes, I ought to have said to him: You say that our husbandry does notanswer because the peasant hates improvements, and that they must be forced onhim by authority. If no system of husbandry answered at all without theseimprovements, you would be quite right. But the only system that does answer iswhere laborer is working in accordance with his habits, just as on the oldpeasant’s land half-way here. Your and our general dissatisfaction withthe system shows that either we are to blame or the laborers. We have gone ourway—the European way—a long while, without asking ourselves aboutthe qualities of our labor force. Let us try to look upon the labor force notas an abstract force, but as the Russian peasant with his instincts, andwe shall arrange our system of culture in accordance with that. Imagine, Iought to have said to him, that you have the same system as the old peasanthas, that you have found means of making your laborers take an interest in thesuccess of the work, and have found the happy mean in the way of improvementswhich they will admit, and you will, without exhausting the soil, get twice orthree times the yield you got before. Divide it in halves, give half as theshare of labor, the surplus left you will be greater, and the share of laborwill be greater too. And to do this one must lower the standard of husbandryand interest the laborers in its success. How to do this?—that’s amatter of detail; but undoubtedly it can be done.”This idea threw Levin into a great excitement. He did not sleep half the night,thinking over in detail the putting of his idea into practice. He had notintended to go away next day, but he now determined to go home early in themorning. Besides, the sister-in-law with her low-necked bodice aroused in him afeeling akin to shame and remorse for some utterly base action. Most importantof all—he must get back without delay: he would have to make haste to puthis new project to the peasants before the sowing of the winter wheat, so thatthe sowing might be undertaken on a new basis. He had made up his mind torevolutionize his whole system.Chapter 29The carrying out of Levin’s plan presented many difficulties; but hestruggled on, doing his utmost, and attained a result which, though not what hedesired, was enough to enable him, without self-deception, to believe that theattempt was worth the trouble. One of the chief difficulties was that theprocess of cultivating the land was in full swing, that it was impossible tostop everything and begin it all again from the beginning, and the machine hadto be mended while in motion.When on the evening that he arrived home he informed the bailiff of his plans,the latter with visible pleasure agreed with what he said so long as he waspointing out that all that had been done up to that time was stupid anduseless. The bailiff said that he had said so a long while ago, but no heed hadbeen paid him. But as for the proposal made by Levin—to take a part asshareholder with his laborers in each agricultural undertaking—at thisthe bailiff simply expressed a profound despondency, and offered no definiteopinion, but began immediately talking of the urgent necessity of carrying theremaining sheaves of rye the next day, and of sending the men out for thesecond ploughing, so that Levin felt that this was not the time for discussingit.On beginning to talk to the peasants about it, and making a proposition to cedethem the land on new terms, he came into collision with the same greatdifficulty that they were so much absorbed by the current work of the day, thatthey had not time to consider the advantages and disadvantages of the proposedscheme.The simple-hearted Ivan, the cowherd, seemed completely to grasp Levin’sproposal—that he should with his family take a share of the profits ofthe cattle-yard—and he was in complete sympathy with the plan. But whenLevin hinted at the future advantages, Ivan’s face expressed alarm andregret that he could not hear all he had to say, and he made haste to findhimself some task that would admit of no delay: he either snatched up the forkto pitch the hay out of the pens, or ran to get water or to clear out the dung.Another difficulty lay in the invincible disbelief of the peasant that alandowner’s object could be anything else than a desire to squeeze all hecould out of them. They were firmly convinced that his real aim (whatever hemight say to them) would always be in what he did not say to them. And theythemselves, in giving their opinion, said a great deal but never said what wastheir real object. Moreover (Levin felt that the irascible landowner had beenright) the peasants made their first and unalterable condition of any agreementwhatever that they should not be forced to any new methods of tillage of anykind, nor to use new implements. They agreed that the modern plough ploughedbetter, that the scarifier did the work more quickly, but they found thousandsof reasons that made it out of the question for them to use either of them; andthough he had accepted the conviction that he would have to lower the standardof cultivation, he felt sorry to give up improved methods, the advantages ofwhich were so obvious. But in spite of all these difficulties he got his way,and by autumn the system was working, or at least so it seemed to him.At first Levin had thought of giving up the whole farming of the land just asit was to the peasants, the laborers, and the bailiff on new conditions ofpartnership; but he was very soon convinced that this was impossible, anddetermined to divide it up. The cattle-yard, the garden, hay fields, and arableland, divided into several parts, had to be made into separate lots. Thesimple-hearted cowherd, Ivan, who, Levin fancied, understood the matter betterthan any of them, collecting together a gang of workers to help him,principally of his own family, became a partner in the cattle-yard. A distantpart of the estate, a tract of waste land that had lain fallow for eight years,was with the help of the clever carpenter, Fyodor Ryezunov, taken by sixfamilies of peasants on new conditions of partnership, and the peasant Shuraevtook the management of all the vegetable gardens on the same terms. Theremainder of the land was still worked on the old system, but these threeassociated partnerships were the first step to a new organization of the whole,and they completely took up Levin’s time.It is true that in the cattle-yard things went no better than before, and Ivanstrenuously opposed warm housing for the cows and butter made of fresh cream,affirming that cows require less food if kept cold, and that butter is moreprofitable made from sour cream, and he asked for wages just as under the oldsystem, and took not the slightest interest in the fact that the money hereceived was not wages but an advance out of his future share in the profits.It is true that Fyodor Ryezunov’s company did not plough over the groundtwice before sowing, as had been agreed, justifying themselves on the plea thatthe time was too short. It is true that the peasants of the same company,though they had agreed to work the land on new conditions, always spoke of theland, not as held in partnership, but as rented for half the crop, and morethan once the peasants and Ryezunov himself said to Levin, “If you wouldtake a rent for the land, it would save you trouble, and we should be morefree.” Moreover the same peasants kept putting off, on various excuses,the building of a cattleyard and barn on the land as agreed upon, and delayeddoing it till the winter.It is true that Shuraev would have liked to let out the kitchen gardens he hadundertaken in small lots to the peasants. He evidently quite misunderstood, andapparently intentionally misunderstood, the conditions upon which the land hadbeen given to him.Often, too, talking to the peasants and explaining to them all the advantagesof the plan, Levin felt that the peasants heard nothing but the sound of hisvoice, and were firmly resolved, whatever he might say, not to let themselvesbe taken in. He felt this especially when he talked to the cleverest of thepeasants, Ryezunov, and detected the gleam in Ryezunov’s eyes whichshowed so plainly both ironical amusement at Levin, and the firm convictionthat, if anyone were to be taken in, it would not be he, Ryezunov. But in spiteof all this Levin thought the system worked, and that by keeping accountsstrictly and insisting on his own way, he would prove to them in the future theadvantages of the arrangement, and then the system would go of itself.These matters, together with the management of the land still left on hishands, and the indoor work over his book, so engrossed Levin the whole summerthat he scarcely ever went out shooting. At the end of August he heard that theOblonskys had gone away to Moscow, from their servant who brought back theside-saddle. He felt that in not answering Darya Alexandrovna’s letter hehad by his rudeness, of which he could not think without a flush of shame,burned his ships, and that he would never go and see them again. He had beenjust as rude with the Sviazhskys, leaving them without saying good-bye. But hewould never go to see them again either. He did not care about that now. Thebusiness of reorganizing the farming of his land absorbed him as completely asthough there would never be anything else in his life. He read the books lenthim by Sviazhsky, and copying out what he had not got, he read both theeconomic and socialistic books on the subject, but, as he had anticipated,found nothing bearing on the scheme he had undertaken. In the books onpolitical economy—in Mill, for instance, whom he studied first with greatardor, hoping every minute to find an answer to the questions that wereengrossing him—he found laws deduced from the condition of land culturein Europe; but he did not see why these laws, which did not apply in Russia,must be general. He saw just the same thing in the socialistic books: eitherthey were the beautiful but impracticable fantasies which had fascinated himwhen he was a student, or they were attempts at improving, rectifying theeconomic position in which Europe was placed, with which the system of landtenure in Russia had nothing in common. Political economy told him that thelaws by which the wealth of Europe had been developed, and was developing, wereuniversal and unvarying. Socialism told him that development along these linesleads to ruin. And neither of them gave an answer, or even a hint, in reply tothe question what he, Levin, and all the Russian peasants and landowners, wereto do with their millions of hands and millions of acres, to make them asproductive as possible for the common weal.Having once taken the subject up, he read conscientiously everything bearing onit, and intended in the autumn to go abroad to study land systems on the spot,in order that he might not on this question be confronted with what so oftenmet him on various subjects. Often, just as he was beginning to understand theidea in the mind of anyone he was talking to, and was beginning to explain hisown, he would suddenly be told: “But Kauffmann, but Jones, but Dubois,but Michelli? You haven’t read them: they’ve thrashed that questionout thoroughly.”He saw now distinctly that Kauffmann and Michelli had nothing to tell him. Heknew what he wanted. He saw that Russia has splendid land, splendid laborers,and that in certain cases, as at the peasant’s on the way toSviazhsky’s, the produce raised by the laborers and the land isgreat—in the majority of cases when capital is applied in the Europeanway the produce is small, and that this simply arises from the fact that thelaborers want to work and work well only in their own peculiar way, and thatthis antagonism is not incidental but invariable, and has its roots in thenational spirit. He thought that the Russian people whose task it was tocolonize and cultivate vast tracts of unoccupied land, consciously adhered,till all their land was occupied, to the methods suitable to their purpose, andthat their methods were by no means so bad as was generally supposed. And hewanted to prove this theoretically in his book and practically on his land.Chapter 30At the end of September the timber had been carted for building the cattleyardon the land that had been allotted to the association of peasants, and thebutter from the cows was sold and the profits divided. In practice the systemworked capitally, or, at least, so it seemed to Levin. In order to work out thewhole subject theoretically and to complete his book, which, in Levin’sdaydreams, was not merely to effect a revolution in political economy, but toannihilate that science entirely and to lay the foundation of a new science ofthe relation of the people to the soil, all that was left to do was to make atour abroad, and to study on the spot all that had been done in the samedirection, and to collect conclusive evidence that all that had been done therewas not what was wanted. Levin was only waiting for the delivery of his wheatto receive the money for it and go abroad. But the rains began, preventing theharvesting of the corn and potatoes left in the fields, and putting a stop toall work, even to the delivery of the wheat.The mud was impassable along the roads; two mills were carried away, and theweather got worse and worse.On the 30th of September the sun came out in the morning, and hoping for fineweather, Levin began making final preparations for his journey. He gave ordersfor the wheat to be delivered, sent the bailiff to the merchant to get themoney owing him, and went out himself to give some final directions on theestate before setting off.Having finished all his business, soaked through with the streams of waterwhich kept running down the leather behind his neck and his gaiters, but in thekeenest and most confident temper, Levin returned homewards in the evening. Theweather had become worse than ever towards evening; the hail lashed thedrenched mare so cruelly that she went along sideways, shaking her head andears; but Levin was all right under his hood, and he looked cheerfully abouthim at the muddy streams running under the wheels, at the drops hanging onevery bare twig, at the whiteness of the patch of unmelted hailstones on theplanks of the bridge, at the thick layer of still juicy, fleshy leaves that layheaped up about the stripped elm-tree. In spite of the gloominess of naturearound him, he felt peculiarly eager. The talks he had been having with thepeasants in the further village had shown that they were beginning to get usedto their new position. The old servant to whose hut he had gone to get dryevidently approved of Levin’s plan, and of his own accord proposed toenter the partnership by the purchase of cattle.“I have only to go stubbornly on towards my aim, and I shall attain myend,” thought Levin; “and it’s something to work and taketrouble for. This is not a matter of myself individually; the question of thepublic welfare comes into it. The whole system of culture, the chief element inthe condition of the people, must be completely transformed. Instead ofpoverty, general prosperity and content; instead of hostility, harmony andunity of interests. In short, a bloodless revolution, but a revolution of thegreatest magnitude, beginning in the little circle of our district, then theprovince, then Russia, the whole world. Because a just idea cannot but befruitful. Yes, it’s an aim worth working for. And its being me, KostyaLevin, who went to a ball in a black tie, and was refused by theShtcherbatskaya girl, and who was intrinsically such a pitiful, worthlesscreature—that proves nothing; I feel sure Franklin felt just asworthless, and he too had no faith in himself, thinking of himself as a whole.That means nothing. And he too, most likely, had an Agafea Mihalovna to whom heconfided his secrets.”Musing on such thoughts Levin reached home in the darkness.The bailiff, who had been to the merchant, had come back and brought part ofthe money for the wheat. An agreement had been made with the old servant, andon the road the bailiff had learned that everywhere the corn was still standingin the fields, so that his one hundred and sixty shocks that had not beencarried were nothing in comparison with the losses of others.After dinner Levin was sitting, as he usually did, in an easy chair with abook, and as he read he went on thinking of the journey before him inconnection with his book. Today all the significance of his book rose beforehim with special distinctness, and whole periods ranged themselves in his mindin illustration of his theories. “I must write that down,” hethought. “That ought to form a brief introduction, which I thoughtunnecessary before.” He got up to go to his writing-table, and Laska,lying at his feet, got up too, stretching and looking at him as though toinquire where to go. But he had not time to write it down, for the headpeasants had come round, and Levin went out into the hall to them.After his levee, that is to say, giving directions about the labors of the nextday, and seeing all the peasants who had business with him, Levin went back tohis study and sat down to work.Laska lay under the table; Agafea Mihalovna settled herself in her place withher stocking.After writing for a little while, Levin suddenly thought with exceptionalvividness of Kitty, her refusal, and their last meeting. He got up and beganwalking about the room.“What’s the use of being dreary?” said Agafea Mihalovna.“Come, why do you stay on at home? You ought to go to some warm springs,especially now you’re ready for the journey.”“Well, I am going away the day after tomorrow, Agafea Mihalovna; I mustfinish my work.”“There, there, your work, you say! As if you hadn’t done enough forthe peasants! Why, as ’tis, they’re saying, ‘Your master willbe getting some honor from the Tsar for it.’ Indeed and it is a strangething; why need you worry about the peasants?”“I’m not worrying about them; I’m doing it for my owngood.”Agafea Mihalovna knew every detail of Levin’s plans for his land. Levinoften put his views before her in all their complexity, and not uncommonly heargued with her and did not agree with her comments. But on this occasion sheentirely misinterpreted what he had said.“Of one’s soul’s salvation we all know and must think beforeall else,” she said with a sigh. “Parfen Denisitch now, for all hewas no scholar, he died a death that God grant everyone of us the like,”she said, referring to a servant who had died recently. “Took thesacrament and all.”“That’s not what I mean,” said he. “I mean thatI’m acting for my own advantage. It’s all the better for me if thepeasants do their work better.”“Well, whatever you do, if he’s a lazy good-for-nought,everything’ll be at sixes and sevens. If he has a conscience, he’llwork, and if not, there’s no doing anything.”“Oh, come, you say yourself Ivan has begun looking after the cattlebetter.”“All I say is,” answered Agafea Mihalovna, evidently not speakingat random, but in strict sequence of idea, “that you ought to getmarried, that’s what I say.”Agafea Mihalovna’s allusion to the very subject he had only just beenthinking about, hurt and stung him. Levin scowled, and without answering her,he sat down again to his work, repeating to himself all that he had beenthinking of the real significance of that work. Only at intervals he listenedin the stillness to the click of Agafea Mihalovna’s needles, andrecollecting what he did not want to remember, he frowned again.At nine o’clock they heard the bell and the faint vibration of a carriageover the mud.“Well, here’s visitors come to us, and you won’t bedull,” said Agafea Mihalovna, getting up and going to the door. But Levinovertook her. His work was not going well now, and he was glad of a visitor,whoever it might be.Chapter 31Running halfway down the staircase, Levin caught a sound he knew, a familiarcough in the hall. But he heard it indistinctly through the sound of his ownfootsteps, and hoped he was mistaken. Then he caught sight of a long, bony,familiar figure, and now it seemed there was no possibility of mistake; and yethe still went on hoping that this tall man taking off his fur cloak andcoughing was not his brother Nikolay.Levin loved his brother, but being with him was always a torture. Just now,when Levin, under the influence of the thoughts that had come to him, andAgafea Mihalovna’s hint, was in a troubled and uncertain humor, themeeting with his brother that he had to face seemed particularly difficult.Instead of a lively, healthy visitor, some outsider who would, he hoped, cheerhim up in his uncertain humor, he had to see his brother, who knew him throughand through, who would call forth all the thoughts nearest his heart, wouldforce him to show himself fully. And that he was not disposed to do.Angry with himself for so base a feeling, Levin ran into the hall; as soon ashe had seen his brother close, this feeling of selfish disappointment vanishedinstantly and was replaced by pity. Terrible as his brother Nikolay had beenbefore in his emaciation and sickliness, now he looked still more emaciated,still more wasted. He was a skeleton covered with skin.He stood in the hall, jerking his long thin neck, and pulling the scarf off it,and smiled a strange and pitiful smile. When he saw that smile, submissive andhumble, Levin felt something clutching at his throat.“You see, I’ve come to you,” said Nikolay in a thick voice,never for one second taking his eyes off his brother’s face.“I’ve been meaning to a long while, but I’ve been unwell allthe time. Now I’m ever so much better,” he said, rubbing his beardwith his big thin hands.“Yes, yes!” answered Levin. And he felt still more frightened when,kissing him, he felt with his lips the dryness of his brother’s skin andsaw close to him his big eyes, full of a strange light.A few weeks before, Konstantin Levin had written to his brother that throughthe sale of the small part of the property, that had remained undivided, therewas a sum of about two thousand roubles to come to him as his share.Nikolay said that he had come now to take this money and, what was moreimportant, to stay a while in the old nest, to get in touch with the earth, soas to renew his strength like the heroes of old for the work that lay beforehim. In spite of his exaggerated stoop, and the emaciation that was so strikingfrom his height, his movements were as rapid and abrupt as ever. Levin led himinto his study.His brother dressed with particular care—a thing he never used todo—combed his scanty, lank hair, and, smiling, went upstairs.He was in the most affectionate and good-humored mood, just as Levin oftenremembered him in childhood. He even referred to Sergey Ivanovitch withoutrancor. When he saw Agafea Mihalovna, he made jokes with her and asked afterthe old servants. The news of the death of Parfen Denisitch made a painfulimpression on him. A look of fear crossed his face, but he regained hisserenity immediately.“Of course he was quite old,” he said, and changed the subject.“Well, I’ll spend a month or two with you, and then I’m offto Moscow. Do you know, Myakov has promised me a place there, and I’mgoing into the service. Now I’m going to arrange my life quitedifferently,” he went on. “You know I got rid of that woman.”“Marya Nikolaevna? Why, what for?”“Oh, she was a horrid woman! She caused me all sorts of worries.”But he did not say what the annoyances were. He could not say that he had castoff Marya Nikolaevna because the tea was weak, and, above all, because shewould look after him, as though he were an invalid.“Besides, I want to turn over a new leaf completely now. I’ve donesilly things, of course, like everyone else, but money’s the lastconsideration; I don’t regret it. So long as there’s health, and myhealth, thank God, is quite restored.”Levin listened and racked his brains, but could think of nothing to say.Nikolay probably felt the same; he began questioning his brother about hisaffairs; and Levin was glad to talk about himself, because then he could speakwithout hypocrisy. He told his brother of his plans and his doings.His brother listened, but evidently he was not interested by it.These two men were so akin, so near each other, that the slightest gesture, thetone of voice, told both more than could be said in words.Both of them now had only one thought—the illness of Nikolay and thenearness of his death—which stifled all else. But neither of them daredto speak of it, and so whatever they said—not uttering the one thoughtthat filled their minds—was all falsehood. Never had Levin been so gladwhen the evening was over and it was time to go to bed. Never with any outsideperson, never on any official visit had he been so unnatural and false as hewas that evening. And the consciousness of this unnaturalness, and the remorsehe felt at it, made him even more unnatural. He wanted to weep over his dying,dearly loved brother, and he had to listen and keep on talking of how he meantto live.As the house was damp, and only one bedroom had been kept heated, Levin put hisbrother to sleep in his own bedroom behind a screen.His brother got into bed, and whether he slept or did not sleep, tossed aboutlike a sick man, coughed, and when he could not get his throat clear, mumbledsomething. Sometimes when his breathing was painful, he said, “Oh, myGod!” Sometimes when he was choking he muttered angrily, “Ah, thedevil!” Levin could not sleep for a long while, hearing him. His thoughtswere of the most various, but the end of all his thoughts was thesame—death. Death, the inevitable end of all, for the first timepresented itself to him with irresistible force. And death, which was here inthis loved brother, groaning half asleep and from habit calling withoutdistinction on God and the devil, was not so remote as it had hitherto seemedto him. It was in himself too, he felt that. If not today, tomorrow, if nottomorrow, in thirty years, wasn’t it all the same! And what was thisinevitable death—he did not know, had never thought about it, and whatwas more, had not the power, had not the courage to think about it.“I work, I want to do something, but I had forgotten it must all end; Ihad forgotten—death.”He sat on his bed in the darkness, crouched up, hugging his knees, and holdinghis breath from the strain of thought, he pondered. But the more intensely hethought, the clearer it became to him that it was indubitably so, that inreality, looking upon life, he had forgotten one little fact—that deathwill come, and all ends; that nothing was even worth beginning, and that therewas no helping it anyway. Yes, it was awful, but it was so.“But I am alive still. Now what’s to be done? what’s to bedone?” he said in despair. He lighted a candle, got up cautiously andwent to the looking-glass, and began looking at his face and hair. Yes, therewere gray hairs about his temples. He opened his mouth. His back teeth werebeginning to decay. He bared his muscular arms. Yes, there was strength inthem. But Nikolay, who lay there breathing with what was left of lungs, had hada strong, healthy body too. And suddenly he recalled how they used to go to bedtogether as children, and how they only waited till Fyodor Bogdanitch was outof the room to fling pillows at each other and laugh, laugh irrepressibly, sothat even their awe of Fyodor Bogdanitch could not check the effervescing,overbrimming sense of life and happiness. “And now that bent, hollowchest ... and I, not knowing what will become of me, or wherefore....”“K...ha! K...ha! Damnation! Why do you keep fidgeting, why don’tyou go to sleep?” his brother’s voice called to him.“Oh, I don’t know, I’m not sleepy.”“I have had a good sleep, I’m not in a sweat now. Just see, feel myshirt; it’s not wet, is it?”Levin felt, withdrew behind the screen, and put out the candle, but for a longwhile he could not sleep. The question how to live had hardly begun to grow alittle clearer to him, when a new, insoluble question presenteditself—death.“Why, he’s dying—yes, he’ll die in the spring, and howhelp him? What can I say to him? What do I know about it? I’d evenforgotten that it was at all.”Chapter 32Levin had long before made the observation that when one is uncomfortable withpeople from their being excessively amenable and meek, one is apt very soonafter to find things intolerable from their touchiness and irritability. Hefelt that this was how it would be with his brother. And his brotherNikolay’s gentleness did in fact not last out for long. The very nextmorning he began to be irritable, and seemed doing his best to find fault withhis brother, attacking him on his tenderest points.Levin felt himself to blame, and could not set things right. He felt that ifthey had both not kept up appearances, but had spoken, as it is called, fromthe heart—that is to say, had said only just what they were thinking andfeeling—they would simply have looked into each other’s faces, andKonstantin could only have said, “You’re dying, you’redying!” and Nikolay could only have answered, “I know I’mdying, but I’m afraid, I’m afraid, I’m afraid!” Andthey could have said nothing more, if they had said only what was in theirhearts. But life like that was impossible, and so Konstantin tried to do whathe had been trying to do all his life, and never could learn to do, though, asfar as he could observe, many people knew so well how to do it, and without itthere was no living at all. He tried to say what he was not thinking, but hefelt continually that it had a ring of falsehood, that his brother detected himin it, and was exasperated at it.The third day Nikolay induced his brother to explain his plan to him again, andbegan not merely attacking it, but intentionally confounding it with communism.“You’ve simply borrowed an idea that’s not your own, butyou’ve distorted it, and are trying to apply it where it’s notapplicable.”“But I tell you it’s nothing to do with it. They deny the justiceof property, of capital, of inheritance, while I do not deny this chiefstimulus.” (Levin felt disgusted himself at using such expressions, butever since he had been engrossed by his work, he had unconsciously come moreand more frequently to use words not Russian.) “All I want is to regulatelabor.”“Which means, you’ve borrowed an idea, stripped it of all that gaveit its force, and want to make believe that it’s something new,”said Nikolay, angrily tugging at his necktie.“But my idea has nothing in common....”“That, anyway,” said Nikolay Levin, with an ironical smile, hiseyes flashing malignantly, “has the charm of—what’s one tocall it?—geometrical symmetry, of clearness, of definiteness. It may be aUtopia. But if once one allows the possibility of making of all the past atabula rasa—no property, no family—then labor would organizeitself. But you gain nothing....”“Why do you mix things up? I’ve never been a communist.”“But I have, and I consider it’s premature, but rational, and ithas a future, just like Christianity in its first ages.”“All that I maintain is that the labor force ought to be investigatedfrom the point of view of natural science; that is to say, it ought to bestudied, its qualities ascertained....”“But that’s utter waste of time. That force finds a certain form ofactivity of itself, according to the stage of its development. There have beenslaves first everywhere, then metayers; and we have the half-crop system, rent,and day laborers. What are you trying to find?”Levin suddenly lost his temper at these words, because at the bottom of hisheart he was afraid that it was true—true that he was trying to hold thebalance even between communism and the familiar forms, and that this was hardlypossible.“I am trying to find means of working productively for myself and for thelaborers. I want to organize....” he answered hotly.“You don’t want to organize anything; it’s simply just asyou’ve been all your life, that you want to be original to pose as notexploiting the peasants simply, but with some idea in view.”“Oh, all right, that’s what you think—and let mealone!” answered Levin, feeling the muscles of his left cheek twitchinguncontrollably.“You’ve never had, and never have, convictions; all you want is toplease your vanity.”“Oh, very well; then let me alone!”“And I will let you alone! and it’s high time I did, and go to thedevil with you! and I’m very sorry I ever came!”In spite of all Levin’s efforts to soothe his brother afterwards, Nikolaywould listen to nothing he said, declaring that it was better to part, andKonstantin saw that it simply was that life was unbearable to him.Nikolay was just getting ready to go, when Konstantin went in to him again andbegged him, rather unnaturally, to forgive him if he had hurt his feelings inany way.“Ah, generosity!” said Nikolay, and he smiled. “If you wantto be right, I can give you that satisfaction. You’re in the right; butI’m going all the same.”It was only just at parting that Nikolay kissed him, and said, looking withsudden strangeness and seriousness at his brother:“Anyway, don’t remember evil against me, Kostya!” and hisvoice quivered. These were the only words that had been spoken sincerelybetween them. Levin knew that those words meant, “You see, and you know,that I’m in a bad way, and maybe we shall not see each otheragain.” Levin knew this, and the tears gushed from his eyes. He kissedhis brother once more, but he could not speak, and knew not what to say.Three days after his brother’s departure, Levin too set off for hisforeign tour. Happening to meet Shtcherbatsky, Kitty’s cousin, in therailway train, Levin greatly astonished him by his depression.“What’s the matter with you?” Shtcherbatsky asked him.“Oh, nothing; there’s not much happiness in life.”“Not much? You come with me to Paris instead of to Mulhausen. You shallsee how to be happy.”“No, I’ve done with it all. It’s time I was dead.”“Well, that’s a good one!” said Shtcherbatsky, laughing;“why, I’m only just getting ready to begin.”“Yes, I thought the same not long ago, but now I know I shall soon bedead.”Levin said what he had genuinely been thinking of late. He saw nothing butdeath or the advance towards death in everything. But his cherished scheme onlyengrossed him the more. Life had to be got through somehow till death did come.Darkness had fallen upon everything for him; but just because of this darknesshe felt that the one guiding clue in the darkness was his work, and he clutchedit and clung to it with all his strength.PART FOURChapter 1The Karenins, husband and wife, continued living in the same house, met everyday, but were complete strangers to one another. Alexey Alexandrovitch made ita rule to see his wife every day, so that the servants might have no groundsfor suppositions, but avoided dining at home. Vronsky was never at AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s house, but Anna saw him away from home, and her husbandwas aware of it.The position was one of misery for all three; and not one of them would havebeen equal to enduring this position for a single day, if it had not been forthe expectation that it would change, that it was merely a temporary painfulordeal which would pass over. Alexey Alexandrovitch hoped that this passionwould pass, as everything does pass, that everyone would forget about it, andhis name would remain unsullied. Anna, on whom the position depended, and forwhom it was more miserable than for anyone, endured it because she not merelyhoped, but firmly believed, that it would all very soon be settled and comeright. She had not the least idea what would settle the position, but shefirmly believed that something would very soon turn up now. Vronsky, againsthis own will or wishes, followed her lead, hoped too that something, apart fromhis own action, would be sure to solve all difficulties.In the middle of the winter Vronsky spent a very tiresome week. A foreignprince, who had come on a visit to Petersburg, was put under his charge, and hehad to show him the sights worth seeing. Vronsky was of distinguishedappearance; he possessed, moreover, the art of behaving with respectfuldignity, and was used to having to do with such grand personages—that washow he came to be put in charge of the prince. But he felt his duties veryirksome. The prince was anxious to miss nothing of which he would be asked athome, had he seen that in Russia? And on his own account he was anxious toenjoy to the utmost all Russian forms of amusement. Vronsky was obliged to behis guide in satisfying both these inclinations. The mornings they spentdriving to look at places of interest; the evenings they passed enjoying thenational entertainments. The prince rejoiced in health exceptional even amongprinces. By gymnastics and careful attention to his health he had broughthimself to such a point that in spite of his excess in pleasure he looked asfresh as a big glossy green Dutch cucumber. The prince had traveled a greatdeal, and considered one of the chief advantages of modern facilities ofcommunication was the accessibility of the pleasures of all nations.He had been in Spain, and there had indulged in serenades and had made friendswith a Spanish girl who played the mandolin. In Switzerland he had killedchamois. In England he had galloped in a red coat over hedges and killed twohundred pheasants for a bet. In Turkey he had got into a harem; in India he hadhunted on an elephant, and now in Russia he wished to taste all the speciallyRussian forms of pleasure.Vronsky, who was, as it were, chief master of the ceremonies to him, was atgreat pains to arrange all the Russian amusements suggested by various personsto the prince. They had race horses, and Russian pancakes and bear hunts andthree-horse sledges, and gypsies and drinking feasts, with the Russianaccompaniment of broken crockery. And the prince with surprising ease fell inwith the Russian spirit, smashed trays full of crockery, sat with a gypsy girlon his knee, and seemed to be asking—what more, and does the wholeRussian spirit consist in just this?In reality, of all the Russian entertainments the prince liked best Frenchactresses and ballet dancers and white-seal champagne. Vronsky was used toprinces, but, either because he had himself changed of late, or that he was intoo close proximity to the prince, that week seemed fearfully wearisome to him.The whole of that week he experienced a sensation such as a man might have setin charge of a dangerous madman, afraid of the madman, and at the same time,from being with him, fearing for his own reason. Vronsky was continuallyconscious of the necessity of never for a second relaxing the tone of sternofficial respectfulness, that he might not himself be insulted. Theprince’s manner of treating the very people who, to Vronsky’ssurprise, were ready to descend to any depths to provide him with Russianamusements, was contemptuous. His criticisms of Russian women, whom he wishedto study, more than once made Vronsky crimson with indignation. The chiefreason why the prince was so particularly disagreeable to Vronsky was that hecould not help seeing himself in him. And what he saw in this mirror did notgratify his self-esteem. He was a very stupid and very self-satisfied and veryhealthy and very well-washed man, and nothing else. He was agentleman—that was true, and Vronsky could not deny it. He was equableand not cringing with his superiors, was free and ingratiating in his behaviorwith his equals, and was contemptuously indulgent with his inferiors. Vronskywas himself the same, and regarded it as a great merit to be so. But for thisprince he was an inferior, and his contemptuous and indulgent attitude to himrevolted him.“Brainless beef! can I be like that?” he thought.Be that as it might, when, on the seventh day, he parted from the prince, whowas starting for Moscow, and received his thanks, he was happy to be rid of hisuncomfortable position and the unpleasant reflection of himself. He saidgood-bye to him at the station on their return from a bear hunt, at which theyhad had a display of Russian prowess kept up all night.Chapter 2When he got home, Vronsky found there a note from Anna. She wrote, “I amill and unhappy. I cannot come out, but I cannot go on longer without seeingyou. Come in this evening. Alexey Alexandrovitch goes to the council at sevenand will be there till ten.” Thinking for an instant of the strangenessof her bidding him come straight to her, in spite of her husband’sinsisting on her not receiving him, he decided to go.Vronsky had that winter got his promotion, was now a colonel, had left theregimental quarters, and was living alone. After having some lunch, he lay downon the sofa immediately, and in five minutes memories of the hideous scenes hehad witnessed during the last few days were confused together and joined on toa mental image of Anna and of the peasant who had played an important part inthe bear hunt, and Vronsky fell asleep. He waked up in the dark, trembling withhorror, and made haste to light a candle. “What was it? What? What wasthe dreadful thing I dreamed? Yes, yes; I think a little dirty man with adisheveled beard was stooping down doing something, and all of a sudden hebegan saying some strange words in French. Yes, there was nothing else in thedream,” he said to himself. “But why was it so awful?” Hevividly recalled the peasant again and those incomprehensible French words thepeasant had uttered, and a chill of horror ran down his spine.“What nonsense!” thought Vronsky, and glanced at his watch.It was half-past eight already. He rang up his servant, dressed in haste, andwent out onto the steps, completely forgetting the dream and only worried atbeing late. As he drove up to the Karenins’ entrance he looked at hiswatch and saw it was ten minutes to nine. A high, narrow carriage with a pairof grays was standing at the entrance. He recognized Anna’s carriage.“She is coming to me,” thought Vronsky, “and better sheshould. I don’t like going into that house. But no matter; I can’thide myself,” he thought, and with that manner peculiar to him fromchildhood, as of a man who has nothing to be ashamed of, Vronsky got out of hissledge and went to the door. The door opened, and the hall-porter with a rug onhis arm called the carriage. Vronsky, though he did not usually notice details,noticed at this moment the amazed expression with which the porter glanced athim. In the very doorway Vronsky almost ran up against Alexey Alexandrovitch.The gas jet threw its full light on the bloodless, sunken face under the blackhat and on the white cravat, brilliant against the beaver of the coat.Karenin’s fixed, dull eyes were fastened upon Vronsky’s face.Vronsky bowed, and Alexey Alexandrovitch, chewing his lips, lifted his hand tohis hat and went on. Vronsky saw him without looking round get into thecarriage, pick up the rug and the opera-glass at the window and disappear.Vronsky went into the hall. His brows were scowling, and his eyes gleamed witha proud and angry light in them.“What a position!” he thought. “If he would fight, wouldstand up for his honor, I could act, could express my feelings; but thisweakness or baseness.... He puts me in the position of playing false, which Inever meant and never mean to do.”Vronsky’s ideas had changed since the day of his conversation with Annain the Vrede garden. Unconsciously yielding to the weakness of Anna—whohad surrendered herself up to him utterly, and simply looked to him to decideher fate, ready to submit to anything—he had long ceased to think thattheir tie might end as he had thought then. His ambitious plans had retreatedinto the background again, and feeling that he had got out of that circle ofactivity in which everything was definite, he had given himself entirely to hispassion, and that passion was binding him more and more closely to her.He was still in the hall when he caught the sound of her retreating footsteps.He knew she had been expecting him, had listened for him, and was now goingback to the drawing-room.“No,” she cried, on seeing him, and at the first sound of her voicethe tears came into her eyes. “No; if things are to go on like this, theend will come much, much too soon.”“What is it, dear one?”“What? I’ve been waiting in agony for an hour, two hours ... No, Iwon’t ... I can’t quarrel with you. Of course you couldn’tcome. No, I won’t.” She laid her two hands on his shoulders, andlooked a long while at him with a profound, passionate, and at the same timesearching look. She was studying his face to make up for the time she had notseen him. She was, every time she saw him, making the picture of him in herimagination (incomparably superior, impossible in reality) fit with him as hereally was.Chapter 3“You met him?” she asked, when they had sat down at the table inthe lamplight. “You’re punished, you see, for being late.”“Yes; but how was it? Wasn’t he to be at the council?”“He had been and come back, and was going out somewhere again. Butthat’s no matter. Don’t talk about it. Where have you been? Withthe prince still?”She knew every detail of his existence. He was going to say that he had been upall night and had dropped asleep, but looking at her thrilled and rapturousface, he was ashamed. And he said he had had to go to report on theprince’s departure.“But it’s over now? He is gone?”“Thank God it’s over! You wouldn’t believe how insufferableit’s been for me.”“Why so? Isn’t it the life all of you, all young men, alwayslead?” she said, knitting her brows; and taking up the crochet work thatwas lying on the table, she began drawing the hook out of it, without lookingat Vronsky.“I gave that life up long ago,” said he, wondering at the change inher face, and trying to divine its meaning. “And I confess,” hesaid, with a smile, showing his thick, white teeth, “this week I’vebeen, as it were, looking at myself in a glass, seeing that life, and Ididn’t like it.”She held the work in her hands, but did not crochet, and looked at him withstrange, shining, and hostile eyes.“This morning Liza came to see me—they’re not afraid to callon me, in spite of the Countess Lidia Ivanovna,” she putin—“and she told me about your Athenian evening. Howloathsome!”“I was just going to say....”She interrupted him. “It was that Thérèse you used to know?”“I was just saying....”“How disgusting you are, you men! How is it you can’t understandthat a woman can never forget that,” she said, getting more and moreangry, and so letting him see the cause of her irritation, “especially awoman who cannot know your life? What do I know? What have I ever known?”she said, “what you tell me. And how do I know whether you tell me thetruth?...”“Anna, you hurt me. Don’t you trust me? Haven’t I told youthat I haven’t a thought I wouldn’t lay bare to you?”“Yes, yes,” she said, evidently trying to suppress her jealousthoughts. “But if only you knew how wretched I am! I believe you, Ibelieve you.... What were you saying?”But he could not at once recall what he had been going to say. These fits ofjealousy, which of late had been more and more frequent with her, horrifiedhim, and however much he tried to disguise the fact, made him feel cold to her,although he knew the cause of her jealousy was her love for him. How often hehad told himself that her love was happiness; and now she loved him as a womancan love when love has outweighed for her all the good things of life—andhe was much further from happiness than when he had followed her from Moscow.Then he had thought himself unhappy, but happiness was before him; now he feltthat the best happiness was already left behind. She was utterly unlike whatshe had been when he first saw her. Both morally and physically she had changedfor the worse. She had broadened out all over, and in her face at the time whenshe was speaking of the actress there was an evil expression of hatred thatdistorted it. He looked at her as a man looks at a faded flower he hasgathered, with difficulty recognizing in it the beauty for which he picked andruined it. And in spite of this he felt that then, when his love was stronger,he could, if he had greatly wished it, have torn that love out of his heart;but now, when as at that moment it seemed to him he felt no love for her, heknew that what bound him to her could not be broken.“Well, well, what was it you were going to say about the prince? I havedriven away the fiend,” she added. The fiend was the name they had givenher jealousy. “What did you begin to tell me about the prince? Why didyou find it so tiresome?”“Oh, it was intolerable!” he said, trying to pick up the thread ofhis interrupted thought. “He does not improve on closer acquaintance. Ifyou want him defined, here he is: a prime, well-fed beast such as takes medalsat the cattle shows, and nothing more,” he said, with a tone of vexationthat interested her.“No; how so?” she replied. “He’s seen a great deal,anyway; he’s cultured?”“It’s an utterly different culture—their culture. He’scultivated, one sees, simply to be able to despise culture, as they despiseeverything but animal pleasures.”“But don’t you all care for these animal pleasures?” shesaid, and again he noticed a dark look in her eyes that avoided him.“How is it you’re defending him?” he said, smiling.“I’m not defending him, it’s nothing to me; but I imagine, ifyou had not cared for those pleasures yourself, you might have got out of them.But if it affords you satisfaction to gaze at Thérèse in the attire ofEve....”“Again, the devil again,” Vronsky said, taking the hand she hadlaid on the table and kissing it.“Yes; but I can’t help it. You don’t know what I havesuffered waiting for you. I believe I’m not jealous. I’m notjealous: I believe you when you’re here; but when you’re awaysomewhere leading your life, so incomprehensible to me....”She turned away from him, pulled the hook at last out of the crochet work, andrapidly, with the help of her forefinger, began working loop after loop of thewool that was dazzling white in the lamplight, while the slender wrist movedswiftly, nervously in the embroidered cuff.“How was it, then? Where did you meet Alexey Alexandrovitch?” Hervoice sounded in an unnatural and jarring tone.“We ran up against each other in the doorway.”“And he bowed to you like this?”She drew a long face, and half-closing her eyes, quickly transformed herexpression, folded her hands, and Vronsky suddenly saw in her beautiful facethe very expression with which Alexey Alexandrovitch had bowed to him. Hesmiled, while she laughed gaily, with that sweet, deep laugh, which was one ofher greatest charms.“I don’t understand him in the least,” said Vronsky.“If after your avowal to him at your country house he had broken withyou, if he had called me out—but this I can’t understand. How canhe put up with such a position? He feels it, that’s evident.”“He?” she said sneeringly. “He’s perfectlysatisfied.”“What are we all miserable for, when everything might be so happy?”“Only not he. Don’t I know him, the falsity in which he’sutterly steeped?... Could one, with any feeling, live as he is living with me?He understands nothing, and feels nothing. Could a man of any feeling live inthe same house with his unfaithful wife? Could he talk to her, call her‘my dear’?”And again she could not help mimicking him: “‘Anna, machère; Anna, dear!’”“He’s not a man, not a human being—he’s a doll! No oneknows him; but I know him. Oh, if I’d been in his place, I’d longago have killed, have torn to pieces a wife like me. I wouldn’t havesaid, ‘Anna, ma chère’! He’s not a man, he’s anofficial machine. He doesn’t understand that I’m your wife, thathe’s outside, that he’s superfluous.... Don’t let’stalk of him!...”“You’re unfair, very unfair, dearest,” said Vronsky, tryingto soothe her. “But never mind, don’t let’s talk of him. Tellme what you’ve been doing? What is the matter? What has been wrong withyou, and what did the doctor say?”She looked at him with mocking amusement. Evidently she had hit on other absurdand grotesque aspects in her husband and was awaiting the moment to giveexpression to them.But he went on:“I imagine that it’s not illness, but your condition. When will itbe?”The ironical light died away in her eyes, but a different smile, aconsciousness of something, he did not know what, and of quiet melancholy, cameover her face.“Soon, soon. You say that our position is miserable, that we must put anend to it. If you knew how terrible it is to me, what I would give to be ableto love you freely and boldly! I should not torture myself and torture you withmy jealousy.... And it will come soon, but not as we expect.”And at the thought of how it would come, she seemed so pitiable to herself thattears came into her eyes, and she could not go on. She laid her hand on hissleeve, dazzling and white with its rings in the lamplight.“It won’t come as we suppose. I didn’t mean to say this toyou, but you’ve made me. Soon, soon, all will be over, and we shall all,all be at peace, and suffer no more.”“I don’t understand,” he said, understanding her.“You asked when? Soon. And I shan’t live through it. Don’tinterrupt me!” and she made haste to speak. “I know it; I know forcertain. I shall die; and I’m very glad I shall die, and release myselfand you.”Tears dropped from her eyes; he bent down over her hand and began kissing it,trying to hide his emotion, which, he knew, had no sort of grounds, though hecould not control it.“Yes, it’s better so,” she said, tightly gripping his hand.“That’s the only way, the only way left us.”He had recovered himself, and lifted his head.“How absurd! What absurd nonsense you are talking!”“No, it’s the truth.”“What, what’s the truth?”“That I shall die. I have had a dream.”“A dream?” repeated Vronsky, and instantly he recalled the peasantof his dream.“Yes, a dream,” she said. “It’s a long while since Idreamed it. I dreamed that I ran into my bedroom, that I had to get somethingthere, to find out something; you know how it is in dreams,” she said,her eyes wide with horror; “and in the bedroom, in the corner, stoodsomething.”“Oh, what nonsense! How can you believe....”But she would not let him interrupt her. What she was saying was too importantto her.“And the something turned round, and I saw it was a peasant with adisheveled beard, little, and dreadful looking. I wanted to run away, but hebent down over a sack, and was fumbling there with his hands....”She showed how he had moved his hands. There was terror in her face. AndVronsky, remembering his dream, felt the same terror filling his soul.“He was fumbling and kept talking quickly, quickly in French, you know:Il faut le battre, le fer, le broyer, le pétrir.... And in my horror Itried to wake up, and woke up ... but woke up in the dream. And I began askingmyself what it meant. And Korney said to me: ‘In childbirth you’lldie, ma’am, you’ll die....’ And I woke up.”“What nonsense, what nonsense!” said Vronsky; but he felt himselfthat there was no conviction in his voice.“But don’t let’s talk of it. Ring the bell, I’ll havetea. And stay a little now; it’s not long I shall....”But all at once she stopped. The expression of her face instantaneouslychanged. Horror and excitement were suddenly replaced by a look of soft,solemn, blissful attention. He could not comprehend the meaning of the change.She was listening to the stirring of the new life within her.Chapter 4Alexey Alexandrovitch, after meeting Vronsky on his own steps, drove, as he hadintended, to the Italian opera. He sat through two acts there, and saw everyonehe had wanted to see. On returning home, he carefully scrutinized the hatstand, and noticing that there was not a military overcoat there, he went, asusual, to his own room. But, contrary to his usual habit, he did not go to bed,he walked up and down his study till three o’clock in the morning. Thefeeling of furious anger with his wife, who would not observe the proprietiesand keep to the one stipulation he had laid on her, not to receive her lover inher own home, gave him no peace. She had not complied with his request, and hewas bound to punish her and carry out his threat—obtain a divorce andtake away his son. He knew all the difficulties connected with this course, buthe had said he would do it, and now he must carry out his threat. CountessLidia Ivanovna had hinted that this was the best way out of his position, andof late the obtaining of divorces had been brought to such perfection thatAlexey Alexandrovitch saw a possibility of overcoming the formal difficulties.Misfortunes never come singly, and the affairs of the reorganization of thenative tribes, and of the irrigation of the lands of the Zaraisky province, hadbrought such official worries upon Alexey Alexandrovitch that he had been oflate in a continual condition of extreme irritability.He did not sleep the whole night, and his fury, growing in a sort of vast,arithmetical progression, reached its highest limits in the morning. He dressedin haste, and as though carrying his cup full of wrath, and fearing to spillany over, fearing to lose with his wrath the energy necessary for the interviewwith his wife, he went into her room directly he heard she was up.Anna, who had thought she knew her husband so well, was amazed at hisappearance when he went in to her. His brow was lowering, and his eyes stareddarkly before him, avoiding her eyes; his mouth was tightly and contemptuouslyshut. In his walk, in his gestures, in the sound of his voice there was adetermination and firmness such as his wife had never seen in him. He went intoher room, and without greeting her, walked straight up to her writing-table,and taking her keys, opened a drawer.“What do you want?” she cried.“Your lover’s letters,” he said.“They’re not here,” she said, shutting the drawer; but fromthat action he saw he had guessed right, and roughly pushing away her hand, hequickly snatched a portfolio in which he knew she used to put her mostimportant papers. She tried to pull the portfolio away, but he pushed her back.“Sit down! I have to speak to you,” he said, putting the portfoliounder his arm, and squeezing it so tightly with his elbow that his shoulderstood up. Amazed and intimidated, she gazed at him in silence.“I told you that I would not allow you to receive your lover in thishouse.”“I had to see him to....”She stopped, not finding a reason.“I do not enter into the details of why a woman wants to see herlover.”“I meant, I only....” she said, flushing hotly. This coarseness ofhis angered her, and gave her courage. “Surely you must feel how easy itis for you to insult me?” she said.“An honest man and an honest woman may be insulted, but to tell a thiefhe’s a thief is simply la constatation d’un fait.”“This cruelty is something new I did not know in you.”“You call it cruelty for a husband to give his wife liberty, giving herthe honorable protection of his name, simply on the condition of observing theproprieties: is that cruelty?”“It’s worse than cruel—it’s base, if you want toknow!” Anna cried, in a rush of hatred, and getting up, she was goingaway.“No!” he shrieked, in his shrill voice, which pitched a note higherthan usual even, and his big hands clutching her by the arm so violently thatred marks were left from the bracelet he was squeezing, he forcibly sat herdown in her place.“Base! If you care to use that word, what is base is to forsake husbandand child for a lover, while you eat your husband’s bread!”She bowed her head. She did not say what she had said the evening before to herlover, that he was her husband, and her husband was superfluous; she didnot even think that. She felt all the justice of his words, and only saidsoftly:“You cannot describe my position as worse than I feel it to be myself;but what are you saying all this for?”“What am I saying it for? what for?” he went on, as angrily.“That you may know that since you have not carried out my wishes inregard to observing outward decorum, I will take measures to put an end to thisstate of things.”“Soon, very soon, it will end, anyway,” she said; and again, at thethought of death near at hand and now desired, tears came into her eyes.“It will end sooner than you and your lover have planned! If you musthave the satisfaction of animal passion....”“Alexey Alexandrovitch! I won’t say it’s not generous, butit’s not like a gentleman to strike anyone who’s down.”“Yes, you only think of yourself! But the sufferings of a man who wasyour husband have no interest for you. You don’t care that his whole lifeis ruined, that he is thuff ... thuff....”Alexey Alexandrovitch was speaking so quickly that he stammered, and wasutterly unable to articulate the word “suffering.” In the end hepronounced it “thuffering.” She wanted to laugh, and wasimmediately ashamed that anything could amuse her at such a moment. And for thefirst time, for an instant, she felt for him, put herself in his place, and wassorry for him. But what could she say or do? Her head sank, and she sat silent.He too was silent for some time, and then began speaking in a frigid, lessshrill voice, emphasizing random words that had no special significance.“I came to tell you....” he said.She glanced at him. “No, it was my fancy,” she thought, recallingthe expression of his face when he stumbled over the word“suffering.” “No; can a man with those dull eyes, with thatself-satisfied complacency, feel anything?”“I cannot change anything,” she whispered.“I have come to tell you that I am going tomorrow to Moscow, and shallnot return again to this house, and you will receive notice of what I decidethrough the lawyer into whose hands I shall intrust the task of getting adivorce. My son is going to my sister’s,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, with an effort recalling what he had meant to say about hisson.“You take Seryozha to hurt me,” she said, looking at him from underher brows. “You do not love him.... Leave me Seryozha!”“Yes, I have lost even my affection for my son, because he is associatedwith the repulsion I feel for you. But still I shall take him. Good-bye!”And he was going away, but now she detained him.“Alexey Alexandrovitch, leave me Seryozha!” she whispered oncemore. “I have nothing else to say. Leave Seryozha till my ... I shallsoon be confined; leave him!”Alexey Alexandrovitch flew into a rage, and, snatching his hand from her, hewent out of the room without a word.Chapter 5The waiting-room of the celebrated Petersburg lawyer was full when AlexeyAlexandrovitch entered it. Three ladies—an old lady, a young lady, and amerchant’s wife—and three gentlemen—one a German banker witha ring on his finger, the second a merchant with a beard, and the third awrathful-looking government clerk in official uniform, with a cross on hisneck—had obviously been waiting a long while already. Two clerks werewriting at tables with scratching pens. The appurtenances of thewriting-tables, about which Alexey Alexandrovitch was himself very fastidious,were exceptionally good. He could not help observing this. One of the clerks,without getting up, turned wrathfully to Alexey Alexandrovitch, half closinghis eyes. “What are you wanting?”He replied that he had to see the lawyer on some business.“He is engaged,” the clerk responded severely, and he pointed withhis pen at the persons waiting, and went on writing.“Can’t he spare time to see me?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.“He has no time free; he is always busy. Kindly wait your turn.”“Then I must trouble you to give him my card,” AlexeyAlexandrovitch said with dignity, seeing the impossibility of preserving hisincognito.The clerk took the card and, obviously not approving of what he read on it,went to the door.Alexey Alexandrovitch was in principle in favor of the publicity of legalproceedings, though for some higher official considerations he disliked theapplication of the principle in Russia, and disapproved of it, as far as hecould disapprove of anything instituted by authority of the Emperor. His wholelife had been spent in administrative work, and consequently, when he did notapprove of anything, his disapproval was softened by the recognition of theinevitability of mistakes and the possibility of reform in every department. Inthe new public law courts he disliked the restrictions laid on the lawyersconducting cases. But till then he had had nothing to do with the law courts,and so had disapproved of their publicity simply in theory; now hisdisapprobation was strengthened by the unpleasant impression made on him in thelawyer’s waiting room.“Coming immediately,” said the clerk; and two minutes later theredid actually appear in the doorway the large figure of an old solicitor who hadbeen consulting with the lawyer himself.The lawyer was a little, squat, bald man, with a dark, reddish beard,light-colored long eyebrows, and an overhanging brow. He was attired as thoughfor a wedding, from his cravat to his double watch-chain and varnished boots.His face was clever and manly, but his dress was dandified and in bad taste.“Pray walk in,” said the lawyer, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch;and, gloomily ushering Karenin in before him, he closed the door.“Won’t you sit down?” He indicated an armchair at awriting-table covered with papers. He sat down himself, and, rubbing his littlehands with short fingers covered with white hairs, he bent his head on oneside. But as soon as he was settled in this position a moth flew over thetable. The lawyer, with a swiftness that could never have been expected of him,opened his hands, caught the moth, and resumed his former attitude.“Before beginning to speak of my business,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, following the lawyer’s movements with wondering eyes,“I ought to observe that the business about which I have to speak to youis to be strictly private.”The lawyer’s overhanging reddish mustaches were parted in a scarcelyperceptible smile.“I should not be a lawyer if I could not keep the secrets confided to me.But if you would like proof....”Alexey Alexandrovitch glanced at his face, and saw that the shrewd, gray eyeswere laughing, and seemed to know all about it already.“You know my name?” Alexey Alexandrovitch resumed.“I know you and the good”—again he caught amoth—“work you are doing, like every Russian,” said thelawyer, bowing.Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed, plucking up his courage. But having once made uphis mind he went on in his shrill voice, without timidity—or hesitation,accentuating here and there a word.“I have the misfortune,” Alexey Alexandrovitch began, “tohave been deceived in my married life, and I desire to break off all relationswith my wife by legal means—that is, to be divorced, but to do this sothat my son may not remain with his mother.”The lawyer’s gray eyes tried not to laugh, but they were dancing withirrepressible glee, and Alexey Alexandrovitch saw that it was not simply thedelight of a man who has just got a profitable job: there was triumph and joy,there was a gleam like the malignant gleam he saw in his wife’s eyes.“You desire my assistance in securing a divorce?”“Yes, precisely so; but I ought to warn you that I may be wasting yourtime and attention. I have come simply to consult you as a preliminary step. Iwant a divorce, but the form in which it is possible is of great consequence tome. It is very possible that if that form does not correspond with myrequirements I may give up a legal divorce.”“Oh, that’s always the case,” said the lawyer, “andthat’s always for you to decide.”He let his eyes rest on Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feet, feeling that hemight offend his client by the sight of his irrepressible amusement. He lookedat a moth that flew before his nose, and moved his hands, but did not catch itfrom regard for Alexey Alexandrovitch’s position.“Though in their general features our laws on this subject are known tome,” pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch, “I should be glad to have anidea of the forms in which such things are done in practice.”“You would be glad,” the lawyer, without lifting his eyes,responded, adopting, with a certain satisfaction, the tone of hisclient’s remarks, “for me to lay before you all the methods bywhich you could secure what you desire?”And on receiving an assuring nod from Alexey Alexandrovitch, he went on,stealing a glance now and then at Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face, which wasgrowing red in patches.“Divorce by our laws,” he said, with a slight shade ofdisapprobation of our laws, “is possible, as you are aware, in thefollowing cases.... Wait a little!” he called to a clerk who put his headin at the door, but he got up all the same, said a few words to him, and satdown again. “... In the following cases: physical defect in the marriedparties, desertion without communication for five years,” he said,crooking a short finger covered with hair, “adultery” (this word hepronounced with obvious satisfaction), “subdivided as follows” (hecontinued to crook his fat fingers, though the three cases and theirsubdivisions could obviously not be classified together): “physicaldefect of the husband or of the wife, adultery of the husband or of thewife.” As by now all his fingers were used up, he uncrooked all hisfingers and went on: “This is the theoretical view; but I imagine youhave done me the honor to apply to me in order to learn its application inpractice. And therefore, guided by precedents, I must inform you that inpractice cases of divorce may all be reduced to thefollowing—there’s no physical defect, I may assume, nordesertion?...”Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed his head in assent.“—May be reduced to the following: adultery of one of the marriedparties, and the detection in the fact of the guilty party by mutual agreement,and failing such agreement, accidental detection. It must be admitted that thelatter case is rarely met with in practice,” said the lawyer, andstealing a glance at Alexey Alexandrovitch he paused, as a man selling pistols,after enlarging on the advantages of each weapon, might await hiscustomer’s choice. But Alexey Alexandrovitch said nothing, and thereforethe lawyer went on: “The most usual and simple, the sensible course, Iconsider, is adultery by mutual consent. I should not permit myself to expressit so, speaking with a man of no education,” he said, “but Iimagine that to you this is comprehensible.”Alexey Alexandrovitch was, however, so perturbed that he did not immediatelycomprehend all the good sense of adultery by mutual consent, and his eyesexpressed this uncertainty; but the lawyer promptly came to his assistance.“People cannot go on living together—here you have a fact. And ifboth are agreed about it, the details and formalities become a matter of noimportance. And at the same time this is the simplest and most certainmethod.”Alexey Alexandrovitch fully understood now. But he had religious scruples,which hindered the execution of such a plan.“That is out of the question in the present case,” he said.“Only one alternative is possible: undesigned detection, supported byletters which I have.”At the mention of letters the lawyer pursed up his lips, and gave utterance toa thin little compassionate and contemptuous sound.“Kindly consider,” he began, “cases of that kind are, as youare aware, under ecclesiastical jurisdiction; the reverend fathers are fond ofgoing into the minutest details in cases of that kind,” he said with asmile, which betrayed his sympathy with the reverend fathers’ taste.“Letters may, of course, be a partial confirmation; but detection in thefact there must be of the most direct kind, that is, by eyewitnesses. In fact,if you do me the honor to intrust your confidence to me, you will do well toleave me the choice of the measures to be employed. If one wants the result,one must admit the means.”“If it is so....” Alexey Alexandrovitch began, suddenly turningwhite; but at that moment the lawyer rose and again went to the door to speakto the intruding clerk.“Tell her we don’t haggle over fees!” he said, and returnedto Alexey Alexandrovitch.On his way back he caught unobserved another moth. “Nice state my repcurtains will be in by the summer!” he thought, frowning.“And so you were saying?...” he said.“I will communicate my decision to you by letter,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, getting up, and he clutched at the table. After standing amoment in silence, he said: “From your words I may consequently concludethat a divorce may be obtained? I would ask you to let me know what are yourterms.”“It may be obtained if you give me complete liberty of action,”said the lawyer, not answering his question. “When can I reckon onreceiving information from you?” he asked, moving towards the door, hiseyes and his varnished boots shining.“In a week’s time. Your answer as to whether you will undertake toconduct the case, and on what terms, you will be so good as to communicate tome.”“Very good.”The lawyer bowed respectfully, let his client out of the door, and, left alone,gave himself up to his sense of amusement. He felt so mirthful that, contraryto his rules, he made a reduction in his terms to the haggling lady, and gaveup catching moths, finally deciding that next winter he must have the furniturecovered with velvet, like Sigonin’s.Chapter 6Alexey Alexandrovitch had gained a brilliant victory at the sitting of theCommission of the 17th of August, but in the sequel this victory cut the groundfrom under his feet. The new commission for the inquiry into the condition ofthe native tribes in all its branches had been formed and despatched to itsdestination with an unusual speed and energy inspired by Alexey Alexandrovitch.Within three months a report was presented. The condition of the native tribeswas investigated in its political, administrative, economic, ethnographic,material, and religious aspects. To all these questions there were answersadmirably stated, and answers admitting no shade of doubt, since they were nota product of human thought, always liable to error, but were all the product ofofficial activity. The answers were all based on official data furnished bygovernors and heads of churches, and founded on the reports of districtmagistrates and ecclesiastical superintendents, founded in their turn on thereports of parochial overseers and parish priests; and so all of these answerswere unhesitating and certain. All such questions as, for instance, of thecause of failure of crops, of the adherence of certain tribes to their ancientbeliefs, etc.—questions which, but for the convenient intervention of theofficial machine, are not, and cannot be solved for ages—received full,unhesitating solution. And this solution was in favor of AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s contention. But Stremov, who had felt stung to the quickat the last sitting, had, on the reception of the commission’s report,resorted to tactics which Alexey Alexandrovitch had not anticipated. Stremov,carrying with him several members, went over to Alexey Alexandrovitch’sside, and not contenting himself with warmly defending the measure proposed byKarenin, proposed other more extreme measures in the same direction. Thesemeasures, still further exaggerated in opposition to what was AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s fundamental idea, were passed by the commission, andthen the aim of Stremov’s tactics became apparent. Carried to an extreme,the measures seemed at once to be so absurd that the highest authorities, andpublic opinion, and intellectual ladies, and the newspapers, all at the sametime fell foul of them, expressing their indignation both with the measures andtheir nominal father, Alexey Alexandrovitch. Stremov drew back, affecting tohave blindly followed Karenin, and to be astounded and distressed at what hadbeen done. This meant the defeat of Alexey Alexandrovitch. But in spite offailing health, in spite of his domestic griefs, he did not give in. There wasa split in the commission. Some members, with Stremov at their head, justifiedtheir mistake on the ground that they had put faith in the commission ofrevision, instituted by Alexey Alexandrovitch, and maintained that the reportof the commission was rubbish, and simply so much waste paper. AlexeyAlexandrovitch, with a following of those who saw the danger of sorevolutionary an attitude to official documents, persisted in upholding thestatements obtained by the revising commission. In consequence of this, in thehigher spheres, and even in society, all was chaos, and although everyone wasinterested, no one could tell whether the native tribes really were becomingimpoverished and ruined, or whether they were in a flourishing condition. Theposition of Alexey Alexandrovitch, owing to this, and partly owing to thecontempt lavished on him for his wife’s infidelity, became veryprecarious. And in this position he took an important resolution. To theastonishment of the commission, he announced that he should ask permission togo himself to investigate the question on the spot. And having obtainedpermission, Alexey Alexandrovitch prepared to set off to these remoteprovinces.Alexey Alexandrovitch’s departure made a great sensation, the more so asjust before he started he officially returned the posting-fares allowed him fortwelve horses, to drive to his destination.“I think it very noble,” Betsy said about this to the PrincessMyakaya. “Why take money for posting-horses when everyone knows thatthere are railways everywhere now?”But Princess Myakaya did not agree, and the Princess Tverskaya’s opinionannoyed her indeed.“It’s all very well for you to talk,” said she, “whenyou have I don’t know how many millions; but I am very glad when myhusband goes on a revising tour in the summer. It’s very good for him andpleasant traveling about, and it’s a settled arrangement for me to keep acarriage and coachman on the money.”On his way to the remote provinces Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped for three daysat Moscow.The day after his arrival he was driving back from calling on thegovernor-general. At the crossroads by Gazetoy Place, where there are alwayscrowds of carriages and sledges, Alexey Alexandrovitch suddenly heard his namecalled out in such a loud and cheerful voice that he could not help lookinground. At the corner of the pavement, in a short, stylish overcoat and alow-crowned fashionable hat, jauntily askew, with a smile that showed a gleamof white teeth and red lips, stood Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant, young, andbeaming. He called him vigorously and urgently, and insisted on his stopping.He had one arm on the window of a carriage that was stopping at the corner, andout of the window were thrust the heads of a lady in a velvet hat, and twochildren. Stepan Arkadyevitch was smiling and beckoning to his brother-in-law.The lady smiled a kindly smile too, and she too waved her hand to AlexeyAlexandrovitch. It was Dolly with her children.Alexey Alexandrovitch did not want to see anyone in Moscow, and least of allhis wife’s brother. He raised his hat and would have driven on, butStepan Arkadyevitch told his coachman to stop, and ran across the snow to him.“Well, what a shame not to have let us know! Been here long? I was atDussots’ yesterday and saw ‘Karenin’ on the visitors’list, but it never entered my head that it was you,” said StepanArkadyevitch, sticking his head in at the window of the carriage, “or Ishould have looked you up. I am glad to see you!” he said, knocking onefoot against the other to shake the snow off. “What a shame of you not tolet us know!” he repeated.“I had no time; I am very busy,” Alexey Alexandrovitch respondeddryly.“Come to my wife, she does so want to see you.”Alexey Alexandrovitch unfolded the rug in which his frozen feet were wrapped,and getting out of his carriage made his way over the snow to DaryaAlexandrovna.“Why, Alexey Alexandrovitch, what are you cutting us like thisfor?” said Dolly, smiling.“I was very busy. Delighted to see you!” he said in a tone clearlyindicating that he was annoyed by it. “How are you?”“Tell me, how is my darling Anna?”Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled something and would have gone on. But StepanArkadyevitch stopped him.“I tell you what we’ll do tomorrow. Dolly, ask him to dinner.We’ll ask Koznishev and Pestsov, so as to entertain him with our Moscowcelebrities.”“Yes, please, do come,” said Dolly; “we will expect you atfive, or six o’clock, if you like. How is my darling Anna? Howlong....”“She is quite well,” Alexey Alexandrovitch mumbled, frowning.“Delighted!” and he moved away towards his carriage.“You will come?” Dolly called after him.Alexey Alexandrovitch said something which Dolly could not catch in the noiseof the moving carriages.“I shall come round tomorrow!” Stepan Arkadyevitch shouted to him.Alexey Alexandrovitch got into his carriage, and buried himself in it so asneither to see nor be seen.“Queer fish!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch to his wife, and glancing athis watch, he made a motion of his hand before his face, indicating a caress tohis wife and children, and walked jauntily along the pavement.“Stiva! Stiva!” Dolly called, reddening.He turned round.“I must get coats, you know, for Grisha and Tanya. Give me themoney.”“Never mind; you tell them I’ll pay the bill!” and hevanished, nodding genially to an acquaintance who drove by.Chapter 7The next day was Sunday. Stepan Arkadyevitch went to the Grand Theater to arehearsal of the ballet, and gave Masha Tchibisova, a pretty dancing-girl whomhe had just taken under his protection, the coral necklace he had promised herthe evening before, and behind the scenes in the dim daylight of the theater,managed to kiss her pretty little face, radiant over her present. Besides thegift of the necklace he wanted to arrange with her about meeting after theballet. After explaining that he could not come at the beginning of the ballet,he promised he would come for the last act and take her to supper. From thetheater Stepan Arkadyevitch drove to Ohotny Row, selected himself the fish andasparagus for dinner, and by twelve o’clock was at Dussots’, wherehe had to see three people, luckily all staying at the same hotel: Levin, whohad recently come back from abroad and was staying there; the new head of hisdepartment, who had just been promoted to that position, and had come on a tourof revision to Moscow; and his brother-in-law, Karenin, whom he must see, so asto be sure of bringing him to dinner.Stepan Arkadyevitch liked dining, but still better he liked to give a dinner,small, but very choice, both as regards the food and drink and as regards theselection of guests. He particularly liked the program of that day’sdinner. There would be fresh perch, asparagus, and la pièce deresistance—first-rate, but quite plain, roast beef, and wines tosuit: so much for the eating and drinking. Kitty and Levin would be of theparty, and that this might not be obtrusively evident, there would be a girlcousin too, and young Shtcherbatsky, and la pièce de resistance amongthe guests—Sergey Koznishev and Alexey Alexandrovitch. Sergey Ivanovitchwas a Moscow man, and a philosopher; Alexey Alexandrovitch a Petersburger, anda practical politician. He was asking, too, the well-known eccentricenthusiast, Pestsov, a liberal, a great talker, a musician, an historian, andthe most delightfully youthful person of fifty, who would be a sauce or garnishfor Koznishev and Karenin. He would provoke them and set them off.The second installment for the forest had been received from the merchant andwas not yet exhausted; Dolly had been very amiable and good-humored of late, andthe idea of the dinner pleased Stepan Arkadyevitch from every point of view. Hewas in the most light-hearted mood. There were two circumstances a littleunpleasant, but these two circumstances were drowned in the sea of good-humoredgaiety which flooded the soul of Stepan Arkadyevitch. These two circumstanceswere: first, that on meeting Alexey Alexandrovitch the day before in the streethe had noticed that he was cold and reserved with him, and putting theexpression of Alexey Alexandrovitch’s face and the fact that he had notcome to see them or let them know of his arrival with the rumors he had heardabout Anna and Vronsky, Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed that something was wrongbetween the husband and wife.That was one disagreeable thing. The other slightly disagreeable fact was thatthe new head of his department, like all new heads, had the reputation alreadyof a terrible person, who got up at six o’clock in the morning, workedlike a horse, and insisted on his subordinates working in the same way.Moreover, this new head had the further reputation of being a bear in hismanners, and was, according to all reports, a man of a class in all respectsthe opposite of that to which his predecessor had belonged, and to which StepanArkadyevitch had hitherto belonged himself. On the previous day StepanArkadyevitch had appeared at the office in a uniform, and the new chief hadbeen very affable and had talked to him as to an acquaintance. ConsequentlyStepan Arkadyevitch deemed it his duty to call upon him in his non-officialdress. The thought that the new chief might not tender him a warm reception wasthe other unpleasant thing. But Stepan Arkadyevitch instinctively felt thateverything would come round all right. “They’re all people,all men, like us poor sinners; why be nasty and quarrelsome?” he thoughtas he went into the hotel.“Good-day, Vassily,” he said, walking into the corridor with hishat cocked on one side, and addressing a footman he knew; “why,you’ve let your whiskers grow! Levin, number seven, eh? Take me up,please. And find out whether Count Anitchkin” (this was the new head)“is receiving.”“Yes, sir,” Vassily responded, smiling. “You’ve notbeen to see us for a long while.”“I was here yesterday, but at the other entrance. Is this numberseven?”Levin was standing with a peasant from Tver in the middle of the room,measuring a fresh bearskin, when Stepan Arkadyevitch went in.“What! you killed him?” cried Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Welldone! A she-bear? How are you, Arhip!”He shook hands with the peasant and sat down on the edge of a chair, withouttaking off his coat and hat.“Come, take off your coat and stay a little,” said Levin, takinghis hat.“No, I haven’t time; I’ve only looked in for a tinysecond,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch. He threw open his coat, butafterwards did take it off, and sat on for a whole hour, talking to Levin abouthunting and the most intimate subjects.“Come, tell me, please, what you did abroad? Where have you been?”said Stepan Arkadyevitch, when the peasant had gone.“Oh, I stayed in Germany, in Prussia, in France, and in England—notin the capitals, but in the manufacturing towns, and saw a great deal that wasnew to me. And I’m glad I went.”“Yes, I knew your idea of the solution of the labor question.”“Not a bit: in Russia there can be no labor question. In Russia thequestion is that of the relation of the working people to the land; though thequestion exists there too—but there it’s a matter of repairingwhat’s been ruined, while with us....”Stepan Arkadyevitch listened attentively to Levin.“Yes, yes!” he said, “it’s very possible you’reright. But I’m glad you’re in good spirits, and are hunting bears,and working, and interested. Shtcherbatsky told me another story—he metyou—that you were in such a depressed state, talking of nothing butdeath....”“Well, what of it? I’ve not given up thinking of death,” saidLevin. “It’s true that it’s high time I was dead; and thatall this is nonsense. It’s the truth I’m telling you. I do value myidea and my work awfully; but in reality only consider this: all this world ofours is nothing but a speck of mildew, which has grown up on a tiny planet. Andfor us to suppose we can have something great—ideas,work—it’s all dust and ashes.”“But all that’s as old as the hills, my boy!”“It is old; but do you know, when you grasp this fully, then somehoweverything becomes of no consequence. When you understand that you will dietomorrow, if not today, and nothing will be left, then everything is sounimportant! And I consider my idea very important, but it turns out really tobe as unimportant too, even if it were carried out, as doing for that bear. Soone goes on living, amusing oneself with hunting, with work—anything soas not to think of death!”Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled a subtle affectionate smile as he listened to Levin.“Well, of course! Here you’ve come round to my point. Do youremember you attacked me for seeking enjoyment in life? Don’t be sosevere, O moralist!”“No; all the same, what’s fine in life is....” Levinhesitated—“oh, I don’t know. All I know is that we shall soonbe dead.”“Why so soon?”“And do you know, there’s less charm in life, when one thinks ofdeath, but there’s more peace.”“On the contrary, the finish is always the best. But I must begoing,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up for the tenth time.“Oh, no, stay a bit!” said Levin, keeping him. “Now, whenshall we see each other again? I’m going tomorrow.”“I’m a nice person! Why, that’s just what I came for! Yousimply must come to dinner with us today. Your brother’s coming, andKarenin, my brother-in-law.”“You don’t mean to say he’s here?” said Levin, and hewanted to inquire about Kitty. He had heard at the beginning of the winter thatshe was at Petersburg with her sister, the wife of the diplomat, and he did notknow whether she had come back or not; but he changed his mind and did not ask.“Whether she’s coming or not, I don’t care,” he said tohimself.“So you’ll come?”“Of course.”“At five o’clock, then, and not evening dress.”And Stepan Arkadyevitch got up and went down below to the new head of hisdepartment. Instinct had not misled Stepan Arkadyevitch. The terrible new headturned out to be an extremely amenable person, and Stepan Arkadyevitch lunchedwith him and stayed on, so that it was four o’clock before he got toAlexey Alexandrovitch.Chapter 8Alexey Alexandrovitch, on coming back from church service, had spent the wholemorning indoors. He had two pieces of business before him that morning; first,to receive and send on a deputation from the native tribes which was on its wayto Petersburg, and now at Moscow; secondly, to write the promised letter to thelawyer. The deputation, though it had been summoned at AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s instigation, was not without its discomforting and evendangerous aspect, and he was glad he had found it in Moscow. The members ofthis deputation had not the slightest conception of their duty and the partthey were to play. They naïvely believed that it was their business to laybefore the commission their needs and the actual condition of things, and toask assistance of the government, and utterly failed to grasp that some oftheir statements and requests supported the contention of the enemy’sside, and so spoiled the whole business. Alexey Alexandrovitch was busilyengaged with them for a long while, drew up a program for them from which theywere not to depart, and on dismissing them wrote a letter to Petersburg for theguidance of the deputation. He had his chief support in this affair in theCountess Lidia Ivanovna. She was a specialist in the matter of deputations, andno one knew better than she how to manage them, and put them in the way theyshould go. Having completed this task, Alexey Alexandrovitch wrote the letterto the lawyer. Without the slightest hesitation he gave him permission to actas he might judge best. In the letter he enclosed three of Vronsky’snotes to Anna, which were in the portfolio he had taken away.Since Alexey Alexandrovitch had left home with the intention of not returningto his family again, and since he had been at the lawyer’s and hadspoken, though only to one man, of his intention, since especially he hadtranslated the matter from the world of real life to the world of ink andpaper, he had grown more and more used to his own intention, and by nowdistinctly perceived the feasibility of its execution.He was sealing the envelope to the lawyer, when he heard the loud tones ofStepan Arkadyevitch’s voice. Stepan Arkadyevitch was disputing withAlexey Alexandrovitch’s servant, and insisting on being announced.“No matter,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch, “so much thebetter. I will inform him at once of my position in regard to his sister, andexplain why it is I can’t dine with him.”“Come in!” he said aloud, collecting his papers, and putting themin the blotting-paper.“There, you see, you’re talking nonsense, and he’s athome!” responded Stepan Arkadyevitch’s voice, addressing theservant, who had refused to let him in, and taking off his coat as he went,Oblonsky walked into the room. “Well, I’m awfully glad I’vefound you! So I hope....” Stepan Arkadyevitch began cheerfully.“I cannot come,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly, standing andnot asking his visitor to sit down.Alexey Alexandrovitch had thought to pass at once into those frigid relationsin which he ought to stand with the brother of a wife against whom he wasbeginning a suit for divorce. But he had not taken into account the ocean ofkindliness brimming over in the heart of Stepan Arkadyevitch.Stepan Arkadyevitch opened wide his clear, shining eyes.“Why can’t you? What do you mean?” he asked in perplexity,speaking in French. “Oh, but it’s a promise. And we’re allcounting on you.”“I want to tell you that I can’t dine at your house, because theterms of relationship which have existed between us must cease.”“How? How do you mean? What for?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with asmile.“Because I am beginning an action for divorce against your sister, mywife. I ought to have....”But, before Alexey Alexandrovitch had time to finish his sentence, StepanArkadyevitch was behaving not at all as he had expected. He groaned and sankinto an armchair.“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch! What are you saying?” cried Oblonsky,and his suffering was apparent in his face.“It is so.”“Excuse me, I can’t, I can’t believe it!”Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, feeling that his words had not had the effecthe anticipated, and that it would be unavoidable for him to explain hisposition, and that, whatever explanations he might make, his relations with hisbrother-in-law would remain unchanged.“Yes, I am brought to the painful necessity of seeking a divorce,”he said.“I will say one thing, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I know you for anexcellent, upright man; I know Anna—excuse me, I can’t change myopinion of her—for a good, an excellent woman; and so, excuse me, Icannot believe it. There is some misunderstanding,” said he.“Oh, if it were merely a misunderstanding!...”“Pardon, I understand,” interposed Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Butof course.... One thing: you must not act in haste. You must not, you must notact in haste!”“I am not acting in haste,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said coldly,“but one cannot ask advice of anyone in such a matter. I have quite madeup my mind.”“This is awful!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I would do onething, Alexey Alexandrovitch. I beseech you, do it!” he said. “Noaction has yet been taken, if I understand rightly. Before you take advice, seemy wife, talk to her. She loves Anna like a sister, she loves you, andshe’s a wonderful woman. For God’s sake, talk to her! Do me thatfavor, I beseech you!”Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch looked at himsympathetically, without interrupting his silence.“You will go to see her?”“I don’t know. That was just why I have not been to see you. Iimagine our relations must change.”“Why so? I don’t see that. Allow me to believe that apart from ourconnection you have for me, at least in part, the same friendly feeling I havealways had for you ... and sincere esteem,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,pressing his hand. “Even if your worst suppositions were correct, Idon’t—and never would—take on myself to judge either side,and I see no reason why our relations should be affected. But now, do this,come and see my wife.”“Well, we look at the matter differently,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch coldly. “However, we won’t discuss it.”“No; why shouldn’t you come today to dine, anyway? My wife’sexpecting you. Please, do come. And, above all, talk it over with her.She’s a wonderful woman. For God’s sake, on my knees, I imploreyou!”“If you so much wish it, I will come,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch,sighing.And, anxious to change the conversation, he inquired about what interested themboth—the new head of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s department, a man notyet old, who had suddenly been promoted to so high a position.Alexey Alexandrovitch had previously felt no liking for Count Anitchkin, andhad always differed from him in his opinions. But now, from a feeling readilycomprehensible to officials—that hatred felt by one who has suffered adefeat in the service for one who has received a promotion, he could not endurehim.“Well, have you seen him?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch with amalignant smile.“Of course; he was at our sitting yesterday. He seems to know his workcapitally, and to be very energetic.”“Yes, but what is his energy directed to?” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch. “Is he aiming at doing anything, or simply undoingwhat’s been done? It’s the great misfortune of ourgovernment—this paper administration, of which he’s a worthyrepresentative.”“Really, I don’t know what fault one could find with him. Hispolicy I don’t know, but one thing—he’s a very nicefellow,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch. “I’ve just been seeinghim, and he’s really a capital fellow. We lunched together, and I taughthim how to make, you know that drink, wine and oranges. It’s so cooling.And it’s a wonder he didn’t know it. He liked it awfully. No,really he’s a capital fellow.”Stepan Arkadyevitch glanced at his watch.“Why, good heavens, it’s four already, and I’ve still to goto Dolgovushin’s! So please come round to dinner. You can’t imaginehow you will grieve my wife and me.”The way in which Alexey Alexandrovitch saw his brother-in-law out was verydifferent from the manner in which he had met him.“I’ve promised, and I’ll come,” he answered wearily.“Believe me, I appreciate it, and I hope you won’t regretit,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.And, putting on his coat as he went, he patted the footman on the head,chuckled, and went out.“At five o’clock, and not evening dress, please,” he shoutedonce more, turning at the door.Chapter 9It was past five, and several guests had already arrived, before the hosthimself got home. He went in together with Sergey Ivanovitch Koznishev andPestsov, who had reached the street door at the same moment. These were the twoleading representatives of the Moscow intellectuals, as Oblonsky had calledthem. Both were men respected for their character and their intelligence. Theyrespected each other, but were in complete and hopeless disagreement uponalmost every subject, not because they belonged to opposite parties, butprecisely because they were of the same party (their enemies refused to see anydistinction between their views); but, in that party, each had his own specialshade of opinion. And since no difference is less easily overcome than thedifference of opinion about semi-abstract questions, they never agreed in anyopinion, and had long, indeed, been accustomed to jeer without anger, each atthe other’s incorrigible aberrations.They were just going in at the door, talking of the weather, when StepanArkadyevitch overtook them. In the drawing-room there were already sittingPrince Alexander Dmitrievitch Shtcherbatsky, young Shtcherbatsky, Turovtsin,Kitty, and Karenin.Stepan Arkadyevitch saw immediately that things were not going well in thedrawing-room without him. Darya Alexandrovna, in her best gray silk gown,obviously worried about the children, who were to have their dinner bythemselves in the nursery, and by her husband’s absence, was not equal tothe task of making the party mix without him. All were sitting like so manypriests’ wives on a visit (so the old prince expressed it), obviouslywondering why they were there, and pumping up remarks simply to avoid beingsilent. Turovtsin—good, simple man—felt unmistakably a fish out ofwater, and the smile with which his thick lips greeted Stepan Arkadyevitchsaid, as plainly as words: “Well, old boy, you have popped me down in alearned set! A drinking party now, or the Château des Fleurs, would bemore in my line!” The old prince sat in silence, his bright little eyeswatching Karenin from one side, and Stepan Arkadyevitch saw that he had alreadyformed a phrase to sum up that politician of whom guests were invited topartake as though he were a sturgeon. Kitty was looking at the door, calling upall her energies to keep her from blushing at the entrance of Konstantin Levin.Young Shtcherbatsky, who had not been introduced to Karenin, was trying to lookas though he were not in the least conscious of it. Karenin himself hadfollowed the Petersburg fashion for a dinner with ladies and was wearingevening dress and a white tie. Stepan Arkadyevitch saw by his face that he hadcome simply to keep his promise, and was performing a disagreeable duty inbeing present at this gathering. He was indeed the person chiefly responsiblefor the chill benumbing all the guests before Stepan Arkadyevitch came in.On entering the drawing-room Stepan Arkadyevitch apologized, explaining that hehad been detained by that prince, who was always the scapegoat for all hisabsences and unpunctualities, and in one moment he had made all the guestsacquainted with each other, and, bringing together Alexey Alexandrovitch andSergey Koznishev, started them on a discussion of the Russification of Poland,into which they immediately plunged with Pestsov. Slapping Turovtsin on theshoulder, he whispered something comic in his ear, and set him down by his wifeand the old prince. Then he told Kitty she was looking very pretty thatevening, and presented Shtcherbatsky to Karenin. In a moment he had so kneadedtogether the social dough that the drawing-room became very lively, and therewas a merry buzz of voices. Konstantin Levin was the only person who had notarrived. But this was so much the better, as going into the dining-room, StepanArkadyevitch found to his horror that the port and sherry had been procuredfrom Depré, and not from Levy, and, directing that the coachman should be sentoff as speedily as possible to Levy’s, he was going back to thedrawing-room.In the dining-room he was met by Konstantin Levin.“I’m not late?”“You can never help being late!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, takinghis arm.“Have you a lot of people? Who’s here?” asked Levin, unableto help blushing, as he knocked the snow off his cap with his glove.“All our own set. Kitty’s here. Come along, I’ll introduceyou to Karenin.”Stepan Arkadyevitch, for all his liberal views, was well aware that to meetKarenin was sure to be felt a flattering distinction, and so treated his bestfriends to this honor. But at that instant Konstantin Levin was not in acondition to feel all the gratification of making such an acquaintance. He hadnot seen Kitty since that memorable evening when he met Vronsky, not counting,that is, the moment when he had had a glimpse of her on the highroad. He hadknown at the bottom of his heart that he would see her here today. But to keephis thoughts free, he had tried to persuade himself that he did not know it.Now when he heard that she was here, he was suddenly conscious of such delight,and at the same time of such dread, that his breath failed him and he could notutter what he wanted to say.“What is she like, what is she like? Like what she used to be, or likewhat she was in the carriage? What if Darya Alexandrovna told the truth? Whyshouldn’t it be the truth?” he thought.“Oh, please, introduce me to Karenin,” he brought out with aneffort, and with a desperately determined step he walked into the drawing-roomand beheld her.She was not the same as she used to be, nor was she as she had been in thecarriage; she was quite different.She was scared, shy, shame-faced, and still more charming from it. She saw himthe very instant he walked into the room. She had been expecting him. She wasdelighted, and so confused at her own delight that there was a moment, themoment when he went up to her sister and glanced again at her, when she, andhe, and Dolly, who saw it all, thought she would break down and would begin tocry. She crimsoned, turned white, crimsoned again, and grew faint, waiting withquivering lips for him to come to her. He went up to her, bowed, and held outhis hand without speaking. Except for the slight quiver of her lips and themoisture in her eyes that made them brighter, her smile was almost calm as shesaid:“How long it is since we’ve seen each other!” and withdesperate determination she pressed his hand with her cold hand.“You’ve not seen me, but I’ve seen you,” said Levin,with a radiant smile of happiness. “I saw you when you were driving fromthe railway station to Ergushovo.”“When?” she asked, wondering.“You were driving to Ergushovo,” said Levin, feeling as if he wouldsob with the rapture that was flooding his heart. “And how dared Iassociate a thought of anything not innocent with this touching creature? And,yes, I do believe it’s true what Darya Alexandrovna told me,” hethought.Stepan Arkadyevitch took him by the arm and led him away to Karenin.“Let me introduce you.” He mentioned their names.“Very glad to meet you again,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch coldly,shaking hands with Levin.“You are acquainted?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked in surprise.“We spent three hours together in the train,” said Levin smiling,“but got out, just as in a masquerade, quite mystified—at least Iwas.”“Nonsense! Come along, please,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointingin the direction of the dining-room.The men went into the dining-room and went up to a table, laid with six sortsof spirits and as many kinds of cheese, some with little silver spades and somewithout, caviar, herrings, preserves of various kinds, and plates with slicesof French bread.The men stood round the strong-smelling spirits and salt delicacies, and thediscussion of the Russification of Poland between Koznishev, Karenin, andPestsov died down in anticipation of dinner.Sergey Ivanovitch was unequaled in his skill in winding up the most heated andserious argument by some unexpected pinch of Attic salt that changed thedisposition of his opponent. He did this now.Alexey Alexandrovitch had been maintaining that the Russification of Polandcould only be accomplished as a result of larger measures which ought to beintroduced by the Russian government.Pestsov insisted that one country can only absorb another when it is the moredensely populated.Koznishev admitted both points, but with limitations. As they were going out ofthe drawing-room to conclude the argument, Koznishev said, smiling:“So, then, for the Russification of our foreign populations there is butone method—to bring up as many children as one can. My brother and I areterribly in fault, I see. You married men, especially you, Stepan Arkadyevitch,are the real patriots: what number have you reached?” he said, smilinggenially at their host and holding out a tiny wine-glass to him.Everyone laughed, and Stepan Arkadyevitch with particular good humor.“Oh, yes, that’s the best method!” he said, munching cheeseand filling the wine-glass with a special sort of spirit. The conversationdropped at the jest.“This cheese is not bad. Shall I give you some?” said the master ofthe house. “Why, have you been going in for gymnastics again?” heasked Levin, pinching his muscle with his left hand. Levin smiled, bent hisarm, and under Stepan Arkadyevitch’s fingers the muscles swelled up likea sound cheese, hard as a knob of iron, through the fine cloth of the coat.“What biceps! A perfect Samson!”“I imagine great strength is needed for hunting bears,” observedAlexey Alexandrovitch, who had the mistiest notions about the chase. He cut offand spread with cheese a wafer of bread fine as a spider-web.Levin smiled.“Not at all. Quite the contrary; a child can kill a bear,” he said,with a slight bow moving aside for the ladies, who were approaching the table.“You have killed a bear, I’ve been told!” said Kitty, tryingassiduously to catch with her fork a perverse mushroom that would slip away,and setting the lace quivering over her white arm. “Are there bears onyour place?” she added, turning her charming little head to him andsmiling.There was apparently nothing extraordinary in what she said, but whatunutterable meaning there was for him in every sound, in every turn of herlips, her eyes, her hand as she said it! There was entreaty for forgiveness,and trust in him, and tenderness—soft, timid tenderness—and promiseand hope and love for him, which he could not but believe in and which chokedhim with happiness.“No, we’ve been hunting in the Tver province. It was coming backfrom there that I met your beau-frère in the train, or yourbeau-frère’s brother-in-law,” he said with a smile. “Itwas an amusing meeting.”And he began telling with droll good-humor how, after not sleeping all night,he had, wearing an old fur-lined, full-skirted coat, got into AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s compartment.“The conductor, forgetting the proverb, would have chucked me out onaccount of my attire; but thereupon I began expressing my feelings in elevatedlanguage, and ... you, too,” he said, addressing Karenin and forgettinghis name, “at first would have ejected me on the ground of the old coat,but afterwards you took my part, for which I am extremely grateful.”“The rights of passengers generally to choose their seats are tooill-defined,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, rubbing the tips of his fingerson his handkerchief.“I saw you were in uncertainty about me,” said Levin, smilinggood-naturedly, “but I made haste to plunge into intellectualconversation to smooth over the defects of my attire.” Sergey Ivanovitch,while he kept up a conversation with their hostess, had one ear for hisbrother, and he glanced askance at him. “What is the matter with himtoday? Why such a conquering hero?” he thought. He did not know thatLevin was feeling as though he had grown wings. Levin knew she was listening tohis words and that she was glad to listen to him. And this was the only thingthat interested him. Not in that room only, but in the whole world, thereexisted for him only himself, with enormously increased importance and dignityin his own eyes, and she. He felt himself on a pinnacle that made him giddy,and far away down below were all those nice excellent Karenins, Oblonskys, andall the world.Quite without attracting notice, without glancing at them, as though there wereno other places left, Stepan Arkadyevitch put Levin and Kitty side by side.“Oh, you may as well sit there,” he said to Levin.The dinner was as choice as the china, in which Stepan Arkadyevitch was aconnoisseur. The soupe Marie-Louise was a splendid success; the tinypies eaten with it melted in the mouth and were irreproachable. The two footmenand Matvey, in white cravats, did their duty with the dishes and winesunobtrusively, quietly, and swiftly. On the material side the dinner was asuccess; it was no less so on the immaterial. The conversation, at timesgeneral and at times between individuals, never paused, and towards the end thecompany was so lively that the men rose from the table, without stoppingspeaking, and even Alexey Alexandrovitch thawed.Chapter 10Pestsov liked thrashing an argument out to the end, and was not satisfied withSergey Ivanovitch’s words, especially as he felt the injustice of hisview.“I did not mean,” he said over the soup, addressing AlexeyAlexandrovitch, “mere density of population alone, but in conjunctionwith fundamental ideas, and not by means of principles.”“It seems to me,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said languidly, and with nohaste, “that that’s the same thing. In my opinion, influence overanother people is only possible to the people which has the higher development,which....”“But that’s just the question,” Pestsov broke in in his bass.He was always in a hurry to speak, and seemed always to put his whole soul intowhat he was saying. “In what are we to make higher development consist?The English, the French, the Germans, which is at the highest stage ofdevelopment? Which of them will nationalize the other? We see the Rhineprovinces have been turned French, but the Germans are not at a lowerstage!” he shouted. “There is another law at work there.”“I fancy that the greater influence is always on the side of truecivilization,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, slightly lifting his eyebrows.“But what are we to lay down as the outward signs of truecivilization?” said Pestsov.“I imagine such signs are generally very well known,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch.“But are they fully known?” Sergey Ivanovitch put in with a subtlesmile. “It is the accepted view now that real culture must be purelyclassical; but we see most intense disputes on each side of the question, andthere is no denying that the opposite camp has strong points in itsfavor.”“You are for classics, Sergey Ivanovitch. Will you take red wine?”said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“I am not expressing my own opinion of either form of culture,”Sergey Ivanovitch said, holding out his glass with a smile of condescension, asto a child. “I only say that both sides have strong arguments to supportthem,” he went on, addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch. “My sympathiesare classical from education, but in this discussion I am personally unable toarrive at a conclusion. I see no distinct grounds for classical studies beinggiven a preeminence over scientific studies.”“The natural sciences have just as great an educational value,” putin Pestsov. “Take astronomy, take botany, or zoology with its system ofgeneral principles.”“I cannot quite agree with that,” responded Alexey Alexandrovitch“It seems to me that one must admit that the very process of studying theforms of language has a peculiarly favorable influence on intellectualdevelopment. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the influence of the classicalauthors is in the highest degree moral, while, unfortunately, with the study ofthe natural sciences are associated the false and noxious doctrines which arethe curse of our day.”Sergey Ivanovitch would have said something, but Pestsov interrupted him in hisrich bass. He began warmly contesting the justice of this view. SergeyIvanovitch waited serenely to speak, obviously with a convincing reply ready.“But,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling subtly, and addressingKarenin, “One must allow that to weigh all the advantages anddisadvantages of classical and scientific studies is a difficult task, and thequestion which form of education was to be preferred would not have been soquickly and conclusively decided if there had not been in favor of classicaleducation, as you expressed it just now, its moral—disons lemot—anti-nihilist influence.”“Undoubtedly.”“If it had not been for the distinctive property of anti-nihilisticinfluence on the side of classical studies, we should have considered thesubject more, have weighed the arguments on both sides,” said SergeyIvanovitch with a subtle smile, “we should have given elbow-room to bothtendencies. But now we know that these little pills of classical learningpossess the medicinal property of anti-nihilism, and we boldly prescribe themto our patients.... But what if they had no such medicinal property?” hewound up humorously.At Sergey Ivanovitch’s little pills, everyone laughed; Turovtsin inespecial roared loudly and jovially, glad at last to have found something tolaugh at, all he ever looked for in listening to conversation.Stepan Arkadyevitch had not made a mistake in inviting Pestsov. With Pestsovintellectual conversation never flagged for an instant. Directly SergeyIvanovitch had concluded the conversation with his jest, Pestsov promptlystarted a new one.“I can’t agree even,” said he, “that the government hadthat aim. The government obviously is guided by abstract considerations, andremains indifferent to the influence its measures may exercise. The educationof women, for instance, would naturally be regarded as likely to be harmful,but the government opens schools and universities for women.”And the conversation at once passed to the new subject of the education ofwomen.Alexey Alexandrovitch expressed the idea that the education of women is apt tobe confounded with the emancipation of women, and that it is only so that itcan be considered dangerous.“I consider, on the contrary, that the two questions are inseparablyconnected together,” said Pestsov; “it is a vicious circle. Womanis deprived of rights from lack of education, and the lack of education resultsfrom the absence of rights. We must not forget that the subjection of women isso complete, and dates from such ages back that we are often unwilling torecognize the gulf that separates them from us,” said he.“You said rights,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till Pestsov hadfinished, “meaning the right of sitting on juries, of voting, ofpresiding at official meetings, the right of entering the civil service, ofsitting in parliament....”“Undoubtedly.”“But if women, as a rare exception, can occupy such positions, it seemsto me you are wrong in using the expression ‘rights.’ It would bemore correct to say duties. Every man will agree that in doing the duty of ajuryman, a witness, a telegraph clerk, we feel we are performing duties. Andtherefore it would be correct to say that women are seeking duties, and quitelegitimately. And one can but sympathize with this desire to assist in thegeneral labor of man.”“Quite so,” Alexey Alexandrovitch assented. “The question, Iimagine, is simply whether they are fitted for such duties.”“They will most likely be perfectly fitted,” said StepanArkadyevitch, “when education has become general among them. We seethis....”“How about the proverb?” said the prince, who had a long while beenintent on the conversation, his little comical eyes twinkling. “I can sayit before my daughter: her hair is long, because her wit is....”“Just what they thought of the negroes before their emancipation!”said Pestsov angrily.“What seems strange to me is that women should seek fresh duties,”said Sergey Ivanovitch, “while we see, unhappily, that men usually try toavoid them.”“Duties are bound up with rights—power, money, honor; those arewhat women are seeking,” said Pestsov.“Just as though I should seek the right to be a wet-nurse and feelinjured because women are paid for the work, while no one will take me,”said the old prince.Turovtsin exploded in a loud roar of laughter and Sergey Ivanovitch regrettedthat he had not made this comparison. Even Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled.“Yes, but a man can’t nurse a baby,” said Pestsov,“while a woman....”“No, there was an Englishman who did suckle his baby on boardship,” said the old prince, feeling this freedom in conversationpermissible before his own daughters.“There are as many such Englishmen as there would be womenofficials,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.“Yes, but what is a girl to do who has no family?” put in StepanArkadyevitch, thinking of Masha Tchibisova, whom he had had in his mind allalong, in sympathizing with Pestsov and supporting him.“If the story of such a girl were thoroughly sifted, you would find shehad abandoned a family—her own or a sister’s, where she might havefound a woman’s duties,” Darya Alexandrovna broke in unexpectedlyin a tone of exasperation, probably suspecting what sort of girl StepanArkadyevitch was thinking of.“But we take our stand on principle as the ideal,” replied Pestsovin his mellow bass. “Woman desires to have rights, to be independent,educated. She is oppressed, humiliated by the consciousness of herdisabilities.”“And I’m oppressed and humiliated that they won’t engage meat the Foundling,” the old prince said again, to the huge delight ofTurovtsin, who in his mirth dropped his asparagus with the thick end in thesauce.Chapter 11Everyone took part in the conversation except Kitty and Levin. At first, whenthey were talking of the influence that one people has on another, there roseto Levin’s mind what he had to say on the subject. But these ideas, onceof such importance in his eyes, seemed to come into his brain as in a dream,and had now not the slightest interest for him. It even struck him as strangethat they should be so eager to talk of what was of no use to anyone. Kitty,too, should, one would have supposed, have been interested in what they weresaying of the rights and education of women. How often she had mused on thesubject, thinking of her friend abroad, Varenka, of her painful state ofdependence, how often she had wondered about herself what would become of herif she did not marry, and how often she had argued with her sister about it!But it did not interest her at all. She and Levin had a conversation of theirown, yet not a conversation, but some sort of mysterious communication, whichbrought them every moment nearer, and stirred in both a sense of glad terrorbefore the unknown into which they were entering.At first Levin, in answer to Kitty’s question how he could have seen herlast year in the carriage, told her how he had been coming home from the mowingalong the highroad and had met her.“It was very, very early in the morning. You were probably only justawake. Your mother was asleep in the corner. It was an exquisite morning. I waswalking along wondering who it could be in a four-in-hand? It was a splendidset of four horses with bells, and in a second you flashed by, and I saw you atthe window—you were sitting like this, holding the strings of your cap inboth hands, and thinking awfully deeply about something,” he said,smiling. “How I should like to know what you were thinking about then!Something important?”“Wasn’t I dreadfully untidy?” she wondered, but seeing thesmile of ecstasy these reminiscences called up, she felt that the impressionshe had made had been very good. She blushed and laughed with delight;“Really I don’t remember.”“How nicely Turovtsin laughs!” said Levin, admiring his moist eyesand shaking chest.“Have you known him long?” asked Kitty.“Oh, everyone knows him!”“And I see you think he’s a horrid man?”“Not horrid, but nothing in him.”“Oh, you’re wrong! And you must give up thinking sodirectly!” said Kitty. “I used to have a very poor opinion of himtoo, but he, he’s an awfully nice and wonderfully good-hearted man. Hehas a heart of gold.”“How could you find out what sort of heart he has?”“We are great friends. I know him very well. Last winter, soon after ...you came to see us,” she said, with a guilty and at the same timeconfiding smile, “all Dolly’s children had scarlet fever, and hehappened to come and see her. And only fancy,” she said in a whisper,“he felt so sorry for her that he stayed and began to help her look afterthe children. Yes, and for three weeks he stopped with them, and looked afterthe children like a nurse.”“I am telling Konstantin Dmitrievitch about Turovtsin in the scarletfever,” she said, bending over to her sister.“Yes, it was wonderful, noble!” said Dolly, glancing towardsTurovtsin, who had become aware they were talking of him, and smiling gently tohim. Levin glanced once more at Turovtsin, and wondered how it was he had notrealized all this man’s goodness before.“I’m sorry, I’m sorry, and I’ll never think ill ofpeople again!” he said gaily, genuinely expressing what he felt at themoment.Chapter 12Connected with the conversation that had sprung up on the rights of women therewere certain questions as to the inequality of rights in marriage improper todiscuss before the ladies. Pestsov had several times during dinner touched uponthese questions, but Sergey Ivanovitch and Stepan Arkadyevitch carefully drewhim off them.When they rose from the table and the ladies had gone out, Pestsov did notfollow them, but addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch, began to expound the chiefground of inequality. The inequality in marriage, in his opinion, lay in thefact that the infidelity of the wife and the infidelity of the husband arepunished unequally, both by the law and by public opinion. Stepan Arkadyevitchwent hurriedly up to Alexey Alexandrovitch and offered him a cigar.“No, I don’t smoke,” Alexey Alexandrovitch answered calmly,and as though purposely wishing to show that he was not afraid of the subject,he turned to Pestsov with a chilly smile.“I imagine that such a view has a foundation in the very nature ofthings,” he said, and would have gone on to the drawing-room. But at thispoint Turovtsin broke suddenly and unexpectedly into the conversation,addressing Alexey Alexandrovitch.“You heard, perhaps, about Pryatchnikov?” said Turovtsin, warmed upby the champagne he had drunk, and long waiting for an opportunity to break thesilence that had weighed on him. “Vasya Pryatchnikov,” he said,with a good-natured smile on his damp, red lips, addressing himself principallyto the most important guest, Alexey Alexandrovitch, “they told me todayhe fought a duel with Kvitsky at Tver, and has killed him.”Just as it always seems that one bruises oneself on a sore place, so StepanArkadyevitch felt now that the conversation would by ill luck fall every momenton Alexey Alexandrovitch’s sore spot. He would again have got hisbrother-in-law away, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself inquired, withcuriosity:“What did Pryatchnikov fight about?”“His wife. Acted like a man, he did! Called him out and shot him!”“Ah!” said Alexey Alexandrovitch indifferently, and lifting hiseyebrows, he went into the drawing-room.“How glad I am you have come,” Dolly said with a frightened smile,meeting him in the outer drawing-room. “I must talk to you. Let’ssit here.”Alexey Alexandrovitch, with the same expression of indifference, given him byhis lifted eyebrows, sat down beside Darya Alexandrovna, and smiled affectedly.“It’s fortunate,” said he, “especially as I was meaningto ask you to excuse me, and to be taking leave. I have to starttomorrow.”Darya Alexandrovna was firmly convinced of Anna’s innocence, and she feltherself growing pale and her lips quivering with anger at this frigid,unfeeling man, who was so calmly intending to ruin her innocent friend.“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” she said, with desperate resolutionlooking him in the face, “I asked you about Anna, you made me no answer.How is she?”“She is, I believe, quite well, Darya Alexandrovna,” replied AlexeyAlexandrovitch, not looking at her.“Alexey Alexandrovitch, forgive me, I have no right ... but I love Annaas a sister, and esteem her; I beg, I beseech you to tell me what is wrongbetween you? what fault do you find with her?”Alexey Alexandrovitch frowned, and almost closing his eyes, dropped his head.“I presume that your husband has told you the grounds on which I considerit necessary to change my attitude to Anna Arkadyevna?” he said, notlooking her in the face, but eyeing with displeasure Shtcherbatsky, who waswalking across the drawing-room.“I don’t believe it, I don’t believe it, I can’tbelieve it!” Dolly said, clasping her bony hands before her with avigorous gesture. She rose quickly, and laid her hand on AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s sleeve. “We shall be disturbed here. Come thisway, please.”Dolly’s agitation had an effect on Alexey Alexandrovitch. He got up andsubmissively followed her to the schoolroom. They sat down to a table coveredwith an oilcloth cut in slits by penknives.“I don’t, I don’t believe it!” Dolly said, trying tocatch his glance that avoided her.“One cannot disbelieve facts, Darya Alexandrovna,” said he, with anemphasis on the word “facts.”“But what has she done?” said Darya Alexandrovna. “Whatprecisely has she done?”“She has forsaken her duty, and deceived her husband. That’s whatshe has done,” said he.“No, no, it can’t be! No, for God’s sake, you aremistaken,” said Dolly, putting her hands to her temples and closing hereyes.Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled coldly, with his lips alone, meaning to signify toher and to himself the firmness of his conviction; but this warm defense,though it could not shake him, reopened his wound. He began to speak withgreater heat.“It is extremely difficult to be mistaken when a wife herself informs herhusband of the fact—informs him that eight years of her life, and a son,all that’s a mistake, and that she wants to begin life again,” hesaid angrily, with a snort.“Anna and sin—I cannot connect them, I cannot believe it!”“Darya Alexandrovna,” he said, now looking straight intoDolly’s kindly, troubled face, and feeling that his tongue was beingloosened in spite of himself, “I would give a great deal for doubt to bestill possible. When I doubted, I was miserable, but it was better than now.When I doubted, I had hope; but now there is no hope, and still I doubt ofeverything. I am in such doubt of everything that I even hate my son, andsometimes do not believe he is my son. I am very unhappy.”He had no need to say that. Darya Alexandrovna had seen that as soon as heglanced into her face; and she felt sorry for him, and her faith in theinnocence of her friend began to totter.“Oh, this is awful, awful! But can it be true that you are resolved on adivorce?”“I am resolved on extreme measures. There is nothing else for me todo.”“Nothing else to do, nothing else to do....” she replied, with tearsin her eyes. “Oh no, don’t say nothing else to do!” she said.“What is horrible in a trouble of this kind is that one cannot, as in anyother—in loss, in death—bear one’s trouble in peace, but thatone must act,” said he, as though guessing her thought. “One mustget out of the humiliating position in which one is placed; one can’tlive à trois.”“I understand, I quite understand that,” said Dolly, and her headsank. She was silent for a little, thinking of herself, of her own grief in herfamily, and all at once, with an impulsive movement, she raised her head andclasped her hands with an imploring gesture. “But wait a little! You area Christian. Think of her! What will become of her, if you cast her off?”“I have thought, Darya Alexandrovna, I have thought a great deal,”said Alexey Alexandrovitch. His face turned red in patches, and his dim eyeslooked straight before him. Darya Alexandrovna at that moment pitied him withall her heart. “That was what I did indeed when she herself made known tome my humiliation; I left everything as of old. I gave her a chance to reform,I tried to save her. And with what result? She would not regard the slightestrequest—that she should observe decorum,” he said, getting heated.“One may save anyone who does not want to be ruined; but if the wholenature is so corrupt, so depraved, that ruin itself seems to be her salvation,what’s to be done?”“Anything, only not divorce!” answered Darya Alexandrovna“But what is anything?”“No, it is awful! She will be no one’s wife, she will belost!”“What can I do?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, raising his shouldersand his eyebrows. The recollection of his wife’s last act had so incensedhim that he had become frigid, as at the beginning of the conversation.“I am very grateful for your sympathy, but I must be going,” hesaid, getting up.“No, wait a minute. You must not ruin her. Wait a little; I will tell youabout myself. I was married, and my husband deceived me; in anger and jealousy,I would have thrown up everything, I would myself.... But I came to myselfagain; and who did it? Anna saved me. And here I am living on. The children aregrowing up, my husband has come back to his family, and feels his fault, isgrowing purer, better, and I live on.... I have forgiven it, and you ought toforgive!”Alexey Alexandrovitch heard her, but her words had no effect on him now. Allthe hatred of that day when he had resolved on a divorce had sprung up again inhis soul. He shook himself, and said in a shrill, loud voice:“Forgive I cannot, and do not wish to, and I regard it as wrong. I havedone everything for this woman, and she has trodden it all in the mud to whichshe is akin. I am not a spiteful man, I have never hated anyone, but I hate herwith my whole soul, and I cannot even forgive her, because I hate her too muchfor all the wrong she has done me!” he said, with tones of hatred in hisvoice.“Love those that hate you....” Darya Alexandrovna whisperedtimorously.Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled contemptuously. That he knew long ago, but itcould not be applied to his case.“Love those that hate you, but to love those one hates is impossible.Forgive me for having troubled you. Everyone has enough to bear in his owngrief!” And regaining his self-possession, Alexey Alexandrovitch quietlytook leave and went away.Chapter 13When they rose from table, Levin would have liked to follow Kitty into thedrawing-room; but he was afraid she might dislike this, as too obviously payingher attention. He remained in the little ring of men, taking part in thegeneral conversation, and without looking at Kitty, he was aware of hermovements, her looks, and the place where she was in the drawing-room.He did at once, and without the smallest effort, keep the promise he had madeher—always to think well of all men, and to like everyone always. Theconversation fell on the village commune, in which Pestsov saw a sort ofspecial principle, called by him the “choral” principle. Levin didnot agree with Pestsov, nor with his brother, who had a special attitude of hisown, both admitting and not admitting the significance of the Russian commune.But he talked to them, simply trying to reconcile and soften their differences.He was not in the least interested in what he said himself, and even less so inwhat they said; all he wanted was that they and everyone should be happy andcontented. He knew now the one thing of importance; and that one thing was atfirst there, in the drawing-room, and then began moving across and came to astandstill at the door. Without turning round he felt the eyes fixed on him,and the smile, and he could not help turning round. She was standing in thedoorway with Shtcherbatsky, looking at him.“I thought you were going towards the piano,” said he, going up toher. “That’s something I miss in the country—music.”“No; we only came to fetch you and thank you,” she said, rewardinghim with a smile that was like a gift, “for coming. What do they want toargue for? No one ever convinces anyone, you know.”“Yes; that’s true,” said Levin; “it generally happensthat one argues warmly simply because one can’t make out what one’sopponent wants to prove.”Levin had often noticed in discussions between the most intelligent people thatafter enormous efforts, and an enormous expenditure of logical subtleties andwords, the disputants finally arrived at being aware that what they had so longbeen struggling to prove to one another had long ago, from the beginning of theargument, been known to both, but that they liked different things, and wouldnot define what they liked for fear of its being attacked. He had often had theexperience of suddenly in a discussion grasping what it was his opponent likedand at once liking it too, and immediately he found himself agreeing, and thenall arguments fell away as useless. Sometimes, too, he had experienced theopposite, expressing at last what he liked himself, which he was devisingarguments to defend, and, chancing to express it well and genuinely, he hadfound his opponent at once agreeing and ceasing to dispute his position. Hetried to say this.She knitted her brow, trying to understand. But directly he began to illustratehis meaning, she understood at once.“I know: one must find out what he is arguing for, what is precious tohim, then one can....”She had completely guessed and expressed his badly expressed idea. Levin smiledjoyfully; he was struck by this transition from the confused, verbosediscussion with Pestsov and his brother to this laconic, clear, almost wordlesscommunication of the most complex ideas.Shtcherbatsky moved away from them, and Kitty, going up to a card-table, satdown, and, taking up the chalk, began drawing diverging circles over the newgreen cloth.They began again on the subject that had been started at dinner—theliberty and occupations of women. Levin was of the opinion of DaryaAlexandrovna that a girl who did not marry should find a woman’s dutiesin a family. He supported this view by the fact that no family can get onwithout women to help; that in every family, poor or rich, there are and mustbe nurses, either relations or hired.“No,” said Kitty, blushing, but looking at him all the more boldlywith her truthful eyes; “a girl may be so circumstanced that she cannotlive in the family without humiliation, while she herself....”At the hint he understood her.“Oh, yes,” he said. “Yes, yes, yes—you’re right;you’re right!”And he saw all that Pestsov had been maintaining at dinner of the liberty ofwoman, simply from getting a glimpse of the terror of an old maid’sexistence and its humiliation in Kitty’s heart; and loving her, he feltthat terror and humiliation, and at once gave up his arguments.A silence followed. She was still drawing with the chalk on the table. Her eyeswere shining with a soft light. Under the influence of her mood he felt in allhis being a continually growing tension of happiness.“Ah! I’ve scribbled all over the table!” she said, and,laying down the chalk, she made a movement as though to get up.“What! shall I be left alone—without her?” he thought withhorror, and he took the chalk. “Wait a minute,” he said, sittingdown to the table. “I’ve long wanted to ask you one thing.”He looked straight into her caressing, though frightened eyes.“Please, ask it.”“Here,” he said; and he wrote the initial letters, w, y, t, m,i, c, n, b, d, t, m, n, o, t. These letters meant, “When you told meit could never be, did that mean never, or then?” There seemed nolikelihood that she could make out this complicated sentence; but he looked ather as though his life depended on her understanding the words. She glanced athim seriously, then leaned her puckered brow on her hands and began to read.Once or twice she stole a look at him, as though asking him, “Is it whatI think?”“I understand,” she said, flushing a little.“What is this word?” he said, pointing to the n that stoodfor never.“It means never,” she said; “but that’s nottrue!”He quickly rubbed out what he had written, gave her the chalk, and stood up.She wrote, t, i, c, n, a, d.Dolly was completely comforted in the depression caused by her conversationwith Alexey Alexandrovitch when she caught sight of the two figures: Kitty withthe chalk in her hand, with a shy and happy smile looking upwards at Levin, andhis handsome figure bending over the table with glowing eyes fastened oneminute on the table and the next on her. He was suddenly radiant: he hadunderstood. It meant, “Then I could not answer differently.”He glanced at her questioningly, timidly.“Only then?”“Yes,” her smile answered.“And n... and now?” he asked.“Well, read this. I’ll tell you what I should like—shouldlike so much!” she wrote the initial letters, i, y, c, f, a, f, w, h.This meant, “If you could forget and forgive what happened.”He snatched the chalk with nervous, trembling fingers, and breaking it, wrotethe initial letters of the following phrase, “I have nothing to forgetand to forgive; I have never ceased to love you.”She glanced at him with a smile that did not waver.“I understand,” she said in a whisper.He sat down and wrote a long phrase. She understood it all, and without askinghim, “Is it this?” took the chalk and at once answered.For a long while he could not understand what she had written, and often lookedinto her eyes. He was stupefied with happiness. He could not supply the wordshe had meant; but in her charming eyes, beaming with happiness, he saw all heneeded to know. And he wrote three letters. But he had hardly finished writingwhen she read them over her arm, and herself finished and wrote the answer,“Yes.”“You’re playing secrétaire?” said the old prince.“But we must really be getting along if you want to be in time at thetheater.”Levin got up and escorted Kitty to the door.In their conversation everything had been said; it had been said that she lovedhim, and that she would tell her father and mother that he would come tomorrowmorning.Chapter 14When Kitty had gone and Levin was left alone, he felt such uneasiness withouther, and such an impatient longing to get as quickly, as quickly as possible,to tomorrow morning, when he would see her again and be plighted to herforever, that he felt afraid, as though of death, of those fourteen hours thathe had to get through without her. It was essential for him to be with someoneto talk to, so as not to be left alone, to kill time. Stepan Arkadyevitch wouldhave been the companion most congenial to him, but he was going out, he said,to a soirée, in reality to the ballet. Levin only had time to tell himhe was happy, and that he loved him, and would never, never forget what he haddone for him. The eyes and the smile of Stepan Arkadyevitch showed Levin thathe comprehended that feeling fittingly.“Oh, so it’s not time to die yet?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,pressing Levin’s hand with emotion.“N-n-no!” said Levin.Darya Alexandrovna too, as she said good-bye to him, gave him a sort ofcongratulation, saying, “How glad I am you have met Kitty again! One mustvalue old friends.” Levin did not like these words of DaryaAlexandrovna’s. She could not understand how lofty and beyond her it allwas, and she ought not to have dared to allude to it. Levin said good-bye tothem, but, not to be left alone, he attached himself to his brother.“Where are you going?”“I’m going to a meeting.”“Well, I’ll come with you. May I?”“What for? Yes, come along,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling.“What is the matter with you today?”“With me? Happiness is the matter with me!” said Levin, lettingdown the window of the carriage they were driving in. “You don’tmind?—it’s so stifling. It’s happiness is the matter with me!Why is it you have never married?”Sergey Ivanovitch smiled.“I am very glad, she seems a nice gi....” Sergey Ivanovitch wasbeginning.“Don’t say it! don’t say it!” shouted Levin, clutchingat the collar of his fur coat with both hands, and muffling him up in it.“She’s a nice girl” were such simple, humble words, so out ofharmony with his feeling.Sergey Ivanovitch laughed outright a merry laugh, which was rare with him.“Well, anyway, I may say that I’m very glad of it.”“That you may do tomorrow, tomorrow and nothing more! Nothing, nothing,silence,” said Levin, and muffling him once more in his fur coat, headded: “I do like you so! Well, is it possible for me to be present atthe meeting?”“Of course it is.”“What is your discussion about today?” asked Levin, never ceasingsmiling.They arrived at the meeting. Levin heard the secretary hesitatingly read theminutes which he obviously did not himself understand; but Levin saw from thissecretary’s face what a good, nice, kind-hearted person he was. This wasevident from his confusion and embarrassment in reading the minutes. Then thediscussion began. They were disputing about the misappropriation of certainsums and the laying of certain pipes, and Sergey Ivanovitch was very cutting totwo members, and said something at great length with an air of triumph; andanother member, scribbling something on a bit of paper, began timidly at first,but afterwards answered him very viciously and delightfully. And then Sviazhsky(he was there too) said something too, very handsomely and nobly. Levinlistened to them, and saw clearly that these missing sums and these pipes werenot anything real, and that they were not at all angry, but were all thenicest, kindest people, and everything was as happy and charming as possibleamong them. They did no harm to anyone, and were all enjoying it. What struckLevin was that he could see through them all today, and from little, almostimperceptible signs knew the soul of each, and saw distinctly that they wereall good at heart. And Levin himself in particular they were all extremely fondof that day. That was evident from the way they spoke to him, from thefriendly, affectionate way even those he did not know looked at him.“Well, did you like it?” Sergey Ivanovitch asked him.“Very much. I never supposed it was so interesting! Capital!Splendid!”Sviazhsky went up to Levin and invited him to come round to tea with him. Levinwas utterly at a loss to comprehend or recall what it was he had disliked inSviazhsky, what he had failed to find in him. He was a clever and wonderfullygood-hearted man.“Most delighted,” he said, and asked after his wife andsister-in-law. And from a queer association of ideas, because in hisimagination the idea of Sviazhsky’s sister-in-law was connected withmarriage, it occurred to him that there was no one to whom he could moresuitably speak of his happiness, and he was very glad to go and see them.Sviazhsky questioned him about his improvements on his estate, presupposing, ashe always did, that there was no possibility of doing anything not done alreadyin Europe, and now this did not in the least annoy Levin. On the contrary, hefelt that Sviazhsky was right, that the whole business was of little value, andhe saw the wonderful softness and consideration with which Sviazhsky avoidedfully expressing his correct view. The ladies of the Sviazhsky household wereparticularly delightful. It seemed to Levin that they knew all about it alreadyand sympathized with him, saying nothing merely from delicacy. He stayed withthem one hour, two, three, talking of all sorts of subjects but the one thingthat filled his heart, and did not observe that he was boring them dreadfully,and that it was long past their bedtime.Sviazhsky went with him into the hall, yawning and wondering at the strangehumor his friend was in. It was past one o’clock. Levin went back to hishotel, and was dismayed at the thought that all alone now with his impatiencehe had ten hours still left to get through. The servant, whose turn it was tobe up all night, lighted his candles, and would have gone away, but Levinstopped him. This servant, Yegor, whom Levin had noticed before, struck him asa very intelligent, excellent, and, above all, good-hearted man.“Well, Yegor, it’s hard work not sleeping, isn’t it?”“One’s got to put up with it! It’s part of our work, you see.In a gentleman’s house it’s easier; but then here one makesmore.”It appeared that Yegor had a family, three boys and a daughter, a sempstress,whom he wanted to marry to a cashier in a saddler’s shop.Levin, on hearing this, informed Yegor that, in his opinion, in marriage thegreat thing was love, and that with love one would always be happy, forhappiness rests only on oneself.Yegor listened attentively, and obviously quite took in Levin’s idea, butby way of assent to it he enunciated, greatly to Levin’s surprise, theobservation that when he had lived with good masters he had always beensatisfied with his masters, and now was perfectly satisfied with his employer,though he was a Frenchman.“Wonderfully good-hearted fellow!” thought Levin.“Well, but you yourself, Yegor, when you got married, did you love yourwife?”“Ay! and why not?” responded Yegor.And Levin saw that Yegor too was in an excited state and intending to expressall his most heartfelt emotions.“My life, too, has been a wonderful one. From a child up....” he wasbeginning with flashing eyes, apparently catching Levin’s enthusiasm,just as people catch yawning.But at that moment a ring was heard. Yegor departed, and Levin was left alone.He had eaten scarcely anything at dinner, had refused tea and supper atSviazhsky’s, but he was incapable of thinking of supper. He had not sleptthe previous night, but was incapable of thinking of sleep either. His room wascold, but he was oppressed by heat. He opened both the movable panes in hiswindow and sat down to the table opposite the open panes. Over the snow-coveredroofs could be seen a decorated cross with chains, and above it the risingtriangle of Charles’s Wain with the yellowish light of Capella. He gazedat the cross, then at the stars, drank in the fresh freezing air that flowedevenly into the room, and followed as though in a dream the images and memoriesthat rose in his imagination. At four o’clock he heard steps in thepassage and peeped out at the door. It was the gambler Myaskin, whom he knew,coming from the club. He walked gloomily, frowning and coughing. “Poor,unlucky fellow!” thought Levin, and tears came into his eyes from loveand pity for this man. He would have talked with him, and tried to comfort him,but remembering that he had nothing but his shirt on, he changed his mind andsat down again at the open pane to bathe in the cold air and gaze at theexquisite lines of the cross, silent, but full of meaning for him, and themounting lurid yellow star. At seven o’clock there was a noise of peoplepolishing the floors, and bells ringing in some servants’ department, andLevin felt that he was beginning to get frozen. He closed the pane, washed,dressed, and went out into the street.Chapter 15The streets were still empty. Levin went to the house of the Shtcherbatskys.The visitors’ doors were closed and everything was asleep. He walkedback, went into his room again, and asked for coffee. The day servant, notYegor this time, brought it to him. Levin would have entered into conversationwith him, but a bell rang for the servant, and he went out. Levin tried todrink coffee and put some roll in his mouth, but his mouth was quite at a losswhat to do with the roll. Levin, rejecting the roll, put on his coat and wentout again for a walk. It was nine o’clock when he reached theShtcherbatskys’ steps the second time. In the house they were only justup, and the cook came out to go marketing. He had to get through at least twohours more.All that night and morning Levin lived perfectly unconsciously, and feltperfectly lifted out of the conditions of material life. He had eaten nothingfor a whole day, he had not slept for two nights, had spent several hoursundressed in the frozen air, and felt not simply fresher and stronger thanever, but felt utterly independent of his body; he moved without musculareffort, and felt as if he could do anything. He was convinced he could flyupwards or lift the corner of the house, if need be. He spent the remainder ofthe time in the street, incessantly looking at his watch and gazing about him.And what he saw then, he never saw again after. The children especially goingto school, the bluish doves flying down from the roofs to the pavement, and thelittle loaves covered with flour, thrust out by an unseen hand, touched him.Those loaves, those doves, and those two boys were not earthly creatures. Itall happened at the same time: a boy ran towards a dove and glanced smiling atLevin; the dove, with a whir of her wings, darted away, flashing in the sun,amid grains of snow that quivered in the air, while from a little window therecame a smell of fresh-baked bread, and the loaves were put out. All of thistogether was so extraordinarily nice that Levin laughed and cried with delight.Going a long way round by Gazetny Place and Kislovka, he went back again to thehotel, and putting his watch before him, he sat down to wait for twelveo’clock. In the next room they were talking about some sort of machines,and swindling, and coughing their morning coughs. They did not realize that thehand was near twelve. The hand reached it. Levin went out onto the steps. Thesledge-drivers clearly knew all about it. They crowded round Levin with happyfaces, quarreling among themselves, and offering their services. Trying not tooffend the other sledge drivers, and promising to drive with them too, Levintook one and told him to drive to the Shtcherbatskys’. The sledge-driverwas splendid in a white shirt-collar sticking out over his overcoat and intohis strong, full-blooded red neck. The sledge was high and comfortable, andaltogether such a one as Levin never drove in after, and the horse was a goodone, and tried to gallop but didn’t seem to move. The driver knew theShtcherbatskys’ house, and drew up at the entrance with a curve of hisarm and a “Wo!” especially indicative of respect for his fare. TheShtcherbatskys’ hall-porter certainly knew all about it. This was evidentfrom the smile in his eyes and the way he said:“Well, it’s a long while since you’ve been to see us,Konstantin Dmitrievitch!”Not only he knew all about it, but he was unmistakably delighted and makingefforts to conceal his joy. Looking into his kindly old eyes, Levin realizedeven something new in his happiness.“Are they up?”“Pray walk in! Leave it here,” said he, smiling, as Levin wouldhave come back to take his hat. That meant something.“To whom shall I announce your honor?” asked the footman.The footman, though a young man, and one of the new school of footmen, a dandy,was a very kind-hearted, good fellow, and he too knew all about it.“The princess ... the prince ... the young princess....” said Levin.The first person he saw was Mademoiselle Linon. She walked across the room, andher ringlets and her face were beaming. He had only just spoken to her, whensuddenly he heard the rustle of a skirt at the door, and Mademoiselle Linonvanished from Levin’s eyes, and a joyful terror came over him at thenearness of his happiness. Mademoiselle Linon was in great haste, and leavinghim, went out at the other door. Directly she had gone out, swift, swift lightsteps sounded on the parquet, and his bliss, his life, himself—what wasbest in himself, what he had so long sought and longed for—was quickly,so quickly approaching him. She did not walk, but seemed, by some unseen force,to float to him. He saw nothing but her clear, truthful eyes, frightened by thesame bliss of love that flooded his heart. Those eyes were shining nearer andnearer, blinding him with their light of love. She stopped still close to him,touching him. Her hands rose and dropped onto his shoulders.She had done all she could—she had run up to him and given herself upentirely, shy and happy. He put his arms round her and pressed his lips to hermouth that sought his kiss.She too had not slept all night, and had been expecting him all the morning.Her mother and father had consented without demur, and were happy in herhappiness. She had been waiting for him. She wanted to be the first to tell himher happiness and his. She had got ready to see him alone, and had beendelighted at the idea, and had been shy and ashamed, and did not know herselfwhat she was doing. She had heard his steps and voice, and had waited at thedoor for Mademoiselle Linon to go. Mademoiselle Linon had gone away. Withoutthinking, without asking herself how and what, she had gone up to him, and didas she was doing.“Let us go to mamma!” she said, taking him by the hand. For a longwhile he could say nothing, not so much because he was afraid of desecratingthe loftiness of his emotion by a word, as that every time he tried to saysomething, instead of words he felt that tears of happiness were welling up. Hetook her hand and kissed it.“Can it be true?” he said at last in a choked voice. “Ican’t believe you love me, dear!”She smiled at that “dear,” and at the timidity with which heglanced at her.“Yes!” she said significantly, deliberately. “I am sohappy!”Not letting go his hands, she went into the drawing-room. The princess, seeingthem, breathed quickly, and immediately began to cry and then immediately beganto laugh, and with a vigorous step Levin had not expected, ran up to him, andhugging his head, kissed him, wetting his cheeks with her tears.“So it is all settled! I am glad. Love her. I am glad.... Kitty!”“You’ve not been long settling things,” said the old prince,trying to seem unmoved; but Levin noticed that his eyes were wet when he turnedto him.“I’ve long, always wished for this!” said the prince, takingLevin by the arm and drawing him towards himself. “Even when this littlefeather-head fancied....”“Papa!” shrieked Kitty, and shut his mouth with her hands.“Well, I won’t!” he said. “I’m very, very ...plea... Oh, what a fool I am....”He embraced Kitty, kissed her face, her hand, her face again, and made the signof the cross over her.And there came over Levin a new feeling of love for this man, till then solittle known to him, when he saw how slowly and tenderly Kitty kissed hismuscular hand.Chapter 16The princess sat in her armchair, silent and smiling; the prince sat downbeside her. Kitty stood by her father’s chair, still holding his hand.All were silent.The princess was the first to put everything into words, and to translate allthoughts and feelings into practical questions. And all equally felt thisstrange and painful for the first minute.“When is it to be? We must have the benediction and announcement. Andwhen’s the wedding to be? What do you think, Alexander?”“Here he is,” said the old prince, pointing toLevin—“he’s the principal person in the matter.”“When?” said Levin blushing. “Tomorrow. If you ask me, Ishould say, the benediction today and the wedding tomorrow.”“Come, mon cher, that’s nonsense!”“Well, in a week.”“He’s quite mad.”“No, why so?”“Well, upon my word!” said the mother, smiling, delighted at thishaste. “How about the trousseau?”“Will there really be a trousseau and all that?” Levin thought withhorror. “But can the trousseau and the benediction and all that—canit spoil my happiness? Nothing can spoil it!” He glanced at Kitty, andnoticed that she was not in the least, not in the very least, disturbed by theidea of the trousseau. “Then it must be all right,” he thought.“Oh, I know nothing about it; I only said what I should like,” hesaid apologetically.“We’ll talk it over, then. The benediction and announcement cantake place now. That’s very well.”The princess went up to her husband, kissed him, and would have gone away, buthe kept her, embraced her, and, tenderly as a young lover, kissed her severaltimes, smiling. The old people were obviously muddled for a moment, and did notquite know whether it was they who were in love again or their daughter. Whenthe prince and the princess had gone, Levin went up to his betrothed and tookher hand. He was self-possessed now and could speak, and he had a great deal hewanted to tell her. But he said not at all what he had to say.“How I knew it would be so! I never hoped for it; and yet in my heart Iwas always sure,” he said. “I believe that it was ordained.”“And I!” she said. “Even when....” She stopped and wenton again, looking at him resolutely with her truthful eyes, “Even when Ithrust from me my happiness. I always loved you alone, but I was carried away.I ought to tell you.... Can you forgive that?”“Perhaps it was for the best. You will have to forgive me so much. Iought to tell you....”This was one of the things he had meant to speak about. He had resolved fromthe first to tell her two things—that he was not chaste as she was, andthat he was not a believer. It was agonizing, but he considered he ought totell her both these facts.“No, not now, later!” he said.“Very well, later, but you must certainly tell me. I’m not afraidof anything. I want to know everything. Now it is settled.”He added: “Settled that you’ll take me whatever I may be—youwon’t give me up? Yes?”“Yes, yes.”Their conversation was interrupted by Mademoiselle Linon, who with an affectedbut tender smile came to congratulate her favorite pupil. Before she had gone,the servants came in with their congratulations. Then relations arrived, andthere began that state of blissful absurdity from which Levin did not emergetill the day after his wedding. Levin was in a continual state of awkwardnessand discomfort, but the intensity of his happiness went on all the whileincreasing. He felt continually that a great deal was being expected ofhim—what, he did not know; and he did everything he was told, and it allgave him happiness. He had thought his engagement would have nothing about itlike others, that the ordinary conditions of engaged couples would spoil hisspecial happiness; but it ended in his doing exactly as other people did, andhis happiness being only increased thereby and becoming more and more special,more and more unlike anything that had ever happened.“Now we shall have sweetmeats to eat,” said MademoiselleLinon—and Levin drove off to buy sweetmeats.“Well, I’m very glad,” said Sviazhsky. “I advise you toget the bouquets from Fomin’s.”“Oh, are they wanted?” And he drove to Fomin’s.His brother offered to lend him money, as he would have so many expenses,presents to give....“Oh, are presents wanted?” And he galloped to Foulde’s.And at the confectioner’s, and at Fomin’s, and at Foulde’s hesaw that he was expected; that they were pleased to see him, and pridedthemselves on his happiness, just as everyone whom he had to do with duringthose days. What was extraordinary was that everyone not only liked him, buteven people previously unsympathetic, cold, and callous, were enthusiastic overhim, gave way to him in everything, treated his feeling with tenderness anddelicacy, and shared his conviction that he was the happiest man in the worldbecause his betrothed was beyond perfection. Kitty too felt the same thing.When Countess Nordston ventured to hint that she had hoped for somethingbetter, Kitty was so angry and proved so conclusively that nothing in the worldcould be better than Levin, that Countess Nordston had to admit it, and inKitty’s presence never met Levin without a smile of ecstatic admiration.The confession he had promised was the one painful incident of this time. Heconsulted the old prince, and with his sanction gave Kitty his diary, in whichthere was written the confession that tortured him. He had written this diaryat the time with a view to his future wife. Two things caused him anguish: hislack of purity and his lack of faith. His confession of unbelief passedunnoticed. She was religious, had never doubted the truths of religion, but hisexternal unbelief did not affect her in the least. Through love she knew allhis soul, and in his soul she saw what she wanted, and that such a state ofsoul should be called unbelieving was to her a matter of no account. The otherconfession set her weeping bitterly.Levin, not without an inner struggle, handed her his diary. He knew thatbetween him and her there could not be, and should not be, secrets, and so hehad decided that so it must be. But he had not realized what an effect it wouldhave on her, he had not put himself in her place. It was only when the sameevening he came to their house before the theater, went into her room and sawher tear-stained, pitiful, sweet face, miserable with suffering he had causedand nothing could undo, he felt the abyss that separated his shameful past fromher dovelike purity, and was appalled at what he had done.“Take them, take these dreadful books!” she said, pushing away thenotebooks lying before her on the table. “Why did you give them me? No,it was better anyway,” she added, touched by his despairing face.“But it’s awful, awful!”His head sank, and he was silent. He could say nothing.“You can’t forgive me,” he whispered.“Yes, I forgive you; but it’s terrible!”But his happiness was so immense that this confession did not shatter it, itonly added another shade to it. She forgave him; but from that time more thanever he considered himself unworthy of her, morally bowed down lower than everbefore her, and prized more highly than ever his undeserved happiness.Chapter 17Unconsciously going over in his memory the conversations that had taken placeduring and after dinner, Alexey Alexandrovitch returned to his solitary room.Darya Alexandrovna’s words about forgiveness had aroused in him nothingbut annoyance. The applicability or non-applicability of the Christian preceptto his own case was too difficult a question to be discussed lightly, and thisquestion had long ago been answered by Alexey Alexandrovitch in the negative.Of all that had been said, what stuck most in his memory was the phrase ofstupid, good-natured Turovtsin—“Acted like a man, he did! Calledhim out and shot him!” Everyone had apparently shared this feeling,though from politeness they had not expressed it.“But the matter is settled, it’s useless thinking about it,”Alexey Alexandrovitch told himself. And thinking of nothing but the journeybefore him, and the revision work he had to do, he went into his room and askedthe porter who escorted him where his man was. The porter said that the man hadonly just gone out. Alexey Alexandrovitch ordered tea to be sent him, sat downto the table, and taking the guidebook, began considering the route of hisjourney.“Two telegrams,” said his manservant, coming into the room.“I beg your pardon, your excellency; I’d only just that minute goneout.”Alexey Alexandrovitch took the telegrams and opened them. The first telegramwas the announcement of Stremov’s appointment to the very post Kareninhad coveted. Alexey Alexandrovitch flung the telegram down, and flushing alittle, got up and began to pace up and down the room. “Quos vultperdere dementat,” he said, meaning by quos the personsresponsible for this appointment. He was not so much annoyed that he had notreceived the post, that he had been conspicuously passed over; but it wasincomprehensible, amazing to him that they did not see that the wordyphrase-monger Stremov was the last man fit for it. How could they fail to seehow they were ruining themselves, lowering their prestige by thisappointment?“Something else in the same line,” he said to himself bitterly,opening the second telegram. The telegram was from his wife. Her name, writtenin blue pencil, “Anna,” was the first thing that caught his eye.“I am dying; I beg, I implore you to come. I shall die easier with yourforgiveness,” he read. He smiled contemptuously, and flung down thetelegram. That this was a trick and a fraud, of that, he thought for the firstminute, there could be no doubt.“There is no deceit she would stick at. She was near her confinement.Perhaps it is the confinement. But what can be their aim? To legitimize thechild, to compromise me, and prevent a divorce,” he thought. “Butsomething was said in it: I am dying....” He read the telegram again, andsuddenly the plain meaning of what was said in it struck him.“And if it is true?” he said to himself. “If it is true thatin the moment of agony and nearness to death she is genuinely penitent, and I,taking it for a trick, refuse to go? That would not only be cruel, and everyonewould blame me, but it would be stupid on my part.”“Piotr, call a coach; I am going to Petersburg,” he said to hisservant.Alexey Alexandrovitch decided that he would go to Petersburg and see his wife.If her illness was a trick, he would say nothing and go away again. If she wasreally in danger, and wished to see him before her death, he would forgive herif he found her alive, and pay her the last duties if he came too late.All the way he thought no more of what he ought to do.With a sense of weariness and uncleanness from the night spent in the train, inthe early fog of Petersburg Alexey Alexandrovitch drove through the desertedNevsky and stared straight before him, not thinking of what was awaiting him.He could not think about it, because in picturing what would happen, he couldnot drive away the reflection that her death would at once remove all thedifficulty of his position. Bakers, closed shops, night-cabmen, porterssweeping the pavements flashed past his eyes, and he watched it all, trying tosmother the thought of what was awaiting him, and what he dared not hope for,and yet was hoping for. He drove up to the steps. A sledge and a carriage withthe coachman asleep stood at the entrance. As he went into the entry, AlexeyAlexandrovitch, as it were, got out his resolution from the remotest corner ofhis brain, and mastered it thoroughly. Its meaning ran: “If it’s atrick, then calm contempt and departure. If truth, do what is proper.”The porter opened the door before Alexey Alexandrovitch rang. The porter,Kapitonitch, looked queer in an old coat, without a tie, and in slippers.“How is your mistress?”“A successful confinement yesterday.”Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped short and turned white. He felt distinctly nowhow intensely he had longed for her death.“And how is she?”Korney in his morning apron ran downstairs.“Very ill,” he answered. “There was a consultation yesterday,and the doctor’s here now.”“Take my things,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, and feeling somerelief at the news that there was still hope of her death, he went into thehall.On the hatstand there was a military overcoat. Alexey Alexandrovitch noticed itand asked:“Who is here?”“The doctor, the midwife, and Count Vronsky.”Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the inner rooms.In the drawing-room there was no one; at the sound of his steps there came outof her boudoir the midwife in a cap with lilac ribbons.She went up to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and with the familiarity given by theapproach of death took him by the arm and drew him towards the bedroom.“Thank God you’ve come! She keeps on about you and nothing butyou,” she said.“Make haste with the ice!” the doctor’s peremptory voice saidfrom the bedroom.Alexey Alexandrovitch went into her boudoir.At the table, sitting sideways in a low chair, was Vronsky, his face hidden inhis hands, weeping. He jumped up at the doctor’s voice, took his handsfrom his face, and saw Alexey Alexandrovitch. Seeing the husband, he was sooverwhelmed that he sat down again, drawing his head down to his shoulders, asif he wanted to disappear; but he made an effort over himself, got up and said:“She is dying. The doctors say there is no hope. I am entirely in yourpower, only let me be here ... though I am at your disposal. I....”Alexey Alexandrovitch, seeing Vronsky’s tears, felt a rush of thatnervous emotion always produced in him by the sight of other people’ssuffering, and turning away his face, he moved hurriedly to the door, withouthearing the rest of his words. From the bedroom came the sound of Anna’svoice saying something. Her voice was lively, eager, with exceedingly distinctintonations. Alexey Alexandrovitch went into the bedroom, and went up to thebed. She was lying turned with her face towards him. Her cheeks were flushedcrimson, her eyes glittered, her little white hands thrust out from the sleevesof her dressing gown were playing with the quilt, twisting it about. It seemedas though she were not only well and blooming, but in the happiest frame ofmind. She was talking rapidly, musically, and with exceptionally correctarticulation and expressive intonation.“For Alexey—I am speaking of Alexey Alexandrovitch (what a strangeand awful thing that both are Alexey, isn’t it?)—Alexey would notrefuse me. I should forget, he would forgive.... But why doesn’t he come?He’s so good he doesn’t know himself how good he is. Ah, my God,what agony! Give me some water, quick! Oh, that will be bad for her, my littlegirl! Oh, very well then, give her to a nurse. Yes, I agree, it’s betterin fact. He’ll be coming; it will hurt him to see her. Give her to thenurse.”“Anna Arkadyevna, he has come. Here he is!” said the midwife,trying to attract her attention to Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Oh, what nonsense!” Anna went on, not seeing her husband.“No, give her to me; give me my little one! He has not come yet. You sayhe won’t forgive me, because you don’t know him. No one knows him.I’m the only one, and it was hard for me even. His eyes I ought toknow—Seryozha has just the same eyes—and I can’t bear to seethem because of it. Has Seryozha had his dinner? I know everyone will forgethim. He would not forget. Seryozha must be moved into the corner room, andMariette must be asked to sleep with him.”All of a sudden she shrank back, was silent; and in terror, as though expectinga blow, as though to defend herself, she raised her hands to her face. She hadseen her husband.“No, no!” she began. “I am not afraid of him; I am afraid ofdeath. Alexey, come here. I am in a hurry, because I’ve no time,I’ve not long left to live; the fever will begin directly and I shallunderstand nothing more. Now I understand, I understand it all, I see itall!”Alexey Alexandrovitch’s wrinkled face wore an expression of agony; hetook her by the hand and tried to say something, but he could not utter it; hislower lip quivered, but he still went on struggling with his emotion, and onlynow and then glanced at her. And each time he glanced at her, he saw her eyesgazing at him with such passionate and triumphant tenderness as he had neverseen in them.“Wait a minute, you don’t know ... stay a little, stay!...”She stopped, as though collecting her ideas. “Yes,” she began;“yes, yes, yes. This is what I wanted to say. Don’t be surprised atme. I’m still the same.... But there is another woman in me, I’mafraid of her: she loved that man, and I tried to hate you, and could notforget about her that used to be. I’m not that woman. Now I’m myreal self, all myself. I’m dying now, I know I shall die, ask him. Evennow I feel—see here, the weights on my feet, on my hands, on my fingers.My fingers—see how huge they are! But this will soon all be over.... Onlyone thing I want: forgive me, forgive me quite. I’m terrible, but mynurse used to tell me; the holy martyr—what was her name? She was worse.And I’ll go to Rome; there’s a wilderness, and there I shall be notrouble to anyone, only I’ll take Seryozha and the little one.... No, youcan’t forgive me! I know, it can’t be forgiven! No, no, go away,you’re too good!” She held his hand in one burning hand, while shepushed him away with the other.The nervous agitation of Alexey Alexandrovitch kept increasing, and had by nowreached such a point that he ceased to struggle with it. He suddenly felt thatwhat he had regarded as nervous agitation was on the contrary a blissfulspiritual condition that gave him all at once a new happiness he had neverknown. He did not think that the Christian law that he had been all his lifetrying to follow, enjoined on him to forgive and love his enemies; but a gladfeeling of love and forgiveness for his enemies filled his heart. He kneltdown, and laying his head in the curve of her arm, which burned him as withfire through the sleeve, he sobbed like a little child. She put her arm aroundhis head, moved towards him, and with defiant pride lifted up her eyes.“That is he. I knew him! Now, forgive me, everyone, forgive me!...They’ve come again; why don’t they go away?... Oh, take thesecloaks off me!”The doctor unloosed her hands, carefully laying her on the pillow, and coveredher up to the shoulders. She lay back submissively, and looked before her withbeaming eyes.“Remember one thing, that I needed nothing but forgiveness, and I wantnothing more.... Why doesn’t he come?” she said, turning tothe door towards Vronsky. “Do come, do come! Give him your hand.”Vronsky came to the side of the bed, and seeing Anna, again hid his face in hishands.“Uncover your face—look at him! He’s a saint,” shesaid. “Oh! uncover your face, do uncover it!” she said angrily.“Alexey Alexandrovitch, do uncover his face! I want to see him.”Alexey Alexandrovitch took Vronsky’s hands and drew them away from hisface, which was awful with the expression of agony and shame upon it.“Give him your hand. Forgive him.”Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, not attempting to restrain the tearsthat streamed from his eyes.“Thank God, thank God!” she said, “now everything is ready.Only to stretch my legs a little. There, that’s capital. How badly theseflowers are done—not a bit like a violet,” she said, pointing tothe hangings. “My God, my God! when will it end? Give me some morphine.Doctor, give me some morphine! Oh, my God, my God!”And she tossed about on the bed.The doctors said that it was puerperal fever, and that it was ninety-ninechances in a hundred it would end in death. The whole day long there was fever,delirium, and unconsciousness. At midnight the patient lay withoutconsciousness, and almost without pulse.The end was expected every minute.Vronsky had gone home, but in the morning he came to inquire, and AlexeyAlexandrovitch meeting him in the hall, said: “Better stay, she might askfor you,” and himself led him to his wife’s boudoir. Towardsmorning, there was a return again of excitement, rapid thought and talk, andagain it ended in unconsciousness. On the third day it was the same thing, andthe doctors said there was hope. That day Alexey Alexandrovitch went into theboudoir where Vronsky was sitting, and closing the door sat down opposite him.“Alexey Alexandrovitch,” said Vronsky, feeling that a statement ofthe position was coming, “I can’t speak, I can’t understand.Spare me! However hard it is for you, believe me, it is more terrible forme.”He would have risen; but Alexey Alexandrovitch took him by the hand and said:“I beg you to hear me out; it is necessary. I must explain my feelings,the feelings that have guided me and will guide me, so that you may not be inerror regarding me. You know I had resolved on a divorce, and had even begun totake proceedings. I won’t conceal from you that in beginning this I wasin uncertainty, I was in misery; I will confess that I was pursued by a desireto revenge myself on you and on her. When I got the telegram, I came here withthe same feelings; I will say more, I longed for her death. But....” Hepaused, pondering whether to disclose or not to disclose his feeling to him.“But I saw her and forgave her. And the happiness of forgiveness hasrevealed to me my duty. I forgive completely. I would offer the other cheek, Iwould give my cloak if my coat be taken. I pray to God only not to take from methe bliss of forgiveness!”Tears stood in his eyes, and the luminous, serene look in them impressedVronsky.“This is my position: you can trample me in the mud, make me thelaughing-stock of the world, I will not abandon her, and I will never utter aword of reproach to you,” Alexey Alexandrovitch went on. “My dutyis clearly marked for me; I ought to be with her, and I will be. If she wishesto see you, I will let you know, but now I suppose it would be better for youto go away.”He got up, and sobs cut short his words. Vronsky too was getting up, and in astooping, not yet erect posture, looked up at him from under his brows. He didnot understand Alexey Alexandrovitch’s feeling, but he felt that it wassomething higher and even unattainable for him with his view of life.Chapter 18After the conversation with Alexey Alexandrovitch, Vronsky went out onto thesteps of the Karenins’ house and stood still, with difficulty rememberingwhere he was, and where he ought to walk or drive. He felt disgraced,humiliated, guilty, and deprived of all possibility of washing away hishumiliation. He felt thrust out of the beaten track along which he had soproudly and lightly walked till then. All the habits and rules of his life thathad seemed so firm, had turned out suddenly false and inapplicable. Thebetrayed husband, who had figured till that time as a pitiful creature, anincidental and somewhat ludicrous obstacle to his happiness, had suddenly beensummoned by her herself, elevated to an awe-inspiring pinnacle, and on thepinnacle that husband had shown himself, not malignant, not false, notludicrous, but kind and straightforward and large. Vronsky could not but feelthis, and the parts were suddenly reversed. Vronsky felt his elevation and hisown abasement, his truth and his own falsehood. He felt that the husband wasmagnanimous even in his sorrow, while he had been base and petty in his deceit.But this sense of his own humiliation before the man he had unjustly despisedmade up only a small part of his misery. He felt unutterably wretched now, forhis passion for Anna, which had seemed to him of late to be growing cooler, nowthat he knew he had lost her forever, was stronger than ever it had been. Hehad seen all of her in her illness, had come to know her very soul, and itseemed to him that he had never loved her till then. And now when he hadlearned to know her, to love her as she should be loved, he had been humiliatedbefore her, and had lost her forever, leaving with her nothing of himself but ashameful memory. Most terrible of all had been his ludicrous, shameful positionwhen Alexey Alexandrovitch had pulled his hands away from his humiliated face.He stood on the steps of the Karenins’ house like one distraught, and didnot know what to do.“A sledge, sir?” asked the porter.“Yes, a sledge.”On getting home, after three sleepless nights, Vronsky, without undressing, laydown flat on the sofa, clasping his hands and laying his head on them. His headwas heavy. Images, memories, and ideas of the strangest description followedone another with extraordinary rapidity and vividness. First it was themedicine he had poured out for the patient and spilt over the spoon, then themidwife’s white hands, then the queer posture of Alexey Alexandrovitch onthe floor beside the bed.“To sleep! To forget!” he said to himself with the sereneconfidence of a healthy man that if he is tired and sleepy, he will go to sleepat once. And the same instant his head did begin to feel drowsy and he began todrop off into forgetfulness. The waves of the sea of unconsciousness had begunto meet over his head, when all at once—it was as though a violent shockof electricity had passed over him. He started so that he leaped up on thesprings of the sofa, and leaning on his arms got in a panic onto his knees. Hiseyes were wide open as though he had never been asleep. The heaviness in hishead and the weariness in his limbs that he had felt a minute before hadsuddenly gone.“You may trample me in the mud,” he heard AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s words and saw him standing before him, and sawAnna’s face with its burning flush and glittering eyes, gazing with loveand tenderness not at him but at Alexey Alexandrovitch; he saw his own, as hefancied, foolish and ludicrous figure when Alexey Alexandrovitch took his handsaway from his face. He stretched out his legs again and flung himself on thesofa in the same position and shut his eyes.“To sleep! To forget!” he repeated to himself. But with his eyesshut he saw more distinctly than ever Anna’s face as it had been on thememorable evening before the races.“That is not and will not be, and she wants to wipe it out of her memory.But I cannot live without it. How can we be reconciled? how can we bereconciled?” he said aloud, and unconsciously began to repeat thesewords. This repetition checked the rising up of fresh images and memories,which he felt were thronging in his brain. But repeating words did not checkhis imagination for long. Again in extraordinarily rapid succession his bestmoments rose before his mind, and then his recent humiliation. “Take awayhis hands,” Anna’s voice says. He takes away his hands and feelsthe shamestruck and idiotic expression of his face.He still lay down, trying to sleep, though he felt there was not the smallesthope of it, and kept repeating stray words from some chain of thought, tryingby this to check the rising flood of fresh images. He listened, and heard in astrange, mad whisper words repeated: “I did not appreciate it, did notmake enough of it. I did not appreciate it, did not make enough of it.”“What’s this? Am I going out of my mind?” he said to himself.“Perhaps. What makes men go out of their minds; what makes men shootthemselves?” he answered himself, and opening his eyes, he saw withwonder an embroidered cushion beside him, worked by Varya, his brother’swife. He touched the tassel of the cushion, and tried to think of Varya, ofwhen he had seen her last. But to think of anything extraneous was an agonizingeffort. “No, I must sleep!” He moved the cushion up, and pressedhis head into it, but he had to make an effort to keep his eyes shut. He jumpedup and sat down. “That’s all over for me,” he said tohimself. “I must think what to do. What is left?” His mind rapidlyran through his life apart from his love of Anna.“Ambition? Serpuhovskoy? Society? The court?” He could not come toa pause anywhere. All of it had had meaning before, but now there was noreality in it. He got up from the sofa, took off his coat, undid his belt, anduncovering his hairy chest to breathe more freely, walked up and down the room.“This is how people go mad,” he repeated, “and how they shootthemselves ... to escape humiliation,” he added slowly.He went to the door and closed it, then with fixed eyes and clenched teeth hewent up to the table, took a revolver, looked round him, turned it to a loadedbarrel, and sank into thought. For two minutes, his head bent forward with anexpression of an intense effort of thought, he stood with the revolver in hishand, motionless, thinking.“Of course,” he said to himself, as though a logical, continuous,and clear chain of reasoning had brought him to an indubitable conclusion. Inreality this “of course,” that seemed convincing to him, was simplythe result of exactly the same circle of memories and images through which hehad passed ten times already during the last hour—memories of happinesslost forever. There was the same conception of the senselessness of everythingto come in life, the same consciousness of humiliation. Even the sequence ofthese images and emotions was the same.“Of course,” he repeated, when for the third time his thoughtpassed again round the same spellbound circle of memories and images, andpulling the revolver to the left side of his chest, and clutching it vigorouslywith his whole hand, as it were, squeezing it in his fist, he pulled thetrigger. He did not hear the sound of the shot, but a violent blow on his chestsent him reeling. He tried to clutch at the edge of the table, dropped therevolver, staggered, and sat down on the ground, looking about him inastonishment. He did not recognize his room, looking up from the ground, at thebent legs of the table, at the wastepaper basket, and the tiger-skin rug. Thehurried, creaking steps of his servant coming through the drawing-room broughthim to his senses. He made an effort at thought, and was aware that he was onthe floor; and seeing blood on the tiger-skin rug and on his arm, he knew hehad shot himself.“Idiotic! Missed!” he said, fumbling after the revolver. Therevolver was close beside him—he sought further off. Still feeling forit, he stretched out to the other side, and not being strong enough to keep hisbalance, fell over, streaming with blood.The elegant, whiskered manservant, who used to be continually complaining tohis acquaintances of the delicacy of his nerves, was so panic-stricken onseeing his master lying on the floor, that he left him losing blood while heran for assistance. An hour later Varya, his brother’s wife, had arrived,and with the assistance of three doctors, whom she had sent for in alldirections, and who all appeared at the same moment, she got the wounded man tobed, and remained to nurse him.Chapter 19The mistake made by Alexey Alexandrovitch in that, when preparing for seeinghis wife, he had overlooked the possibility that her repentance might besincere, and he might forgive her, and she might not die—this mistake wastwo months after his return from Moscow brought home to him in all itssignificance. But the mistake made by him had arisen not simply from his havingoverlooked that contingency, but also from the fact that until that day of hisinterview with his dying wife, he had not known his own heart. At his sickwife’s bedside he had for the first time in his life given way to thatfeeling of sympathetic suffering always roused in him by the sufferings ofothers, and hitherto looked on by him with shame as a harmful weakness. Andpity for her, and remorse for having desired her death, and most of all, thejoy of forgiveness, made him at once conscious, not simply of the relief of hisown sufferings, but of a spiritual peace he had never experienced before. Hesuddenly felt that the very thing that was the source of his sufferings hadbecome the source of his spiritual joy; that what had seemed insoluble while hewas judging, blaming, and hating, had become clear and simple when he forgaveand loved.He forgave his wife and pitied her for her sufferings and her remorse. Heforgave Vronsky, and pitied him, especially after reports reached him of hisdespairing action. He felt more for his son than before. And he blamed himselfnow for having taken too little interest in him. But for the little newbornbaby he felt a quite peculiar sentiment, not of pity, only, but of tenderness.At first, from a feeling of compassion alone, he had been interested in thedelicate little creature, who was not his child, and who was cast on one sideduring her mother’s illness, and would certainly have died if he had nottroubled about her, and he did not himself observe how fond he became of her.He would go into the nursery several times a day, and sit there for a longwhile, so that the nurses, who were at first afraid of him, got quite used tohis presence. Sometimes for half an hour at a stretch he would sit silentlygazing at the saffron-red, downy, wrinkled face of the sleeping baby, watchingthe movements of the frowning brows, and the fat little hands, with clenchedfingers, that rubbed the little eyes and nose. At such moments particularly,Alexey Alexandrovitch had a sense of perfect peace and inward harmony, and sawnothing extraordinary in his position, nothing that ought to be changed.But as time went on, he saw more and more distinctly that however natural theposition now seemed to him, he would not long be allowed to remain in it. Hefelt that besides the blessed spiritual force controlling his soul, there wasanother, a brutal force, as powerful, or more powerful, which controlled hislife, and that this force would not allow him that humble peace he longed for.He felt that everyone was looking at him with inquiring wonder, that he was notunderstood, and that something was expected of him. Above all, he felt theinstability and unnaturalness of his relations with his wife.When the softening effect of the near approach of death had passed away, AlexeyAlexandrovitch began to notice that Anna was afraid of him, ill at ease withhim, and could not look him straight in the face. She seemed to be wanting, andnot daring, to tell him something; and as though foreseeing their presentrelations could not continue, she seemed to be expecting something from him.Towards the end of February it happened that Anna’s baby daughter, whohad been named Anna too, fell ill. Alexey Alexandrovitch was in the nursery inthe morning, and leaving orders for the doctor to be sent for, he went to hisoffice. On finishing his work, he returned home at four. Going into the hall hesaw a handsome groom, in a braided livery and a bear fur cape, holding a whitefur cloak.“Who is here?” asked Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Princess Elizaveta Federovna Tverskaya,” the groom answered, andit seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch that he grinned.During all this difficult time Alexey Alexandrovitch had noticed that hisworldly acquaintances, especially women, took a peculiar interest in him andhis wife. All these acquaintances he observed with difficulty concealing theirmirth at something; the same mirth that he had perceived in the lawyer’seyes, and just now in the eyes of this groom. Everyone seemed, somehow, hugelydelighted, as though they had just been at a wedding. When they met him, withill-disguised enjoyment they inquired after his wife’s health. Thepresence of Princess Tverskaya was unpleasant to Alexey Alexandrovitch from thememories associated with her, and also because he disliked her, and he wentstraight to the nursery. In the day nursery Seryozha, leaning on the table withhis legs on a chair, was drawing and chatting away merrily. The Englishgoverness, who had during Anna’s illness replaced the French one, wassitting near the boy knitting a shawl. She hurriedly got up, curtseyed, andpulled Seryozha.Alexey Alexandrovitch stroked his son’s hair, answered thegoverness’s inquiries about his wife, and asked what the doctor had saidof the baby.“The doctor said it was nothing serious, and he ordered a bath,sir.”“But she is still in pain,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, listeningto the baby’s screaming in the next room.“I think it’s the wet-nurse, sir,” the Englishwoman saidfirmly.“What makes you think so?” he asked, stopping short.“It’s just as it was at Countess Paul’s, sir. They gave thebaby medicine, and it turned out that the baby was simply hungry: the nurse hadno milk, sir.”Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, and after standing still a few seconds he wentin at the other door. The baby was lying with its head thrown back, stiffeningitself in the nurse’s arms, and would not take the plump breast offeredit; and it never ceased screaming in spite of the double hushing of thewet-nurse and the other nurse, who was bending over her.“Still no better?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.“She’s very restless,” answered the nurse in a whisper.“Miss Edwarde says that perhaps the wet-nurse has no milk,” hesaid.“I think so too, Alexey Alexandrovitch.”“Then why didn’t you say so?”“Who’s one to say it to? Anna Arkadyevna still ill....” saidthe nurse discontentedly.The nurse was an old servant of the family. And in her simple words thereseemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch an allusion to his position.The baby screamed louder than ever, struggling and sobbing. The nurse, with agesture of despair, went to it, took it from the wet-nurse’s arms, andbegan walking up and down, rocking it.“You must ask the doctor to examine the wet-nurse,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch. The smartly dressed and healthy-looking nurse, frightened atthe idea of losing her place, muttered something to herself, and covering herbosom, smiled contemptuously at the idea of doubts being cast on her abundanceof milk. In that smile, too, Alexey Alexandrovitch saw a sneer at his position.“Luckless child!” said the nurse, hushing the baby, and stillwalking up and down with it.Alexey Alexandrovitch sat down, and with a despondent and suffering facewatched the nurse walking to and fro.When the child at last was still, and had been put in a deep bed, and thenurse, after smoothing the little pillow, had left her, Alexey Alexandrovitchgot up, and walking awkwardly on tiptoe, approached the baby. For a minute hewas still, and with the same despondent face gazed at the baby; but all at oncea smile, that moved his hair and the skin of his forehead, came out on hisface, and he went as softly out of the room.In the dining-room he rang the bell, and told the servant who came in to sendagain for the doctor. He felt vexed with his wife for not being anxious aboutthis exquisite baby, and in this vexed humor he had no wish to go to her; hehad no wish, either, to see Princess Betsy. But his wife might wonder why hedid not go to her as usual; and so, overcoming his disinclination, he wenttowards the bedroom. As he walked over the soft rug towards the door, he couldnot help overhearing a conversation he did not want to hear.“If he hadn’t been going away, I could have understood your answerand his too. But your husband ought to be above that,” Betsy was saying.“It’s not for my husband; for myself I don’t wish it.Don’t say that!” answered Anna’s excited voice.“Yes, but you must care to say good-bye to a man who has shot himself onyour account....”“That’s just why I don’t want to.”With a dismayed and guilty expression, Alexey Alexandrovitch stopped and wouldhave gone back unobserved. But reflecting that this would be undignified, heturned back again, and clearing his throat, he went up to the bedroom. Thevoices were silent, and he went in.Anna, in a gray dressing gown, with a crop of short clustering black curls onher round head, was sitting on a settee. The eagerness died out of her face, asit always did, at the sight of her husband; she dropped her head and lookedround uneasily at Betsy. Betsy, dressed in the height of the latest fashion, ina hat that towered somewhere over her head like a shade on a lamp, in a bluedress with violet crossway stripes slanting one way on the bodice and the otherway on the skirt, was sitting beside Anna, her tall flat figure held erect.Bowing her head, she greeted Alexey Alexandrovitch with an ironical smile.“Ah!” she said, as though surprised. “I’m very gladyou’re at home. You never put in an appearance anywhere, and Ihaven’t seen you ever since Anna has been ill. I have heard all aboutit—your anxiety. Yes, you’re a wonderful husband!” she said,with a meaning and affable air, as though she were bestowing an order ofmagnanimity on him for his conduct to his wife.Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed frigidly, and kissing his wife’s hand, askedhow she was.“Better, I think,” she said, avoiding his eyes.“But you’ve rather a feverish-looking color,” he said, layingstress on the word “feverish.”“We’ve been talking too much,” said Betsy. “I feelit’s selfishness on my part, and I am going away.”She got up, but Anna, suddenly flushing, quickly caught at her hand.“No, wait a minute, please. I must tell you ... no, you.” sheturned to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and her neck and brow were suffused withcrimson. “I won’t and can’t keep anything secret fromyou,” she said.Alexey Alexandrovitch cracked his fingers and bowed his head.“Betsy’s been telling me that Count Vronsky wants to come here tosay good-bye before his departure for Tashkend.” She did not look at herhusband, and was evidently in haste to have everything out, however hard itmight be for her. “I told her I could not receive him.”“You said, my dear, that it would depend on Alexey Alexandrovitch,”Betsy corrected her.“Oh, no, I can’t receive him; and what object wouldthere....” She stopped suddenly, and glanced inquiringly at her husband(he did not look at her). “In short, I don’t wish it....”Alexey Alexandrovitch advanced and would have taken her hand.Her first impulse was to jerk back her hand from the damp hand with big swollenveins that sought hers, but with an obvious effort to control herself shepressed his hand.“I am very grateful to you for your confidence, but....” he said,feeling with confusion and annoyance that what he could decide easily andclearly by himself, he could not discuss before Princess Tverskaya, who to himstood for the incarnation of that brute force which would inevitably controlhim in the life he led in the eyes of the world, and hinder him from giving wayto his feeling of love and forgiveness. He stopped short, looking at PrincessTverskaya.“Well, good-bye, my darling,” said Betsy, getting up. She kissedAnna, and went out. Alexey Alexandrovitch escorted her out.“Alexey Alexandrovitch! I know you are a truly magnanimous man,”said Betsy, stopping in the little drawing-room, and with special warmthshaking hands with him once more. “I am an outsider, but I so love herand respect you that I venture to advise. Receive him. Alexey Vronsky is thesoul of honor, and he is going away to Tashkend.”“Thank you, princess, for your sympathy and advice. But the question ofwhether my wife can or cannot see anyone she must decide herself.”He said this from habit, lifting his brows with dignity, and reflectedimmediately that whatever his words might be, there could be no dignity in hisposition. And he saw this by the suppressed, malicious, and ironical smile withwhich Betsy glanced at him after this phrase.Chapter 20Alexey Alexandrovitch took leave of Betsy in the drawing-room, and went to hiswife. She was lying down, but hearing his steps she sat up hastily in herformer attitude, and looked in a scared way at him. He saw she had been crying.“I am very grateful for your confidence in me.” He repeated gentlyin Russian the phrase he had said in Betsy’s presence in French, and satdown beside her. When he spoke to her in Russian, using the Russian“thou” of intimacy and affection, it was insufferably irritating toAnna. “And I am very grateful for your decision. I, too, imagine thatsince he is going away, there is no sort of necessity for Count Vronsky to comehere. However, if....”“But I’ve said so already, so why repeat it?” Anna suddenlyinterrupted him with an irritation she could not succeed in repressing.“No sort of necessity,” she thought, “for a man to come andsay good-bye to the woman he loves, for whom he was ready to ruin himself, andhas ruined himself, and who cannot live without him. No sort ofnecessity!” she compressed her lips, and dropped her burning eyes to hishands with their swollen veins. They were rubbing each other.“Let us never speak of it,” she added more calmly.“I have left this question to you to decide, and I am very glad tosee....” Alexey Alexandrovitch was beginning.“That my wish coincides with your own,” she finished quickly,exasperated at his talking so slowly while she knew beforehand all he wouldsay.“Yes,” he assented; “and Princess Tverskaya’sinterference in the most difficult private affairs is utterly uncalled for. Sheespecially....”“I don’t believe a word of what’s said about her,” saidAnna quickly. “I know she really cares for me.”Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed and said nothing. She played nervously with thetassel of her dressing-gown, glancing at him with that torturing sensation ofphysical repulsion for which she blamed herself, though she could not controlit. Her only desire now was to be rid of his oppressive presence.“I have just sent for the doctor,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.“I am very well; what do I want the doctor for?”“No, the little one cries, and they say the nurse hasn’t enoughmilk.”“Why didn’t you let me nurse her, when I begged to? Anyway”(Alexey Alexandrovitch knew what was meant by that “anyway”),“she’s a baby, and they’re killing her.” She rang thebell and ordered the baby to be brought her. “I begged to nurse her, Iwasn’t allowed to, and now I’m blamed for it.”“I don’t blame....”“Yes, you do blame me! My God! why didn’t I die!” And shebroke into sobs. “Forgive me, I’m nervous, I’m unjust,”she said, controlling herself, “but do go away....”“No, it can’t go on like this,” Alexey Alexandrovitch said tohimself decidedly as he left his wife’s room.Never had the impossibility of his position in the world’s eyes, and hiswife’s hatred of him, and altogether the might of that mysterious brutalforce that guided his life against his spiritual inclinations, and exactedconformity with its decrees and change in his attitude to his wife, beenpresented to him with such distinctness as that day. He saw clearly that allthe world and his wife expected of him something, but what exactly, he couldnot make out. He felt that this was rousing in his soul a feeling of angerdestructive of his peace of mind and of all the good of his achievement. Hebelieved that for Anna herself it would be better to break off all relationswith Vronsky; but if they all thought this out of the question, he was evenready to allow these relations to be renewed, so long as the children were notdisgraced, and he was not deprived of them nor forced to change his position.Bad as this might be, it was anyway better than a rupture, which would put herin a hopeless and shameful position, and deprive him of everything he caredfor. But he felt helpless; he knew beforehand that everyone was against him,and that he would not be allowed to do what seemed to him now so natural andright, but would be forced to do what was wrong, though it seemed the properthing to them.Chapter 21Before Betsy had time to walk out of the drawing-room, she was met in thedoorway by Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just come from Yeliseev’s, wherea consignment of fresh oysters had been received.“Ah! princess! what a delightful meeting!” he began.“I’ve been to see you.”“A meeting for one minute, for I’m going,” said Betsy,smiling and putting on her glove.“Don’t put on your glove yet, princess; let me kiss your hand.There’s nothing I’m so thankful to the revival of the old fashionsfor as the kissing the hand.” He kissed Betsy’s hand. “Whenshall we see each other?”“You don’t deserve it,” answered Betsy, smiling.“Oh, yes, I deserve a great deal, for I’ve become a most seriousperson. I don’t only manage my own affairs, but other people’stoo,” he said, with a significant expression.“Oh, I’m so glad!” answered Betsy, at once understanding thathe was speaking of Anna. And going back into the drawing-room, they stood in acorner. “He’s killing her,” said Betsy in a whisper full ofmeaning. “It’s impossible, impossible....”“I’m so glad you think so,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, shakinghis head with a serious and sympathetically distressed expression,“that’s what I’ve come to Petersburg for.”“The whole town’s talking of it,” she said. “It’san impossible position. She pines and pines away. He doesn’t understandthat she’s one of those women who can’t trifle with their feelings.One of two things: either let him take her away, act with energy, or give her adivorce. This is stifling her.”“Yes, yes ... just so....” Oblonsky said, sighing.“That’s what I’ve come for. At least not solely for that ...I’ve been made a Kammerherr; of course, one has to say thank you.But the chief thing was having to settle this.”“Well, God help you!” said Betsy.After accompanying Betsy to the outside hall, once more kissing her hand abovethe glove, at the point where the pulse beats, and murmuring to her suchunseemly nonsense that she did not know whether to laugh or be angry, StepanArkadyevitch went to his sister. He found her in tears.Although he happened to be bubbling over with good spirits, Stepan Arkadyevitchimmediately and quite naturally fell into the sympathetic, poetically emotionaltone which harmonized with her mood. He asked her how she was, and how she hadspent the morning.“Very, very miserably. Today and this morning and all past days and daysto come,” she said.“I think you’re giving way to pessimism. You must rouse yourself,you must look life in the face. I know it’s hard, but....”“I have heard it said that women love men even for their vices,”Anna began suddenly, “but I hate him for his virtues. I can’t livewith him. Do you understand? the sight of him has a physical effect on me, itmakes me beside myself. I can’t, I can’t live with him. What am Ito do? I have been unhappy, and used to think one couldn’t be moreunhappy, but the awful state of things I am going through now, I could neverhave conceived. Would you believe it, that knowing he’s a good man, asplendid man, that I’m not worth his little finger, still I hate him. Ihate him for his generosity. And there’s nothing left for mebut....”She would have said death, but Stepan Arkadyevitch would not let her finish.“You are ill and overwrought,” he said; “believe me,you’re exaggerating dreadfully. There’s nothing so terrible init.”And Stepan Arkadyevitch smiled. No one else in Stepan Arkadyevitch’splace, having to do with such despair, would have ventured to smile (the smilewould have seemed brutal); but in his smile there was so much of sweetness andalmost feminine tenderness that his smile did not wound, but softened andsoothed. His gentle, soothing words and smiles were as soothing and softeningas almond oil. And Anna soon felt this.“No, Stiva,” she said, “I’m lost, lost! worse thanlost! I can’t say yet that all is over; on the contrary, I feel thatit’s not over. I’m an overstrained string that must snap. Butit’s not ended yet ... and it will have a fearful end.”“No matter, we must let the string be loosened, little by little.There’s no position from which there is no way of escape.”“I have thought, and thought. Only one....”Again he knew from her terrified eyes that this one way of escape in herthought was death, and he would not let her say it.“Not at all,” he said. “Listen to me. You can’t seeyour own position as I can. Let me tell you candidly my opinion.” Againhe smiled discreetly his almond-oil smile. “I’ll begin from thebeginning. You married a man twenty years older than yourself. You married himwithout love and not knowing what love was. It was a mistake, let’sadmit.”“A fearful mistake!” said Anna.“But I repeat, it’s an accomplished fact. Then you had, let us say,the misfortune to love a man not your husband. That was a misfortune; but that,too, is an accomplished fact. And your husband knew it and forgave it.”He stopped at each sentence, waiting for her to object, but she made no answer.“That’s so. Now the question is: can you go on living with yourhusband? Do you wish it? Does he wish it?”“I know nothing, nothing.”“But you said yourself that you can’t endure him.”“No, I didn’t say so. I deny it. I can’t tell, I don’tknow anything about it.”“Yes, but let....”“You can’t understand. I feel I’m lying head downwards in asort of pit, but I ought not to save myself. And I can’t....”“Never mind, we’ll slip something under and pull you out. Iunderstand you: I understand that you can’t take it on yourself toexpress your wishes, your feelings.”“There’s nothing, nothing I wish ... except for it to be allover.”“But he sees this and knows it. And do you suppose it weighs on him anyless than on you? You’re wretched, he’s wretched, and what good cancome of it? while divorce would solve the difficulty completely.” Withsome effort Stepan Arkadyevitch brought out his central idea, and lookedsignificantly at her.She said nothing, and shook her cropped head in dissent. But from the look inher face, that suddenly brightened into its old beauty, he saw that if she didnot desire this, it was simply because it seemed to her unattainable happiness.“I’m awfully sorry for you! And how happy I should be if I couldarrange things!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling more boldly.“Don’t speak, don’t say a word! God grant only that I mayspeak as I feel. I’m going to him.”Anna looked at him with dreamy, shining eyes, and said nothing.Chapter 22Stepan Arkadyevitch, with the same somewhat solemn expression with which heused to take his presidential chair at his board, walked into AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s room. Alexey Alexandrovitch was walking about his roomwith his hands behind his back, thinking of just what Stepan Arkadyevitch hadbeen discussing with his wife.“I’m not interrupting you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, on thesight of his brother-in-law becoming suddenly aware of a sense of embarrassmentunusual with him. To conceal this embarrassment he took out a cigarette case hehad just bought that opened in a new way, and sniffing the leather, took acigarette out of it.“No. Do you want anything?” Alexey Alexandrovitch asked withouteagerness.“Yes, I wished ... I wanted ... yes, I wanted to talk to you,” saidStepan Arkadyevitch, with surprise aware of an unaccustomed timidity.This feeling was so unexpected and so strange that he did not believe it wasthe voice of conscience telling him that what he was meaning to do was wrong.Stepan Arkadyevitch made an effort and struggled with the timidity that hadcome over him.“I hope you believe in my love for my sister and my sincere affection andrespect for you,” he said, reddening.Alexey Alexandrovitch stood still and said nothing, but his face struck StepanArkadyevitch by its expression of an unresisting sacrifice.“I intended ... I wanted to have a little talk with you about my sisterand your mutual position,” he said, still struggling with an unaccustomedconstraint.Alexey Alexandrovitch smiled mournfully, looked at his brother-in-law, andwithout answering went up to the table, took from it an unfinished letter, andhanded it to his brother-in-law.“I think unceasingly of the same thing. And here is what I had begunwriting, thinking I could say it better by letter, and that my presenceirritates her,” he said, as he gave him the letter.Stepan Arkadyevitch took the letter, looked with incredulous surprise at thelusterless eyes fixed so immovably on him, and began to read.“I see that my presence is irksome to you. Painful as it is to me tobelieve it, I see that it is so, and cannot be otherwise. I don’t blameyou, and God is my witness that on seeing you at the time of your illness Iresolved with my whole heart to forget all that had passed between us and tobegin a new life. I do not regret, and shall never regret, what I have done;but I have desired one thing—your good, the good of your soul—andnow I see I have not attained that. Tell me yourself what will give you truehappiness and peace to your soul. I put myself entirely in your hands, andtrust to your feeling of what’s right.”Stepan Arkadyevitch handed back the letter, and with the same surprisecontinued looking at his brother-in-law, not knowing what to say. This silencewas so awkward for both of them that Stepan Arkadyevitch’s lips begantwitching nervously, while he still gazed without speaking at Karenin’sface.“That’s what I wanted to say to her,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, turning away.“Yes, yes....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, not able to answer for thetears that were choking him.“Yes, yes, I understand you,” he brought out at last.“I want to know what she would like,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch.“I am afraid she does not understand her own position. She is not ajudge,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, recovering himself. “She iscrushed, simply crushed by your generosity. If she were to read this letter,she would be incapable of saying anything, she would only hang her head lowerthan ever.”“Yes, but what’s to be done in that case? how explain, how find outher wishes?”“If you will allow me to give my opinion, I think that it lies with youto point out directly the steps you consider necessary to end theposition.”“So you consider it must be ended?” Alexey Alexandrovitchinterrupted him. “But how?” he added, with a gesture of his handsbefore his eyes not usual with him. “I see no possible way out ofit.”“There is some way of getting out of every position,” said StepanArkadyevitch, standing up and becoming more cheerful. “There was a timewhen you thought of breaking off.... If you are convinced now that you cannotmake each other happy....”“Happiness may be variously understood. But suppose that I agree toeverything, that I want nothing: what way is there of getting out of ourposition?”“If you care to know my opinion,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with thesame smile of softening, almond-oil tenderness with which he had been talkingto Anna. His kindly smile was so winning that Alexey Alexandrovitch, feelinghis own weakness and unconsciously swayed by it, was ready to believe whatStepan Arkadyevitch was saying.“She will never speak out about it. But one thing is possible, one thingshe might desire,” he went on, “that is the cessation of yourrelations and all memories associated with them. To my thinking, in yourposition what’s essential is the formation of a new attitude to oneanother. And that can only rest on a basis of freedom on both sides.”“Divorce,” Alexey Alexandrovitch interrupted, in a tone ofaversion.“Yes, I imagine that divorce—yes, divorce,” StepanArkadyevitch repeated, reddening. “That is from every point of view themost rational course for married people who find themselves in the position youare in. What can be done if married people find that life is impossible forthem together? That may always happen.”Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.“There’s only one point to be considered: is either of the partiesdesirous of forming new ties? If not, it is very simple,” said StepanArkadyevitch, feeling more and more free from constraint.Alexey Alexandrovitch, scowling with emotion, muttered something to himself,and made no answer. All that seemed so simple to Stepan Arkadyevitch, AlexeyAlexandrovitch had thought over thousands of times. And, so far from beingsimple, it all seemed to him utterly impossible. Divorce, the details of whichhe knew by this time, seemed to him now out of the question, because the senseof his own dignity and respect for religion forbade his taking upon himself afictitious charge of adultery, and still more suffering his wife, pardoned andbeloved by him, to be caught in the fact and put to public shame. Divorceappeared to him impossible also on other still more weighty grounds.What would become of his son in case of a divorce? To leave him with his motherwas out of the question. The divorced mother would have her own illegitimatefamily, in which his position as a stepson and his education would not be good.Keep him with him? He knew that would be an act of vengeance on his part, andthat he did not want. But apart from this, what more than all made divorce seemimpossible to Alexey Alexandrovitch was, that by consenting to a divorce hewould be completely ruining Anna. The saying of Darya Alexandrovna at Moscow,that in deciding on a divorce he was thinking of himself, and not consideringthat by this he would be ruining her irrevocably, had sunk into his heart. Andconnecting this saying with his forgiveness of her, with his devotion to thechildren, he understood it now in his own way. To consent to a divorce, to giveher her freedom, meant in his thoughts to take from himself the last tie thatbound him to life—the children whom he loved; and to take from her thelast prop that stayed her on the path of right, to thrust her down to her ruin.If she were divorced, he knew she would join her life to Vronsky’s, andtheir tie would be an illegitimate and criminal one, since a wife, by theinterpretation of the ecclesiastical law, could not marry while her husband wasliving. “She will join him, and in a year or two he will throw her over,or she will form a new tie,” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch. “And I,by agreeing to an unlawful divorce, shall be to blame for her ruin.” Hehad thought it all over hundreds of times, and was convinced that a divorce wasnot at all simple, as Stepan Arkadyevitch had said, but was utterly impossible.He did not believe a single word Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him; to every wordhe had a thousand objections to make, but he listened to him, feeling that hiswords were the expression of that mighty brutal force which controlled his lifeand to which he would have to submit.“The only question is on what terms you agree to give her a divorce. Shedoes not want anything, does not dare ask you for anything, she leaves it allto your generosity.”“My God, my God! what for?” thought Alexey Alexandrovitch,remembering the details of divorce proceedings in which the husband took theblame on himself, and with just the same gesture with which Vronsky had donethe same, he hid his face for shame in his hands.“You are distressed, I understand that. But if you think itover....”“Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the otheralso; and if any man take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also,”thought Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Yes, yes!” he cried in a shrill voice. “I will take thedisgrace on myself, I will give up even my son, but ... but wouldn’t itbe better to let it alone? Still you may do as you like....”And turning away so that his brother-in-law could not see him, he sat down on achair at the window. There was bitterness, there was shame in his heart, butwith bitterness and shame he felt joy and emotion at the height of his ownmeekness.Stepan Arkadyevitch was touched. He was silent for a space.“Alexey Alexandrovitch, believe me, she appreciates yourgenerosity,” he said. “But it seems it was the will of God,”he added, and as he said it felt how foolish a remark it was, and withdifficulty repressed a smile at his own foolishness.Alexey Alexandrovitch would have made some reply, but tears stopped him.“This is an unhappy fatality, and one must accept it as such. I acceptthe calamity as an accomplished fact, and am doing my best to help both her andyou,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.When he went out of his brother-in-law’s room he was touched, but thatdid not prevent him from being glad he had successfully brought the matter to aconclusion, for he felt certain Alexey Alexandrovitch would not go back on hiswords. To this satisfaction was added the fact that an idea had just struck himfor a riddle turning on his successful achievement, that when the affair wasover he would ask his wife and most intimate friends. He put this riddle intotwo or three different ways. “But I’ll work it out better thanthat,” he said to himself with a smile.Chapter 23Vronsky’s wound had been a dangerous one, though it did not touch theheart, and for several days he had lain between life and death. The first timehe was able to speak, Varya, his brother’s wife, was alone in the room.“Varya,” he said, looking sternly at her, “I shot myself byaccident. And please never speak of it, and tell everyone so. Or elseit’s too ridiculous.”Without answering his words, Varya bent over him, and with a delighted smilegazed into his face. His eyes were clear, not feverish; but their expressionwas stern.“Thank God!” she said. “You’re not in pain?”“A little here.” He pointed to his breast.“Then let me change your bandages.”In silence, stiffening his broad jaws, he looked at her while she bandaged himup. When she had finished he said:“I’m not delirious. Please manage that there may be no talk of myhaving shot myself on purpose.”“No one does say so. Only I hope you won’t shoot yourself byaccident any more,” she said, with a questioning smile.“Of course I won’t, but it would have been better....”And he smiled gloomily.In spite of these words and this smile, which so frightened Varya, when theinflammation was over and he began to recover, he felt that he was completelyfree from one part of his misery. By his action he had, as it were, washed awaythe shame and humiliation he had felt before. He could now think calmly ofAlexey Alexandrovitch. He recognized all his magnanimity, but he did not nowfeel himself humiliated by it. Besides, he got back again into the beaten trackof his life. He saw the possibility of looking men in the face again withoutshame, and he could live in accordance with his own habits. One thing he couldnot pluck out of his heart, though he never ceased struggling with it, was theregret, amounting to despair, that he had lost her forever. That now, havingexpiated his sin against the husband, he was bound to renounce her, and neverin future to stand between her with her repentance and her husband, he hadfirmly decided in his heart; but he could not tear out of his heart his regretat the loss of her love, he could not erase from his memory those moments ofhappiness that he had so little prized at the time, and that haunted him in alltheir charm.Serpuhovskoy had planned his appointment at Tashkend, and Vronsky agreed to theproposition without the slightest hesitation. But the nearer the time ofdeparture came, the bitterer was the sacrifice he was making to what he thoughthis duty.His wound had healed, and he was driving about making preparations for hisdeparture for Tashkend.“To see her once and then to bury myself, to die,” he thought, andas he was paying farewell visits, he uttered this thought to Betsy. Chargedwith this commission, Betsy had gone to Anna, and brought him back a negativereply.“So much the better,” thought Vronsky, when he received the news.“It was a weakness, which would have shattered what strength I haveleft.”Next day Betsy herself came to him in the morning, and announced that she hadheard through Oblonsky as a positive fact that Alexey Alexandrovitch had agreedto a divorce, and that therefore Vronsky could see Anna.Without even troubling himself to see Betsy out of his flat, forgetting all hisresolutions, without asking when he could see her, where her husband was,Vronsky drove straight to the Karenins’. He ran up the stairs seeing noone and nothing, and with a rapid step, almost breaking into a run, he wentinto her room. And without considering, without noticing whether there wasanyone in the room or not, he flung his arms round her, and began to cover herface, her hands, her neck with kisses.Anna had been preparing herself for this meeting, had thought what she wouldsay to him, but she did not succeed in saying anything of it; his passionmastered her. She tried to calm him, to calm herself, but it was too late. Hisfeeling infected her. Her lips trembled so that for a long while she could saynothing.“Yes, you have conquered me, and I am yours,” she said at last,pressing his hands to her bosom.“So it had to be,” he said. “So long as we live, it must beso. I know it now.”“That’s true,” she said, getting whiter and whiter, andembracing his head. “Still there is something terrible in it after allthat has happened.”“It will all pass, it will all pass; we shall be so happy. Our love, ifit could be stronger, will be strengthened by there being something terrible init,” he said, lifting his head and parting his strong teeth in a smile.And she could not but respond with a smile—not to his words, but to thelove in his eyes. She took his hand and stroked her chilled cheeks and croppedhead with it.“I don’t know you with this short hair. You’ve grown sopretty. A boy. But how pale you are!”“Yes, I’m very weak,” she said, smiling. And her lips begantrembling again.“We’ll go to Italy; you will get strong,” he said.“Can it be possible we could be like husband and wife, alone, your familywith you?” she said, looking close into his eyes.“It only seems strange to me that it can ever have been otherwise.”“Stiva says that he has agreed to everything, but I can’taccept his generosity,” she said, looking dreamily pastVronsky’s face. “I don’t want a divorce; it’s all thesame to me now. Only I don’t know what he will decide aboutSeryozha.”He could not conceive how at this moment of their meeting she could rememberand think of her son, of divorce. What did it all matter?“Don’t speak of that, don’t think of it,” he said,turning her hand in his, and trying to draw her attention to him; but still shedid not look at him.“Oh, why didn’t I die! it would have been better,” she said,and silent tears flowed down both her cheeks; but she tried to smile, so as notto wound him.To decline the flattering and dangerous appointment at Tashkend would havebeen, Vronsky had till then considered, disgraceful and impossible. But now,without an instant’s consideration, he declined it, and observingdissatisfaction in the most exalted quarters at this step, he immediatelyretired from the army.A month later Alexey Alexandrovitch was left alone with his son in his house atPetersburg, while Anna and Vronsky had gone abroad, not having obtained adivorce, but having absolutely declined all idea of one.PART FIVEChapter 1Princess Shtcherbatskaya considered that it was out of the question for thewedding to take place before Lent, just five weeks off, since not half thetrousseau could possibly be ready by that time. But she could not but agreewith Levin that to fix it for after Lent would be putting it off too late, asan old aunt of Prince Shtcherbatsky’s was seriously ill and might die,and then the mourning would delay the wedding still longer. And therefore,deciding to divide the trousseau into two parts—a larger and smallertrousseau—the princess consented to have the wedding before Lent. Shedetermined that she would get the smaller part of the trousseau all ready now,and the larger part should be made later, and she was much vexed with Levinbecause he was incapable of giving her a serious answer to the question whetherhe agreed to this arrangement or not. The arrangement was the more suitable as,immediately after the wedding, the young people were to go to the country,where the more important part of the trousseau would not be wanted.Levin still continued in the same delirious condition in which it seemed to himthat he and his happiness constituted the chief and sole aim of all existence,and that he need not now think or care about anything, that everything wasbeing done and would be done for him by others. He had not even plans and aimsfor the future, he left its arrangement to others, knowing that everythingwould be delightful. His brother Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, andthe princess guided him in doing what he had to do. All he did was to agreeentirely with everything suggested to him. His brother raised money for him,the princess advised him to leave Moscow after the wedding. Stepan Arkadyevitchadvised him to go abroad. He agreed to everything. “Do what you choose,if it amuses you. I’m happy, and my happiness can be no greater and noless for anything you do,” he thought. When he told Kitty of StepanArkadyevitch’s advice that they should go abroad, he was much surprisedthat she did not agree to this, and had some definite requirements of her ownin regard to their future. She knew Levin had work he loved in the country. Shedid not, as he saw, understand this work, she did not even care to understandit. But that did not prevent her from regarding it as a matter of greatimportance. And then she knew their home would be in the country, and shewanted to go, not abroad where she was not going to live, but to the placewhere their home would be. This definitely expressed purpose astonished Levin.But since he did not care either way, he immediately asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,as though it were his duty, to go down to the country and to arrange everythingthere to the best of his ability with the taste of which he had so much.“But I say,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to him one day after he hadcome back from the country, where he had got everything ready for the youngpeople’s arrival, “have you a certificate of having been atconfession?”“No. But what of it?”“You can’t be married without it.”“Aïe, aïe, aïe!” cried Levin. “Why, I believeit’s nine years since I’ve taken the sacrament! I never thought ofit.”“You’re a pretty fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch laughing,“and you call me a Nihilist! But this won’t do, you know. You musttake the sacrament.”“When? There are four days left now.”Stepan Arkadyevitch arranged this also, and Levin had to go to confession. ToLevin, as to any unbeliever who respects the beliefs of others, it wasexceedingly disagreeable to be present at and take part in church ceremonies.At this moment, in his present softened state of feeling, sensitive toeverything, this inevitable act of hypocrisy was not merely painful to Levin,it seemed to him utterly impossible. Now, in the heyday of his highest glory,his fullest flower, he would have to be a liar or a scoffer. He felt incapableof being either. But though he repeatedly plied Stepan Arkadyevitch withquestions as to the possibility of obtaining a certificate without actuallycommunicating, Stepan Arkadyevitch maintained that it was out of the question.“Besides, what is it to you—two days? And he’s an awfullynice clever old fellow. He’ll pull the tooth out for you so gently, youwon’t notice it.”Standing at the first litany, Levin attempted to revive in himself his youthfulrecollections of the intense religious emotion he had passed through betweenthe ages of sixteen and seventeen.But he was at once convinced that it was utterly impossible to him. Heattempted to look at it all as an empty custom, having no sort of meaning, likethe custom of paying calls. But he felt that he could not do that either. Levinfound himself, like the majority of his contemporaries, in the vaguest positionin regard to religion. Believe he could not, and at the same time he had nofirm conviction that it was all wrong. And consequently, not being able tobelieve in the significance of what he was doing nor to regard it withindifference as an empty formality, during the whole period of preparing forthe sacrament he was conscious of a feeling of discomfort and shame at doingwhat he did not himself understand, and what, as an inner voice told him, wastherefore false and wrong.During the service he would first listen to the prayers, trying to attach somemeaning to them not discordant with his own views; then feeling that he couldnot understand and must condemn them, he tried not to listen to them, but toattend to the thoughts, observations, and memories which floated through hisbrain with extreme vividness during this idle time of standing in church.He had stood through the litany, the evening service and the midnight service,and the next day he got up earlier than usual, and without having tea went ateight o’clock in the morning to the church for the morning service andthe confession.There was no one in the church but a beggar soldier, two old women, and thechurch officials. A young deacon, whose long back showed in two distinct halvesthrough his thin undercassock, met him, and at once going to a little table atthe wall read the exhortation. During the reading, especially at the frequentand rapid repetition of the same words, “Lord, have mercy on us!”which resounded with an echo, Levin felt that thought was shut and sealed up,and that it must not be touched or stirred now or confusion would be theresult; and so standing behind the deacon he went on thinking of his ownaffairs, neither listening nor examining what was said. “It’swonderful what expression there is in her hand,” he thought, rememberinghow they had been sitting the day before at a corner table. They had nothing totalk about, as was almost always the case at this time, and laying her hand onthe table she kept opening and shutting it, and laughed herself as she watchedher action. He remembered how he had kissed it and then had examined the lineson the pink palm. “Have mercy on us again!” thought Levin, crossinghimself, bowing, and looking at the supple spring of the deacon’s backbowing before him. “She took my hand then and examined the lines.‘You’ve got a splendid hand,’ she said.” And he lookedat his own hand and the short hand of the deacon. “Yes, now it will soonbe over,” he thought. “No, it seems to be beginning again,”he thought, listening to the prayers. “No, it’s just ending: therehe is bowing down to the ground. That’s always at the end.”The deacon’s hand in a plush cuff accepted a three-rouble noteunobtrusively, and the deacon said he would put it down in the register, andhis new boots creaking jauntily over the flagstones of the empty church, hewent to the altar. A moment later he peeped out thence and beckoned to Levin.Thought, till then locked up, began to stir in Levin’s head, but he madehaste to drive it away. “It will come right somehow,” he thought,and went towards the altar-rails. He went up the steps, and turning to theright saw the priest. The priest, a little old man with a scanty grizzled beardand weary, good-natured eyes, was standing at the altar-rails, turning over thepages of a missal. With a slight bow to Levin he began immediately readingprayers in the official voice. When he had finished them he bowed down to theground and turned, facing Levin.“Christ is present here unseen, receiving your confession,” hesaid, pointing to the crucifix. “Do you believe in all the doctrines ofthe Holy Apostolic Church?” the priest went on, turning his eyes awayfrom Levin’s face and folding his hands under his stole.“I have doubted, I doubt everything,” said Levin in a voice thatjarred on himself, and he ceased speaking.The priest waited a few seconds to see if he would not say more, and closinghis eyes he said quickly, with a broad, Vladimirsky accent:“Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind, but we must pray that Godin His mercy will strengthen us. What are your special sins?” he added,without the slightest interval, as though anxious not to waste time.“My chief sin is doubt. I have doubts of everything, and for the mostpart I am in doubt.”“Doubt is natural to the weakness of mankind,” the priest repeatedthe same words. “What do you doubt about principally?”“I doubt of everything. I sometimes even have doubts of the existence ofGod,” Levin could not help saying, and he was horrified at theimpropriety of what he was saying. But Levin’s words did not, it seemed,make much impression on the priest.“What sort of doubt can there be of the existence of God?” he saidhurriedly, with a just perceptible smile.Levin did not speak.“What doubt can you have of the Creator when you behold Hiscreation?” the priest went on in the rapid customary jargon. “Whohas decked the heavenly firmament with its lights? Who has clothed the earth inits beauty? How explain it without the Creator?” he said, lookinginquiringly at Levin.Levin felt that it would be improper to enter upon a metaphysical discussionwith the priest, and so he said in reply merely what was a direct answer to thequestion.“I don’t know,” he said.“You don’t know! Then how can you doubt that God createdall?” the priest said, with good-humored perplexity.“I don’t understand it at all,” said Levin, blushing, andfeeling that his words were stupid, and that they could not be anything butstupid in such a position.“Pray to God and beseech Him. Even the holy fathers had doubts, andprayed to God to strengthen their faith. The devil has great power, and we mustresist him. Pray to God, beseech Him. Pray to God,” he repeatedhurriedly.The priest paused for some time, as though meditating.“You’re about, I hear, to marry the daughter of my parishioner andson in the spirit, Prince Shtcherbatsky?” he resumed, with a smile.“An excellent young lady.”“Yes,” answered Levin, blushing for the priest. “What does hewant to ask me about this at confession for?” he thought.And, as though answering his thought, the priest said to him:“You are about to enter into holy matrimony, and God may bless you withoffspring. Well, what sort of bringing-up can you give your babes if you do notovercome the temptation of the devil, enticing you to infidelity?” hesaid, with gentle reproachfulness. “If you love your child as a goodfather, you will not desire only wealth, luxury, honor for your infant; youwill be anxious for his salvation, his spiritual enlightenment with the lightof truth. Eh? What answer will you make him when the innocent babe asks you:‘Papa! who made all that enchants me in this world—the earth, thewaters, the sun, the flowers, the grass?’ Can you say to him: ‘Idon’t know’? You cannot but know, since the Lord God in Hisinfinite mercy has revealed it to us. Or your child will ask you: ‘Whatawaits me in the life beyond the tomb?’ What will you say to him when youknow nothing? How will you answer him? Will you leave him to the allurements ofthe world and the devil? That’s not right,” he said, and hestopped, putting his head on one side and looking at Levin with his kindly,gentle eyes.Levin made no answer this time, not because he did not want to enter upon adiscussion with the priest, but because, so far, no one had ever asked him suchquestions, and when his babes did ask him those questions, it would be timeenough to think about answering them.“You are entering upon a time of life,” pursued the priest,“when you must choose your path and keep to it. Pray to God that He mayin His mercy aid you and have mercy on you!” he concluded. “OurLord and God, Jesus Christ, in the abundance and riches of His loving-kindness,forgives this child....” and, finishing the prayer of absolution, thepriest blessed him and dismissed him.On getting home that day, Levin had a delightful sense of relief at the awkwardposition being over and having been got through without his having to tell alie. Apart from this, there remained a vague memory that what the kind, niceold fellow had said had not been at all so stupid as he had fancied at first,and that there was something in it that must be cleared up.“Of course, not now,” thought Levin, “but some day lateron.” Levin felt more than ever now that there was something not clear andnot clean in his soul, and that, in regard to religion, he was in the sameposition which he perceived so clearly and disliked in others, and for which heblamed his friend Sviazhsky.Levin spent that evening with his betrothed at Dolly’s, and was in veryhigh spirits. To explain to Stepan Arkadyevitch the state of excitement inwhich he found himself, he said that he was happy like a dog being trained tojump through a hoop, who, having at last caught the idea, and done what wasrequired of him, whines and wags its tail, and jumps up to the table and thewindows in its delight.Chapter 2On the day of the wedding, according to the Russian custom (the princess andDarya Alexandrovna insisted on strictly keeping all the customs), Levin did notsee his betrothed, and dined at his hotel with three bachelor friends, casuallybrought together at his rooms. These were Sergey Ivanovitch, Katavasov, auniversity friend, now professor of natural science, whom Levin had met in thestreet and insisted on taking home with him, and Tchirikov, his best man, aMoscow conciliation-board judge, Levin’s companion in his bear-hunts. Thedinner was a very merry one: Sergey Ivanovitch was in his happiest mood, andwas much amused by Katavasov’s originality. Katavasov, feeling hisoriginality was appreciated and understood, made the most of it. Tchirikovalways gave a lively and good-humored support to conversation of any sort.“See, now,” said Katavasov, drawling his words from a habitacquired in the lecture-room, “what a capable fellow was our friendKonstantin Dmitrievitch. I’m not speaking of present company, forhe’s absent. At the time he left the university he was fond of science,took an interest in humanity; now one-half of his abilities is devoted todeceiving himself, and the other to justifying the deceit.”“A more determined enemy of matrimony than you I never saw,” saidSergey Ivanovitch.“Oh, no, I’m not an enemy of matrimony. I’m in favor ofdivision of labor. People who can do nothing else ought to rear people whilethe rest work for their happiness and enlightenment. That’s how I look atit. To muddle up two trades is the error of the amateur; I’m not one oftheir number.”“How happy I shall be when I hear that you’re in love!” saidLevin. “Please invite me to the wedding.”“I’m in love now.”“Yes, with a cuttlefish! You know,” Levin turned to his brother,“Mihail Semyonovitch is writing a work on the digestive organs ofthe....”“Now, make a muddle of it! It doesn’t matter what about. And thefact is, I certainly do love cuttlefish.”“But that’s no hindrance to your loving your wife.”“The cuttlefish is no hindrance. The wife is the hindrance.”“Why so?”“Oh, you’ll see! You care about farming, hunting,—well,you’d better look out!”“Arhip was here today; he said there were a lot of elks in Prudno, andtwo bears,” said Tchirikov.“Well, you must go and get them without me.”“Ah, that’s the truth,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “Andyou may say good-bye to bear-hunting for the future—your wife won’tallow it!”Levin smiled. The picture of his wife not letting him go was so pleasant thathe was ready to renounce the delights of looking upon bears forever.“Still, it’s a pity they should get those two bears without you. Doyou remember last time at Hapilovo? That was a delightful hunt!” saidTchirikov.Levin had not the heart to disillusion him of the notion that there could besomething delightful apart from her, and so said nothing.“There’s some sense in this custom of saying good-bye to bachelorlife,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “However happy you may be, you mustregret your freedom.”“And confess there is a feeling that you want to jump out of the window,like Gogol’s bridegroom?”“Of course there is, but it isn’t confessed,” said Katavasov,and he broke into loud laughter.“Oh, well, the window’s open. Let’s start off this instant toTver! There’s a big she-bear; one can go right up to the lair. Seriously,let’s go by the five o’clock! And here let them do what theylike,” said Tchirikov, smiling.“Well, now, on my honor,” said Levin, smiling, “I can’tfind in my heart that feeling of regret for my freedom.”“Yes, there’s such a chaos in your heart just now that youcan’t find anything there,” said Katavasov. “Wait a bit, whenyou set it to rights a little, you’ll find it!”“No; if so, I should have felt a little, apart from my feeling” (hecould not say love before them) “and happiness, a certain regret atlosing my freedom.... On the contrary, I am glad at the very loss of myfreedom.”“Awful! It’s a hopeless case!” said Katavasov. “Well,let’s drink to his recovery, or wish that a hundredth part of his dreamsmay be realized—and that would be happiness such as never has been seenon earth!”Soon after dinner the guests went away to be in time to be dressed for thewedding.When he was left alone, and recalled the conversation of these bachelorfriends, Levin asked himself: had he in his heart that regret for his freedomof which they had spoken? He smiled at the question. “Freedom! What isfreedom for? Happiness is only in loving and wishing her wishes, thinking herthoughts, that is to say, not freedom at all—that’shappiness!”“But do I know her ideas, her wishes, her feelings?” some voicesuddenly whispered to him. The smile died away from his face, and he grewthoughtful. And suddenly a strange feeling came upon him. There came over him adread and doubt—doubt of everything.“What if she does not love me? What if she’s marrying me simply tobe married? What if she doesn’t see herself what she’sdoing?” he asked himself. “She may come to her senses, and onlywhen she is being married realize that she does not and cannot love me.”And strange, most evil thoughts of her began to come to him. He was jealous ofVronsky, as he had been a year ago, as though the evening he had seen her withVronsky had been yesterday. He suspected she had not told him everything.He jumped up quickly. “No, this can’t go on!” he said tohimself in despair. “I’ll go to her; I’ll ask her; I’llsay for the last time: we are free, and hadn’t we better stay so?Anything’s better than endless misery, disgrace, unfaithfulness!”With despair in his heart and bitter anger against all men, against himself,against her, he went out of the hotel and drove to her house.He found her in one of the back rooms. She was sitting on a chest and makingsome arrangements with her maid, sorting over heaps of dresses of differentcolors, spread on the backs of chairs and on the floor.“Ah!” she cried, seeing him, and beaming with delight.“Kostya! Konstantin Dmitrievitch!” (These latter days she usedthese names almost alternately.) “I didn’t expect you! I’mgoing through my wardrobe to see what’s for whom....”“Oh! that’s very nice!” he said gloomily, looking at themaid.“You can go, Dunyasha, I’ll call you presently,” said Kitty.“Kostya, what’s the matter?” she asked, definitely adoptingthis familiar name as soon as the maid had gone out. She noticed his strangeface, agitated and gloomy, and a panic came over her.“Kitty! I’m in torture. I can’t suffer alone,” he saidwith despair in his voice, standing before her and looking imploringly into hereyes. He saw already from her loving, truthful face, that nothing could come ofwhat he had meant to say, but yet he wanted her to reassure him herself.“I’ve come to say that there’s still time. This can all bestopped and set right.”“What? I don’t understand. What is the matter?”“What I have said a thousand times over, and can’t help thinking... that I’m not worthy of you. You couldn’t consent to marry me.Think a little. You’ve made a mistake. Think it over thoroughly. Youcan’t love me.... If ... better say so,” he said, not looking ather. “I shall be wretched. Let people say what they like;anything’s better than misery.... Far better now while there’sstill time....”“I don’t understand,” she answered, panic-stricken;“you mean you want to give it up ... don’t want it?”“Yes, if you don’t love me.”“You’re out of your mind!” she cried, turning crimson withvexation. But his face was so piteous, that she restrained her vexation, andflinging some clothes off an armchair, she sat down beside him. “Whatare you thinking? tell me all.”“I am thinking you can’t love me. What can you love me for?”“My God! what can I do?...” she said, and burst into tears.“Oh! what have I done?” he cried, and kneeling before her, he fellto kissing her hands.When the princess came into the room five minutes later, she found themcompletely reconciled. Kitty had not simply assured him that she loved him, buthad gone so far—in answer to his question, what she loved himfor—as to explain what for. She told him that she loved him because sheunderstood him completely, because she knew what he would like, and becauseeverything he liked was good. And this seemed to him perfectly clear. When theprincess came to them, they were sitting side by side on the chest, sorting thedresses and disputing over Kitty’s wanting to give Dunyasha the browndress she had been wearing when Levin proposed to her, while he insisted thatthat dress must never be given away, but Dunyasha must have the blue one.“How is it you don’t see? She’s a brunette, and itwon’t suit her.... I’ve worked it all out.”Hearing why he had come, the princess was half humorously, half seriously angrywith him, and sent him home to dress and not to hinder Kitty’shair-dressing, as Charles the hair-dresser was just coming.“As it is, she’s been eating nothing lately and is losing herlooks, and then you must come and upset her with your nonsense,” she saidto him. “Get along with you, my dear!”Levin, guilty and shamefaced, but pacified, went back to his hotel. Hisbrother, Darya Alexandrovna, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, all in full dress, werewaiting for him to bless him with the holy picture. There was no time to lose.Darya Alexandrovna had to drive home again to fetch her curled and pomaded son,who was to carry the holy pictures after the bride. Then a carriage had to besent for the best man, and another that would take Sergey Ivanovitch away wouldhave to be sent back.... Altogether there were a great many most complicatedmatters to be considered and arranged. One thing was unmistakable, that theremust be no delay, as it was already half-past six.Nothing special happened at the ceremony of benediction with the holy picture.Stepan Arkadyevitch stood in a comically solemn pose beside his wife, took theholy picture, and telling Levin to bow down to the ground, he blessed him withhis kindly, ironical smile, and kissed him three times; Darya Alexandrovna didthe same, and immediately was in a hurry to get off, and again plunged into theintricate question of the destinations of the various carriages.“Come, I’ll tell you how we’ll manage: you drive in ourcarriage to fetch him, and Sergey Ivanovitch, if he’ll be so good, willdrive there and then send his carriage.”“Of course; I shall be delighted.”“We’ll come on directly with him. Are your things sent off?”said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Yes,” answered Levin, and he told Kouzma to put out his clothesfor him to dress.Chapter 3A crowd of people, principally women, was thronging round the church lighted upfor the wedding. Those who had not succeeded in getting into the main entrancewere crowding about the windows, pushing, wrangling, and peeping through thegratings.More than twenty carriages had already been drawn up in ranks along the streetby the police. A police officer, regardless of the frost, stood at theentrance, gorgeous in his uniform. More carriages were continually driving up,and ladies wearing flowers and carrying their trains, and men taking off theirhelmets or black hats kept walking into the church. Inside the church bothlusters were already lighted, and all the candles before the holy pictures. Thegilt on the red ground of the holy picture-stand, and the gilt relief on thepictures, and the silver of the lusters and candlesticks, and the stones of thefloor, and the rugs, and the banners above in the choir, and the steps of thealtar, and the old blackened books, and the cassocks and surplices—allwere flooded with light. On the right side of the warm church, in the crowd offrock coats and white ties, uniforms and broadcloth, velvet, satin, hair andflowers, bare shoulders and arms and long gloves, there was discreet but livelyconversation that echoed strangely in the high cupola. Every time there washeard the creak of the opened door the conversation in the crowd died away, andeverybody looked round expecting to see the bride and bridegroom come in. Butthe door had opened more than ten times, and each time it was either a belatedguest or guests, who joined the circle of the invited on the right, or aspectator, who had eluded or softened the police officer, and went to join thecrowd of outsiders on the left. Both the guests and the outside public had bynow passed through all the phases of anticipation.At first they imagined that the bride and bridegroom would arrive immediately,and attached no importance at all to their being late. Then they began to lookmore and more often towards the door, and to talk of whether anything couldhave happened. Then the long delay began to be positively discomforting, andrelations and guests tried to look as if they were not thinking of thebridegroom but were engrossed in conversation.The head deacon, as though to remind them of the value of his time, coughedimpatiently, making the window-panes quiver in their frames. In the choir thebored choristers could be heard trying their voices and blowing their noses.The priest was continually sending first the beadle and then the deacon to findout whether the bridegroom had not come, more and more often he went himself,in a lilac vestment and an embroidered sash, to the side door, expecting to seethe bridegroom. At last one of the ladies, glancing at her watch, said,“It really is strange, though!” and all the guests became uneasyand began loudly expressing their wonder and dissatisfaction. One of thebridegroom’s best men went to find out what had happened. Kitty meanwhilehad long ago been quite ready, and in her white dress and long veil and wreathof orange blossoms she was standing in the drawing-room of theShtcherbatskys’ house with her sister, Madame Lvova, who was herbridal-mother. She was looking out of the window, and had been for over half anhour anxiously expecting to hear from the best man that her bridegroom was atthe church.Levin meanwhile, in his trousers, but without his coat and waistcoat, waswalking to and fro in his room at the hotel, continually putting his head outof the door and looking up and down the corridor. But in the corridor there wasno sign of the person he was looking for and he came back in despair, andfrantically waving his hands addressed Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was smokingserenely.“Was ever a man in such a fearful fool’s position?” he said.“Yes, it is stupid,” Stepan Arkadyevitch assented, smilingsoothingly. “But don’t worry, it’ll be broughtdirectly.”“No, what is to be done!” said Levin, with smothered fury.“And these fools of open waistcoats! Out of the question!” he said,looking at the crumpled front of his shirt. “And what if the things havebeen taken on to the railway station!” he roared in desperation.“Then you must put on mine.”“I ought to have done so long ago, if at all.”“It’s not nice to look ridiculous.... Wait a bit! it will comeround.”The point was that when Levin asked for his evening suit, Kouzma, his oldservant, had brought him the coat, waistcoat, and everything that was wanted.“But the shirt!” cried Levin.“You’ve got a shirt on,” Kouzma answered, with a placidsmile.Kouzma had not thought of leaving out a clean shirt, and on receivinginstructions to pack up everything and send it round to theShtcherbatskys’ house, from which the young people were to set out thesame evening, he had done so, packing everything but the dress suit. The shirtworn since the morning was crumpled and out of the question with thefashionable open waistcoat. It was a long way to send to theShtcherbatskys’. They sent out to buy a shirt. The servant came back;everything was shut up—it was Sunday. They sent to StepanArkadyevitch’s and brought a shirt—it was impossibly wide andshort. They sent finally to the Shtcherbatskys’ to unpack the things. Thebridegroom was expected at the church while he was pacing up and down his roomlike a wild beast in a cage, peeping out into the corridor, and with horror anddespair recalling what absurd things he had said to Kitty and what she might bethinking now.At last the guilty Kouzma flew panting into the room with the shirt.“Only just in time. They were just lifting it into the van,” saidKouzma.Three minutes later Levin ran full speed into the corridor, not looking at hiswatch for fear of aggravating his sufferings.“You won’t help matters like this,” said Stepan Arkadyevitchwith a smile, hurrying with more deliberation after him. “It will comeround, it will come round ... I tell you.”Chapter 4“They’ve come!” “Here he is!” “Whichone?” “Rather young, eh?” “Why, my dear soul, she looksmore dead than alive!” were the comments in the crowd, when Levin,meeting his bride in the entrance, walked with her into the church.Stepan Arkadyevitch told his wife the cause of the delay, and the guests werewhispering it with smiles to one another. Levin saw nothing and no one; he didnot take his eyes off his bride.Everyone said she had lost her looks dreadfully of late, and was not nearly sopretty on her wedding day as usual; but Levin did not think so. He looked ather hair done up high, with the long white veil and white flowers and the high,stand-up, scalloped collar, that in such a maidenly fashion hid her long neckat the sides and only showed it in front, her strikingly slender figure, and itseemed to him that she looked better than ever—not because these flowers,this veil, this gown from Paris added anything to her beauty; but because, inspite of the elaborate sumptuousness of her attire, the expression of her sweetface, of her eyes, of her lips was still her own characteristic expression ofguileless truthfulness.“I was beginning to think you meant to run away,” she said, andsmiled to him.“It’s so stupid, what happened to me, I’m ashamed to speak ofit!” he said, reddening, and he was obliged to turn to Sergey Ivanovitch,who came up to him.“This is a pretty story of yours about the shirt!” said SergeyIvanovitch, shaking his head and smiling.“Yes, yes!” answered Levin, without an idea of what they weretalking about.“Now, Kostya, you have to decide,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with anair of mock dismay, “a weighty question. You are at this moment just inthe humor to appreciate all its gravity. They ask me, are they to light thecandles that have been lighted before or candles that have never been lighted?It’s a matter of ten roubles,” he added, relaxing his lips into asmile. “I have decided, but I was afraid you might not agree.”Levin saw it was a joke, but he could not smile.“Well, how’s it to be then?—unlighted or lighted candles?that’s the question.”“Yes, yes, unlighted.”“Oh, I’m very glad. The question’s decided!” saidStepan Arkadyevitch, smiling. “How silly men are, though, in thisposition,” he said to Tchirikov, when Levin, after looking absently athim, had moved back to his bride.“Kitty, mind you’re the first to step on the carpet,” saidCountess Nordston, coming up. “You’re a nice person!” shesaid to Levin.“Aren’t you frightened, eh?” said Marya Dmitrievna, an oldaunt.“Are you cold? You’re pale. Stop a minute, stoop down,” saidKitty’s sister, Madame Lvova, and with her plump, handsome arms shesmilingly set straight the flowers on her head.Dolly came up, tried to say something, but could not speak, cried, and thenlaughed unnaturally.Kitty looked at all of them with the same absent eyes as Levin.Meanwhile the officiating clergy had got into their vestments, and the priestand deacon came out to the lectern, which stood in the forepart of the church.The priest turned to Levin saying something. Levin did not hear what the priestsaid.“Take the bride’s hand and lead her up,” the best man said toLevin.It was a long while before Levin could make out what was expected of him. For along time they tried to set him right and made him begin again—because hekept taking Kitty by the wrong arm or with the wrong arm—till heunderstood at last that what he had to do was, without changing his position,to take her right hand in his right hand. When at last he had taken thebride’s hand in the correct way, the priest walked a few paces in frontof them and stopped at the lectern. The crowd of friends and relations movedafter them, with a buzz of talk and a rustle of skirts. Someone stooped downand pulled out the bride’s train. The church became so still that thedrops of wax could be heard falling from the candles.The little old priest in his ecclesiastical cap, with his long silvery-graylocks of hair parted behind his ears, was fumbling with something at thelectern, putting out his little old hands from under the heavy silver vestmentwith the gold cross on the back of it.Stepan Arkadyevitch approached him cautiously, whispered something, and makinga sign to Levin, walked back again.The priest lighted two candles, wreathed with flowers, and holding themsideways so that the wax dropped slowly from them he turned, facing the bridalpair. The priest was the same old man that had confessed Levin. He looked withweary and melancholy eyes at the bride and bridegroom, sighed, and putting hisright hand out from his vestment, blessed the bridegroom with it, and also witha shade of solicitous tenderness laid the crossed fingers on the bowed head ofKitty. Then he gave them the candles, and taking the censer, moved slowly awayfrom them.“Can it be true?” thought Levin, and he looked round at his bride.Looking down at her he saw her face in profile, and from the scarcelyperceptible quiver of her lips and eyelashes he knew she was aware of his eyesupon her. She did not look round, but the high scalloped collar, that reachedher little pink ear, trembled faintly. He saw that a sigh was held back in herthroat, and the little hand in the long glove shook as it held the candle.All the fuss of the shirt, of being late, all the talk of friends andrelations, their annoyance, his ludicrous position—all suddenly passedaway and he was filled with joy and dread.The handsome, stately head-deacon wearing a silver robe and his curly locksstanding out at each side of his head, stepped smartly forward, and lifting hisstole on two fingers, stood opposite the priest.“Blessed be the name of the Lord,” the solemn syllables rang outslowly one after another, setting the air quivering with waves of sound.“Blessed is the name of our God, from the beginning, is now, and evershall be,” the little old priest answered in a submissive, piping voice,still fingering something at the lectern. And the full chorus of the unseenchoir rose up, filling the whole church, from the windows to the vaulted roof,with broad waves of melody. It grew stronger, rested for an instant, and slowlydied away.They prayed, as they always do, for peace from on high and for salvation, forthe Holy Synod, and for the Tsar; they prayed, too, for the servants of God,Konstantin and Ekaterina, now plighting their troth.“Vouchsafe to them love made perfect, peace and help, O Lord, we beseechThee,” the whole church seemed to breathe with the voice of the headdeacon.Levin heard the words, and they impressed him. “How did they guess thatit is help, just help that one wants?” he thought, recalling all hisfears and doubts of late. “What do I know? what can I do in this fearfulbusiness,” he thought, “without help? Yes, it is help I wantnow.”When the deacon had finished the prayer for the Imperial family, the priestturned to the bridal pair with a book: “Eternal God, that joinesttogether in love them that were separate,” he read in a gentle, pipingvoice: “who hast ordained the union of holy wedlock that cannot be setasunder, Thou who didst bless Isaac and Rebecca and their descendants,according to Thy Holy Covenant; bless Thy servants, Konstantin and Ekaterina,leading them in the path of all good works. For gracious and merciful art Thou,our Lord, and glory be to Thee, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, nowand ever shall be.”“Amen!” the unseen choir sent rolling again upon the air.“‘Joinest together in love them that were separate.’ Whatdeep meaning in those words, and how they correspond with what one feels atthis moment,” thought Levin. “Is she feeling the same as I?”And looking round, he met her eyes, and from their expression he concluded thatshe was understanding it just as he was. But this was a mistake; she almostcompletely missed the meaning of the words of the service; she had not heardthem, in fact. She could not listen to them and take them in, so strong was theone feeling that filled her breast and grew stronger and stronger. That feelingwas joy at the completion of the process that for the last month and a half hadbeen going on in her soul, and had during those six weeks been a joy and atorture to her. On the day when in the drawing-room of the house in ArbatyStreet she had gone up to him in her brown dress, and given herself to himwithout a word—on that day, at that hour, there took place in her heart acomplete severance from all her old life, and a quite different, new, utterlystrange life had begun for her, while the old life was actually going on asbefore. Those six weeks had for her been a time of the utmost bliss and theutmost misery. All her life, all her desires and hopes were concentrated onthis one man, still uncomprehended by her, to whom she was bound by a feelingof alternate attraction and repulsion, even less comprehended than the manhimself, and all the while she was going on living in the outward conditions ofher old life. Living the old life, she was horrified at herself, at her utterinsurmountable callousness to all her own past, to things, to habits, to thepeople she had loved, who loved her—to her mother, who was wounded by herindifference, to her kind, tender father, till then dearer than all the world.At one moment she was horrified at this indifference, at another she rejoicedat what had brought her to this indifference. She could not frame a thought,not a wish apart from life with this man; but this new life was not yet, andshe could not even picture it clearly to herself. There was only anticipation,the dread and joy of the new and the unknown. And now behold—anticipationand uncertainty and remorse at the abandonment of the old life—all wasending, and the new was beginning. This new life could not but have terrors forher inexperience; but, terrible or not, the change had been wrought six weeksbefore in her soul, and this was merely the final sanction of what had longbeen completed in her heart.Turning again to the lectern, the priest with some difficulty tookKitty’s little ring, and asking Levin for his hand, put it on the firstjoint of his finger. “The servant of God, Konstantin, plights his trothto the servant of God, Ekaterina.” And putting his big ring onKitty’s touchingly weak, pink little finger, the priest said the samething.And the bridal pair tried several times to understand what they had to do, andeach time made some mistake and were corrected by the priest in a whisper. Atlast, having duly performed the ceremony, having signed the rings with thecross, the priest handed Kitty the big ring, and Levin the little one. Againthey were puzzled, and passed the rings from hand to hand, still without doingwhat was expected.Dolly, Tchirikov, and Stepan Arkadyevitch stepped forward to set them right.There was an interval of hesitation, whispering, and smiles; but the expressionof solemn emotion on the faces of the betrothed pair did not change: on thecontrary, in their perplexity over their hands they looked more grave anddeeply moved than before, and the smile with which Stepan Arkadyevitchwhispered to them that now they would each put on their own ring died away onhis lips. He had a feeling that any smile would jar on them.“Thou who didst from the beginning create male and female,” thepriest read after the exchange of rings, “from Thee woman was given toman to be a helpmeet to him, and for the procreation of children. O Lord, ourGod, who hast poured down the blessings of Thy Truth according to Thy HolyCovenant upon Thy chosen servants, our fathers, from generation to generation,bless Thy servants Konstantin and Ekaterina, and make their troth fast infaith, and union of hearts, and truth, and love....”Levin felt more and more that all his ideas of marriage, all his dreams of howhe would order his life, were mere childishness, and that it was something hehad not understood hitherto, and now understood less than ever, though it wasbeing performed upon him. The lump in his throat rose higher and higher, tearsthat would not be checked came into his eyes.Chapter 5In the church there was all Moscow, all the friends and relations; and duringthe ceremony of plighting troth, in the brilliantly lighted church, there wasan incessant flow of discreetly subdued talk in the circle of gaily dressedwomen and girls, and men in white ties, frockcoats, and uniforms. The talk wasprincipally kept up by the men, while the women were absorbed in watching everydetail of the ceremony, which always means so much to them.In the little group nearest to the bride were her two sisters: Dolly, and theother one, the self-possessed beauty, Madame Lvova, who had just arrived fromabroad.“Why is it Marie’s in lilac, as bad as black, at a wedding?”said Madame Korsunskaya.“With her complexion, it’s the one salvation,” respondedMadame Trubetskaya. “I wonder why they had the wedding in the evening?It’s like shop-people....”“So much prettier. I was married in the evening too....” answeredMadame Korsunskaya, and she sighed, remembering how charming she had been thatday, and how absurdly in love her husband was, and how different it all wasnow.“They say if anyone’s best man more than ten times, he’llnever be married. I wanted to be for the tenth time, but the post wastaken,” said Count Siniavin to the pretty Princess Tcharskaya, who haddesigns on him.Princess Tcharskaya only answered with a smile. She looked at Kitty, thinkinghow and when she would stand with Count Siniavin in Kitty’s place, andhow she would remind him then of his joke today.Shtcherbatsky told the old maid of honor, Madame Nikolaeva, that he meant toput the crown on Kitty’s chignon for luck.“She ought not to have worn a chignon,” answered Madame Nikolaeva,who had long ago made up her mind that if the elderly widower she was anglingfor married her, the wedding should be of the simplest. “I don’tlike such grandeur.”Sergey Ivanovitch was talking to Darya Dmitrievna, jestingly assuring her thatthe custom of going away after the wedding was becoming common because newlymarried people always felt a little ashamed of themselves.“Your brother may feel proud of himself. She’s a marvel ofsweetness. I believe you’re envious.”“Oh, I’ve got over that, Darya Dmitrievna,” he answered, anda melancholy and serious expression suddenly came over his face.Stepan Arkadyevitch was telling his sister-in-law his joke about divorce.“The wreath wants setting straight,” she answered, not hearing him.“What a pity she’s lost her looks so,” Countess Nordston saidto Madame Lvova. “Still he’s not worth her little finger, ishe?”“Oh, I like him so—not because he’s my futurebeau-frère,” answered Madame Lvova. “And how well he’sbehaving! It’s so difficult, too, to look well in such a position, not tobe ridiculous. And he’s not ridiculous, and not affected; one can seehe’s moved.”“You expected it, I suppose?”“Almost. She always cared for him.”“Well, we shall see which of them will step on the rug first. I warnedKitty.”“It will make no difference,” said Madame Lvova; “we’reall obedient wives; it’s in our family.”“Oh, I stepped on the rug before Vassily on purpose. And you,Dolly?”Dolly stood beside them; she heard them, but she did not answer. She was deeplymoved. The tears stood in her eyes, and she could not have spoken withoutcrying. She was rejoicing over Kitty and Levin; going back in thought to herown wedding, she glanced at the radiant figure of Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgotall the present, and remembered only her own innocent love. She recalled notherself only, but all her women-friends and acquaintances. She thought of themon the one day of their triumph, when they had stood like Kitty under thewedding crown, with love and hope and dread in their hearts, renouncing thepast, and stepping forward into the mysterious future. Among the brides thatcame back to her memory, she thought too of her darling Anna, of whose proposeddivorce she had just been hearing. And she had stood just as innocent in orangeflowers and bridal veil. And now? “It’s terribly strange,”she said to herself. It was not merely the sisters, the women-friends andfemale relations of the bride who were following every detail of the ceremony.Women who were quite strangers, mere spectators, were watching it excitedly,holding their breath, in fear of losing a single movement or expression of thebride and bridegroom, and angrily not answering, often not hearing, the remarksof the callous men, who kept making joking or irrelevant observations.“Why has she been crying? Is she being married against her will?”“Against her will to a fine fellow like that? A prince, isn’the?”“Is that her sister in the white satin? Just listen how the deacon boomsout, ‘And fearing her husband.’”“Are the choristers from Tchudovo?”“No, from the Synod.”“I asked the footman. He says he’s going to take her home to hiscountry place at once. Awfully rich, they say. That’s why she’sbeing married to him.”“No, they’re a well-matched pair.”“I say, Marya Vassilievna, you were making out those fly-away crinolineswere not being worn. Just look at her in the puce dress—anambassador’s wife they say she is—how her skirt bounces out fromside to side!”“What a pretty dear the bride is—like a lamb decked with flowers!Well, say what you will, we women feel for our sister.”Such were the comments in the crowd of gazing women who had succeeded inslipping in at the church doors.Chapter 6When the ceremony of plighting troth was over, the beadle spread before thelectern in the middle of the church a piece of pink silken stuff, the choirsang a complicated and elaborate psalm, in which the bass and tenor sangresponses to one another, and the priest turning round pointed the bridal pairto the pink silk rug. Though both had often heard a great deal about the sayingthat the one who steps first on the rug will be the head of the house, neitherLevin nor Kitty were capable of recollecting it, as they took the few stepstowards it. They did not hear the loud remarks and disputes that followed, somemaintaining he had stepped on first, and others that both had stepped ontogether.After the customary questions, whether they desired to enter upon matrimony,and whether they were pledged to anyone else, and their answers, which soundedstrange to themselves, a new ceremony began. Kitty listened to the words of theprayer, trying to make out their meaning, but she could not. The feeling oftriumph and radiant happiness flooded her soul more and more as the ceremonywent on, and deprived her of all power of attention.They prayed: “Endow them with continence and fruitfulness, and vouchsafethat their hearts may rejoice looking upon their sons and daughters.”They alluded to God’s creation of a wife from Adam’s rib “andfor this cause a man shall leave father and mother, and cleave unto his wife,and they two shall be one flesh,” and that “this is a greatmystery”; they prayed that God would make them fruitful and bless them,like Isaac and Rebecca, Joseph, Moses and Zipporah, and that they might lookupon their children’s children. “That’s all splendid,”thought Kitty, catching the words, “all that’s just as it shouldbe,” and a smile of happiness, unconsciously reflected in everyone wholooked at her, beamed on her radiant face.“Put it on quite,” voices were heard urging when the priest had puton the wedding crowns and Shtcherbatsky, his hand shaking in its three-buttonglove, held the crown high above her head.“Put it on!” she whispered, smiling.Levin looked round at her, and was struck by the joyful radiance on her face,and unconsciously her feeling infected him. He too, like her felt glad andhappy.They enjoyed hearing the epistle read, and the roll of the head deacon’svoice at the last verse, awaited with such impatience by the outside public.They enjoyed drinking out of the shallow cup of warm red wine and water, andthey were still more pleased when the priest, flinging back his stole andtaking both their hands in his, led them round the lectern to the accompanimentof bass voices chanting “Glory to God.”Shtcherbatsky and Tchirikov, supporting the crowns and stumbling over thebride’s train, smiling too and seeming delighted at something, were atone moment left behind, at the next treading on the bridal pair as the priestcame to a halt. The spark of joy kindled in Kitty seemed to have infectedeveryone in the church. It seemed to Levin that the priest and the deacon toowanted to smile just as he did.Taking the crowns off their heads the priest read the last prayer andcongratulated the young people. Levin looked at Kitty, and he had never beforeseen her look as she did. She was charming with the new radiance of happinessin her face. Levin longed to say something to her, but he did not know whetherit was all over. The priest got him out of his difficulty. He smiled his kindlysmile and said gently, “Kiss your wife, and you kiss your husband,”and took the candles out of their hands.Levin kissed her smiling lips with timid care, gave her his arm, and with a newstrange sense of closeness, walked out of the church. He did not believe, hecould not believe, that it was true. It was only when their wondering and timideyes met that he believed in it, because he felt that they were one.After supper, the same night, the young people left for the country.Chapter 7Vronsky and Anna had been traveling for three months together in Europe. Theyhad visited Venice, Rome, and Naples, and had just arrived at a small Italiantown where they meant to stay some time. A handsome head waiter, with thickpomaded hair parted from the neck upwards, an evening coat, a broad whitecambric shirt front, and a bunch of trinkets hanging above his rounded stomach,stood with his hands in the full curve of his pockets, looking contemptuouslyfrom under his eyelids while he gave some frigid reply to a gentleman who hadstopped him. Catching the sound of footsteps coming from the other side of theentry towards the staircase, the head waiter turned round, and seeing theRussian count, who had taken their best rooms, he took his hands out of hispockets deferentially, and with a bow informed him that a courier had been, andthat the business about the palazzo had been arranged. The steward was preparedto sign the agreement.“Ah! I’m glad to hear it,” said Vronsky. “Is madame athome or not?”“Madame has been out for a walk but has returned now,” answered thewaiter.Vronsky took off his soft, wide-brimmed hat and passed his handkerchief overhis heated brow and hair, which had grown half over his ears, and was brushedback covering the bald patch on his head. And glancing casually at thegentleman, who still stood there gazing intently at him, he would have gone on.“This gentleman is a Russian, and was inquiring after you,” saidthe head waiter.With mingled feelings of annoyance at never being able to get away fromacquaintances anywhere, and longing to find some sort of diversion from themonotony of his life, Vronsky looked once more at the gentleman, who hadretreated and stood still again, and at the same moment a light came into theeyes of both.“Golenishtchev!”“Vronsky!”It really was Golenishtchev, a comrade of Vronsky’s in the Corps ofPages. In the corps Golenishtchev had belonged to the liberal party; he leftthe corps without entering the army, and had never taken office under thegovernment. Vronsky and he had gone completely different ways on leaving thecorps, and had only met once since.At that meeting Vronsky perceived that Golenishtchev had taken up a sort oflofty, intellectually liberal line, and was consequently disposed to look downupon Vronsky’s interests and calling in life. Hence Vronsky had met himwith the chilling and haughty manner he so well knew how to assume, the meaningof which was: “You may like or dislike my way of life, that’s amatter of the most perfect indifference to me; you will have to treat me withrespect if you want to know me.” Golenishtchev had been contemptuouslyindifferent to the tone taken by Vronsky. This second meeting might have beenexpected, one would have supposed, to estrange them still more. But now theybeamed and exclaimed with delight on recognizing one another. Vronsky wouldnever have expected to be so pleased to see Golenishtchev, but probably he wasnot himself aware how bored he was. He forgot the disagreeable impression oftheir last meeting, and with a face of frank delight held out his hand to hisold comrade. The same expression of delight replaced the look of uneasiness onGolenishtchev’s face.“How glad I am to meet you!” said Vronsky, showing his strong whiteteeth in a friendly smile.“I heard the name Vronsky, but I didn’t know which one. I’mvery, very glad!”“Let’s go in. Come, tell me what you’re doing.”“I’ve been living here for two years. I’m working.”“Ah!” said Vronsky, with sympathy; “let’s go in.”And with the habit common with Russians, instead of saying in Russian what hewanted to keep from the servants, he began to speak in French.“Do you know Madame Karenina? We are traveling together. I am going tosee her now,” he said in French, carefully scrutinizingGolenishtchev’s face.“Ah! I did not know” (though he did know), Golenishtchev answeredcarelessly. “Have you been here long?” he added.“Four days,” Vronsky answered, once more scrutinizing hisfriend’s face intently.“Yes, he’s a decent fellow, and will look at the thingproperly,” Vronsky said to himself, catching the significance ofGolenishtchev’s face and the change of subject. “I can introducehim to Anna, he looks at it properly.”During those three months that Vronsky had spent abroad with Anna, he hadalways on meeting new people asked himself how the new person would look at hisrelations with Anna, and for the most part, in men, he had met with the“proper” way of looking at it. But if he had been asked, and thosewho looked at it “properly” had been asked, exactly how they didlook at it, both he and they would have been greatly puzzled to answer.In reality, those who in Vronsky’s opinion had the “proper”view had no sort of view at all, but behaved in general as well-bred persons dobehave in regard to all the complex and insoluble problems with which life isencompassed on all sides; they behaved with propriety, avoiding allusions andunpleasant questions. They assumed an air of fully comprehending the import andforce of the situation, of accepting and even approving of it, but ofconsidering it superfluous and uncalled for to put all this into words.Vronsky at once divined that Golenishtchev was of this class, and therefore wasdoubly pleased to see him. And in fact, Golenishtchev’s manner to MadameKarenina, when he was taken to call on her, was all that Vronsky could havedesired. Obviously without the slightest effort he steered clear of allsubjects which might lead to embarrassment.He had never met Anna before, and was struck by her beauty, and still more bythe frankness with which she accepted her position. She blushed when Vronskybrought in Golenishtchev, and he was extremely charmed by this childish blushoverspreading her candid and handsome face. But what he liked particularly wasthe way in which at once, as though on purpose that there might be nomisunderstanding with an outsider, she called Vronsky simply Alexey, and saidthey were moving into a house they had just taken, what was here called apalazzo. Golenishtchev liked this direct and simple attitude to her ownposition. Looking at Anna’s manner of simple-hearted, spirited gaiety,and knowing Alexey Alexandrovitch and Vronsky, Golenishtchev fancied that heunderstood her perfectly. He fancied that he understood what she was utterlyunable to understand: how it was that, having made her husband wretched, havingabandoned him and her son and lost her good name, she yet felt full of spirits,gaiety, and happiness.“It’s in the guide-book,” said Golenishtchev, referring tothe palazzo Vronsky had taken. “There’s a first-rate Tintorettothere. One of his latest period.”“I tell you what: it’s a lovely day, let’s go and haveanother look at it,” said Vronsky, addressing Anna.“I shall be very glad to; I’ll go and put on my hat. Would you sayit’s hot?” she said, stopping short in the doorway and lookinginquiringly at Vronsky. And again a vivid flush overspread her face.Vronsky saw from her eyes that she did not know on what terms he cared to bewith Golenishtchev, and so was afraid of not behaving as he would wish.He looked a long, tender look at her.“No, not very,” he said.And it seemed to her that she understood everything, most of all, that he waspleased with her; and smiling to him, she walked with her rapid step out at thedoor.The friends glanced at one another, and a look of hesitation came into bothfaces, as though Golenishtchev, unmistakably admiring her, would have liked tosay something about her, and could not find the right thing to say, whileVronsky desired and dreaded his doing so.“Well then,” Vronsky began to start a conversation of some sort;“so you’re settled here? You’re still at the same work,then?” he went on, recalling that he had been told Golenishtchev waswriting something.“Yes, I’m writing the second part of the TwoElements,” said Golenishtchev, coloring with pleasure at thequestion—“that is, to be exact, I am not writing it yet; I ampreparing, collecting materials. It will be of far wider scope, and will touchon almost all questions. We in Russia refuse to see that we are the heirs ofByzantium,” and he launched into a long and heated explanation of hisviews.Vronsky at the first moment felt embarrassed at not even knowing of the firstpart of the Two Elements, of which the author spoke as something wellknown. But as Golenishtchev began to lay down his opinions and Vronsky was ableto follow them even without knowing the Two Elements, he listened to himwith some interest, for Golenishtchev spoke well. But Vronsky was startled andannoyed by the nervous irascibility with which Golenishtchev talked of thesubject that engrossed him. As he went on talking, his eyes glittered more andmore angrily; he was more and more hurried in his replies to imaginaryopponents, and his face grew more and more excited and worried. RememberingGolenishtchev, a thin, lively, good-natured and well-bred boy, always at thehead of the class, Vronsky could not make out the reason of his irritability,and he did not like it. What he particularly disliked was that Golenishtchev, aman belonging to a good set, should put himself on a level with some scribblingfellows, with whom he was irritated and angry. Was it worth it? Vronskydisliked it, yet he felt that Golenishtchev was unhappy, and was sorry for him.Unhappiness, almost mental derangement, was visible on his mobile, ratherhandsome face, while without even noticing Anna’s coming in, he went onhurriedly and hotly expressing his views.When Anna came in in her hat and cape, and her lovely hand rapidly swinging herparasol, and stood beside him, it was with a feeling of relief that Vronskybroke away from the plaintive eyes of Golenishtchev which fastened persistentlyupon him, and with a fresh rush of love looked at his charming companion, fullof life and happiness. Golenishtchev recovered himself with an effort, and atfirst was dejected and gloomy, but Anna, disposed to feel friendly witheveryone as she was at that time, soon revived his spirits by her direct andlively manner. After trying various subjects of conversation, she got him uponpainting, of which he talked very well, and she listened to him attentively.They walked to the house they had taken, and looked over it.“I am very glad of one thing,” said Anna to Golenishtchev when theywere on their way back, “Alexey will have a capital atelier. Youmust certainly take that room,” she said to Vronsky in Russian, using theaffectionately familiar form as though she saw that Golenishtchev would becomeintimate with them in their isolation, and that there was no need of reservebefore him.“Do you paint?” said Golenishtchev, turning round quickly toVronsky.“Yes, I used to study long ago, and now I have begun to do alittle,” said Vronsky, reddening.“He has great talent,” said Anna with a delighted smile.“I’m no judge, of course. But good judges have said thesame.”Chapter 8Anna, in that first period of her emancipation and rapid return to health, feltherself unpardonably happy and full of the joy of life. The thought of herhusband’s unhappiness did not poison her happiness. On one side thatmemory was too awful to be thought of. On the other side her husband’sunhappiness had given her too much happiness to be regretted. The memory of allthat had happened after her illness: her reconciliation with her husband, itsbreakdown, the news of Vronsky’s wound, his visit, the preparations fordivorce, the departure from her husband’s house, the parting from herson—all that seemed to her like a delirious dream, from which she hadwaked up alone with Vronsky abroad. The thought of the harm caused to herhusband aroused in her a feeling like repulsion, and akin to what a drowningman might feel who has shaken off another man clinging to him. That man diddrown. It was an evil action, of course, but it was the sole means of escape,and better not to brood over these fearful facts.One consolatory reflection upon her conduct had occurred to her at the firstmoment of the final rupture, and when now she recalled all the past, sheremembered that one reflection. “I have inevitably made that manwretched,” she thought; “but I don’t want to profit by hismisery. I too am suffering, and shall suffer; I am losing what I prized aboveeverything—I am losing my good name and my son. I have done wrong, and soI don’t want happiness, I don’t want a divorce, and shall sufferfrom my shame and the separation from my child.” But, however sincerelyAnna had meant to suffer, she was not suffering. Shame there was not. With thetact of which both had such a large share, they had succeeded in avoidingRussian ladies abroad, and so had never placed themselves in a false position,and everywhere they had met people who pretended that they perfectly understoodtheir position, far better indeed than they did themselves. Separation from theson she loved—even that did not cause her anguish in these early days.The baby girl—his child—was so sweet, and had so wonAnna’s heart, since she was all that was left her, that Anna rarelythought of her son.The desire for life, waxing stronger with recovered health, was so intense, andthe conditions of life were so new and pleasant, that Anna felt unpardonablyhappy. The more she got to know Vronsky, the more she loved him. She loved himfor himself, and for his love for her. Her complete ownership of him was acontinual joy to her. His presence was always sweet to her. All the traits ofhis character, which she learned to know better and better, were unutterablydear to her. His appearance, changed by his civilian dress, was as fascinatingto her as though she were some young girl in love. In everything he said,thought, and did, she saw something particularly noble and elevated. Heradoration of him alarmed her indeed; she sought and could not find in himanything not fine. She dared not show him her sense of her own insignificancebeside him. It seemed to her that, knowing this, he might sooner cease to loveher; and she dreaded nothing now so much as losing his love, though she had nogrounds for fearing it. But she could not help being grateful to him for hisattitude to her, and showing that she appreciated it. He, who had in heropinion such a marked aptitude for a political career, in which he would havebeen certain to play a leading part—he had sacrificed his ambition forher sake, and never betrayed the slightest regret. He was more lovinglyrespectful to her than ever, and the constant care that she should not feel theawkwardness of her position never deserted him for a single instant. He, somanly a man, never opposed her, had indeed, with her, no will of his own, andwas anxious, it seemed, for nothing but to anticipate her wishes. And she couldnot but appreciate this, even though the very intensity of his solicitude forher, the atmosphere of care with which he surrounded her, sometimes weighedupon her.Vronsky, meanwhile, in spite of the complete realization of what he had so longdesired, was not perfectly happy. He soon felt that the realization of hisdesires gave him no more than a grain of sand out of the mountain of happinesshe had expected. It showed him the mistake men make in picturing to themselveshappiness as the realization of their desires. For a time after joining hislife to hers, and putting on civilian dress, he had felt all the delight offreedom in general of which he had known nothing before, and of freedom in hislove,—and he was content, but not for long. He was soon aware that therewas springing up in his heart a desire for desires—ennui. Withoutconscious intention he began to clutch at every passing caprice, taking it fora desire and an object. Sixteen hours of the day must be occupied in some way,since they were living abroad in complete freedom, outside the conditions ofsocial life which filled up time in Petersburg. As for the amusements ofbachelor existence, which had provided Vronsky with entertainment on previoustours abroad, they could not be thought of, since the sole attempt of the sorthad led to a sudden attack of depression in Anna, quite out of proportion withthe cause—a late supper with bachelor friends. Relations with the societyof the place—foreign and Russian—were equally out of the questionowing to the irregularity of their position. The inspection of objects ofinterest, apart from the fact that everything had been seen already, had notfor Vronsky, a Russian and a sensible man, the immense significance Englishmenare able to attach to that pursuit.And just as the hungry stomach eagerly accepts every object it can get, hopingto find nourishment in it, Vronsky quite unconsciously clutched first atpolitics, then at new books, and then at pictures.As he had from a child a taste for painting, and as, not knowing what to spendhis money on, he had begun collecting engravings, he came to a stop atpainting, began to take interest in it, and concentrated upon it the unoccupiedmass of desires which demanded satisfaction.He had a ready appreciation of art, and probably, with a taste for imitatingart, he supposed himself to have the real thing essential for an artist, andafter hesitating for some time which style of painting toselect—religious, historical, realistic, or genre painting—he setto work to paint. He appreciated all kinds, and could have felt inspired byanyone of them; but he had no conception of the possibility of knowing nothingat all of any school of painting, and of being inspired directly by what iswithin the soul, without caring whether what is painted will belong to anyrecognized school. Since he knew nothing of this, and drew his inspiration, notdirectly from life, but indirectly from life embodied in art, his inspirationcame very quickly and easily, and as quickly and easily came his success inpainting something very similar to the sort of painting he was trying toimitate.More than any other style he liked the French—graceful andeffective—and in that style he began to paint Anna’s portrait inItalian costume, and the portrait seemed to him, and to everyone who saw it,extremely successful.Chapter 9The old neglected palazzo, with its lofty carved ceilings and frescoes on thewalls, with its floors of mosaic, with its heavy yellow stuff curtains on thewindows, with its vases on pedestals, and its open fireplaces, its carved doorsand gloomy reception rooms, hung with pictures—this palazzo did much, byits very appearance after they had moved into it, to confirm in Vronsky theagreeable illusion that he was not so much a Russian country gentleman, aretired army officer, as an enlightened amateur and patron of the arts, himselfa modest artist who had renounced the world, his connections, and his ambitionfor the sake of the woman he loved.The pose chosen by Vronsky with their removal into the palazzo was completelysuccessful, and having, through Golenishtchev, made acquaintance with a fewinteresting people, for a time he was satisfied. He painted studies from natureunder the guidance of an Italian professor of painting, and studied mediævalItalian life. Mediæval Italian life so fascinated Vronsky that he even wore ahat and flung a cloak over his shoulder in the mediæval style, which, indeed,was extremely becoming to him.“Here we live, and know nothing of what’s going on,” Vronskysaid to Golenishtchev as he came to see him one morning. “Have you seenMihailov’s picture?” he said, handing him a Russian gazette he hadreceived that morning, and pointing to an article on a Russian artist, livingin the very same town, and just finishing a picture which had long been talkedabout, and had been bought beforehand. The article reproached the governmentand the academy for letting so remarkable an artist be left withoutencouragement and support.“I’ve seen it,” answered Golenishtchev. “Of course,he’s not without talent, but it’s all in a wrong direction.It’s all the Ivanov-Strauss-Renan attitude to Christ and to religiouspainting.”“What is the subject of the picture?” asked Anna.“Christ before Pilate. Christ is represented as a Jew with all therealism of the new school.”And the question of the subject of the picture having brought him to one of hisfavorite theories, Golenishtchev launched forth into a disquisition on it.“I can’t understand how they can fall into such a gross mistake.Christ always has His definite embodiment in the art of the great masters. Andtherefore, if they want to depict, not God, but a revolutionist or a sage, letthem take from history a Socrates, a Franklin, a Charlotte Corday, but notChrist. They take the very figure which cannot be taken for their art, andthen....”“And is it true that this Mihailov is in such poverty?” askedVronsky, thinking that, as a Russian Mæcenas, it was his duty to assist theartist regardless of whether the picture were good or bad.“I should say not. He’s a remarkable portrait-painter. Have youever seen his portrait of Madame Vassiltchikova? But I believe he doesn’tcare about painting any more portraits, and so very likely he is in want. Imaintain that....”“Couldn’t we ask him to paint a portrait of Anna Arkadyevna?”said Vronsky.“Why mine?” said Anna. “After yours I don’t wantanother portrait. Better have one of Annie” (so she called her babygirl). “Here she is,” she added, looking out of the window at thehandsome Italian nurse, who was carrying the child out into the garden, andimmediately glancing unnoticed at Vronsky. The handsome nurse, from whomVronsky was painting a head for his picture, was the one hidden grief inAnna’s life. He painted with her as his model, admired her beauty andmediævalism, and Anna dared not confess to herself that she was afraid ofbecoming jealous of this nurse, and was for that reason particularly graciousand condescending both to her and her little son. Vronsky, too, glanced out ofthe window and into Anna’s eyes, and, turning at once to Golenishtchev,he said:“Do you know this Mihailov?”“I have met him. But he’s a queer fish, and quite without breeding.You know, one of those uncouth new people one’s so often coming acrossnowadays, one of those free-thinkers you know, who are rearedd’emblée in theories of atheism, scepticism, and materialism. Informer days,” said Golenishtchev, not observing, or not willing toobserve, that both Anna and Vronsky wanted to speak, “in former days thefree-thinker was a man who had been brought up in ideas of religion, law, andmorality, and only through conflict and struggle came to free-thought; but nowthere has sprung up a new type of born free-thinkers who grow up without evenhaving heard of principles of morality or of religion, of the existence ofauthorities, who grow up directly in ideas of negation in everything, that isto say, savages. Well, he’s of that class. He’s the son, itappears, of some Moscow butler, and has never had any sort of bringing-up. Whenhe got into the academy and made his reputation he tried, as he’s nofool, to educate himself. And he turned to what seemed to him the very sourceof culture—the magazines. In old times, you see, a man who wanted toeducate himself—a Frenchman, for instance—would have set to work tostudy all the classics and theologians and tragedians and historians andphilosophers, and, you know, all the intellectual work that came in his way.But in our day he goes straight for the literature of negation, very quicklyassimilates all the extracts of the science of negation, and he’s ready.And that’s not all—twenty years ago he would have found in thatliterature traces of conflict with authorities, with the creeds of the ages; hewould have perceived from this conflict that there was something else; but nowhe comes at once upon a literature in which the old creeds do not even furnishmatter for discussion, but it is stated baldly that there is nothingelse—evolution, natural selection, struggle for existence—andthat’s all. In my article I’ve....”“I tell you what,” said Anna, who had for a long while beenexchanging wary glances with Vronsky, and knew that he was not in the leastinterested in the education of this artist, but was simply absorbed by the ideaof assisting him, and ordering a portrait of him; “I tell youwhat,” she said, resolutely interrupting Golenishtchev, who was stilltalking away, “let’s go and see him!”Golenishtchev recovered his self-possession and readily agreed. But as theartist lived in a remote suburb, it was decided to take the carriage.An hour later Anna, with Golenishtchev by her side and Vronsky on the frontseat of the carriage, facing them, drove up to a new ugly house in the remotesuburb. On learning from the porter’s wife, who came out to them, thatMihailov saw visitors at his studio, but that at that moment he was in hislodging only a couple of steps off, they sent her to him with their cards,asking permission to see his picture.Chapter 10The artist Mihailov was, as always, at work when the cards of Count Vronsky andGolenishtchev were brought to him. In the morning he had been working in hisstudio at his big picture. On getting home he flew into a rage with his wifefor not having managed to put off the landlady, who had been asking for money.“I’ve said it to you twenty times, don’t enter into details.You’re fool enough at all times, and when you start explaining things inItalian you’re a fool three times as foolish,” he said after a longdispute.“Don’t let it run so long; it’s not my fault. If I had themoney....”“Leave me in peace, for God’s sake!” Mihailov shrieked, withtears in his voice, and, stopping his ears, he went off into his working room,the other side of a partition wall, and closed the door after him.“Idiotic woman!” he said to himself, sat down to the table, and,opening a portfolio, he set to work at once with peculiar fervor at a sketch hehad begun.Never did he work with such fervor and success as when things went ill withhim, and especially when he quarreled with his wife. “Oh! damn themall!” he thought as he went on working. He was making a sketch for thefigure of a man in a violent rage. A sketch had been made before, but he wasdissatisfied with it. “No, that one was better ... where is it?” Hewent back to his wife, and scowling, and not looking at her, asked his eldestlittle girl, where was that piece of paper he had given them? The paper withthe discarded sketch on it was found, but it was dirty, and spotted withcandle-grease. Still, he took the sketch, laid it on his table, and, moving alittle away, screwing up his eyes, he fell to gazing at it. All at once hesmiled and gesticulated gleefully.“That’s it! that’s it!” he said, and, at once pickingup the pencil, he began rapidly drawing. The spot of tallow had given the man anew pose.He had sketched this new pose, when all at once he recalled the face of ashopkeeper of whom he had bought cigars, a vigorous face with a prominent chin,and he sketched this very face, this chin on to the figure of the man. Helaughed aloud with delight. The figure from a lifeless imagined thing hadbecome living, and such that it could never be changed. That figure lived, andwas clearly and unmistakably defined. The sketch might be corrected inaccordance with the requirements of the figure, the legs, indeed, could andmust be put differently, and the position of the left hand must be quitealtered; the hair too might be thrown back. But in making these corrections hewas not altering the figure but simply getting rid of what concealed thefigure. He was, as it were, stripping off the wrappings which hindered it frombeing distinctly seen. Each new feature only brought out the whole figure inall its force and vigor, as it had suddenly come to him from the spot oftallow. He was carefully finishing the figure when the cards were brought him.“Coming, coming!”He went in to his wife.“Come, Sasha, don’t be cross!” he said, smiling timidly andaffectionately at her. “You were to blame. I was to blame. I’llmake it all right.” And having made peace with his wife he put on anolive-green overcoat with a velvet collar and a hat, and went towards hisstudio. The successful figure he had already forgotten. Now he was delightedand excited at the visit of these people of consequence, Russians, who had comein their carriage.Of his picture, the one that stood now on his easel, he had at the bottom ofhis heart one conviction—that no one had ever painted a picture like it.He did not believe that his picture was better than all the pictures ofRaphael, but he knew that what he tried to convey in that picture, no one everhad conveyed. This he knew positively, and had known a long while, ever sincehe had begun to paint it. But other people’s criticisms, whatever theymight be, had yet immense consequence in his eyes, and they agitated him to thedepths of his soul. Any remark, the most insignificant, that showed that thecritic saw even the tiniest part of what he saw in the picture, agitated him tothe depths of his soul. He always attributed to his critics a more profoundcomprehension than he had himself, and always expected from them something hedid not himself see in the picture. And often in their criticisms he fanciedthat he had found this.He walked rapidly to the door of his studio, and in spite of his excitement hewas struck by the soft light on Anna’s figure as she stood in the shadeof the entrance listening to Golenishtchev, who was eagerly telling hersomething, while she evidently wanted to look round at the artist. He washimself unconscious how, as he approached them, he seized on this impressionand absorbed it, as he had the chin of the shopkeeper who had sold him thecigars, and put it away somewhere to be brought out when he wanted it. Thevisitors, not agreeably impressed beforehand by Golenishtchev’s accountof the artist, were still less so by his personal appearance. Thick-set and ofmiddle height, with nimble movements, with his brown hat, olive-green coat andnarrow trousers—though wide trousers had been a long while infashion,—most of all, with the ordinariness of his broad face, and thecombined expression of timidity and anxiety to keep up his dignity, Mihailovmade an unpleasant impression.“Please step in,” he said, trying to look indifferent, and goinginto the passage he took a key out of his pocket and opened the door.Chapter 11On entering the studio, Mihailov once more scanned his visitors and noted downin his imagination Vronsky’s expression too, and especially his jaws.Although his artistic sense was unceasingly at work collecting materials,although he felt a continually increasing excitement as the moment ofcriticizing his work drew nearer, he rapidly and subtly formed, fromimperceptible signs, a mental image of these three persons.That fellow (Golenishtchev) was a Russian living here. Mihailov did notremember his surname nor where he had met him, nor what he had said to him. Heonly remembered his face as he remembered all the faces he had ever seen; buthe remembered, too, that it was one of the faces laid by in his memory in theimmense class of the falsely consequential and poor in expression. The abundanthair and very open forehead gave an appearance of consequence to the face,which had only one expression—a petty, childish, peevish expression,concentrated just above the bridge of the narrow nose. Vronsky and MadameKarenina must be, Mihailov supposed, distinguished and wealthy Russians,knowing nothing about art, like all those wealthy Russians, but posing asamateurs and connoisseurs. “Most likely they’ve already looked atall the antiques, and now they’re making the round of the studios of thenew people, the German humbug, and the cracked Pre-Raphaelite English fellow,and have only come to me to make the point of view complete,” he thought.He was well acquainted with the way dilettanti have (the cleverer they were theworse he found them) of looking at the works of contemporary artists with thesole object of being in a position to say that art is a thing of the past, andthat the more one sees of the new men the more one sees how inimitable theworks of the great old masters have remained. He expected all this; he saw itall in their faces, he saw it in the careless indifference with which theytalked among themselves, stared at the lay figures and busts, and walked aboutin leisurely fashion, waiting for him to uncover his picture. But in spite ofthis, while he was turning over his studies, pulling up the blinds and takingoff the sheet, he was in intense excitement, especially as, in spite of hisconviction that all distinguished and wealthy Russians were certain to bebeasts and fools, he liked Vronsky, and still more Anna.“Here, if you please,” he said, moving on one side with his nimblegait and pointing to his picture, “it’s the exhortation to Pilate.Matthew, chapter xxvii,” he said, feeling his lips were beginning totremble with emotion. He moved away and stood behind them.For the few seconds during which the visitors were gazing at the picture insilence Mihailov too gazed at it with the indifferent eye of an outsider. Forthose few seconds he was sure in anticipation that a higher, juster criticismwould be uttered by them, by those very visitors whom he had been so despisinga moment before. He forgot all he had thought about his picture before duringthe three years he had been painting it; he forgot all its qualities which hadbeen absolutely certain to him—he saw the picture with their indifferent,new, outside eyes, and saw nothing good in it. He saw in the foregroundPilate’s irritated face and the serene face of Christ, and in thebackground the figures of Pilate’s retinue and the face of John watchingwhat was happening. Every face that, with such agony, such blunders andcorrections had grown up within him with its special character, every face thathad given him such torments and such raptures, and all these faces so manytimes transposed for the sake of the harmony of the whole, all the shades ofcolor and tones that he had attained with such labor—all of this togetherseemed to him now, looking at it with their eyes, the merest vulgarity,something that had been done a thousand times over. The face dearest to him,the face of Christ, the center of the picture, which had given him such ecstasyas it unfolded itself to him, was utterly lost to him when he glanced at thepicture with their eyes. He saw a well-painted (no, not even that—hedistinctly saw now a mass of defects) repetition of those endless Christs ofTitian, Raphael, Rubens, and the same soldiers and Pilate. It was all common,poor, and stale, and positively badly painted—weak and unequal. Theywould be justified in repeating hypocritically civil speeches in the presenceof the painter, and pitying him and laughing at him when they were alone again.The silence (though it lasted no more than a minute) became too intolerable tohim. To break it, and to show he was not agitated, he made an effort andaddressed Golenishtchev.“I think I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you,” he said,looking uneasily first at Anna, then at Vronsky, in fear of losing any shade oftheir expression.“To be sure! We met at Rossi’s, do you remember, at thatsoirée when that Italian lady recited—the new Rachel?”Golenishtchev answered easily, removing his eyes without the slightest regretfrom the picture and turning to the artist.Noticing, however, that Mihailov was expecting a criticism of the picture, hesaid:“Your picture has got on a great deal since I saw it last time; and whatstrikes me particularly now, as it did then, is the figure of Pilate. One soknows the man: a good-natured, capital fellow, but an official through andthrough, who does not know what it is he’s doing. But I fancy....”All Mihailov’s mobile face beamed at once; his eyes sparkled. He tried tosay something, but he could not speak for excitement, and pretended to becoughing. Low as was his opinion of Golenishtchev’s capacity forunderstanding art, trifling as was the true remark upon the fidelity of theexpression of Pilate as an official, and offensive as might have seemed theutterance of so unimportant an observation while nothing was said of moreserious points, Mihailov was in an ecstasy of delight at this observation. Hehad himself thought about Pilate’s figure just what Golenishtchev said.The fact that this reflection was but one of millions of reflections, which asMihailov knew for certain would be true, did not diminish for him thesignificance of Golenishtchev’s remark. His heart warmed to Golenishtchevfor this remark, and from a state of depression he suddenly passed to ecstasy.At once the whole of his picture lived before him in all the indescribablecomplexity of everything living. Mihailov again tried to say that that was howhe understood Pilate, but his lips quivered intractably, and he could notpronounce the words. Vronsky and Anna too said something in that subdued voicein which, partly to avoid hurting the artist’s feelings and partly toavoid saying out loud something silly—so easily said when talking ofart—people usually speak at exhibitions of pictures. Mihailov fanciedthat the picture had made an impression on them too. He went up to them.“How marvelous Christ’s expression is!” said Anna. Of all shesaw she liked that expression most of all, and she felt that it was the centerof the picture, and so praise of it would be pleasant to the artist. “Onecan see that He is pitying Pilate.”This again was one of the million true reflections that could be found in hispicture and in the figure of Christ. She said that He was pitying Pilate. InChrist’s expression there ought to be indeed an expression of pity, sincethere is an expression of love, of heavenly peace, of readiness for death, anda sense of the vanity of words. Of course there is the expression of anofficial in Pilate and of pity in Christ, seeing that one is the incarnation ofthe fleshly and the other of the spiritual life. All this and much more flashedinto Mihailov’s thoughts.“Yes, and how that figure is done—what atmosphere! One can walkround it,” said Golenishtchev, unmistakably betraying by this remark thathe did not approve of the meaning and idea of the figure.“Yes, there’s a wonderful mastery!” said Vronsky. “Howthose figures in the background stand out! There you have technique,” hesaid, addressing Golenishtchev, alluding to a conversation between them aboutVronsky’s despair of attaining this technique.“Yes, yes, marvelous!” Golenishtchev and Anna assented. In spite ofthe excited condition in which he was, the sentence about technique had sent apang to Mihailov’s heart, and looking angrily at Vronsky he suddenlyscowled. He had often heard this word technique, and was utterly unable tounderstand what was understood by it. He knew that by this term was understooda mechanical facility for painting or drawing, entirely apart from its subject.He had noticed often that even in actual praise technique was opposed toessential quality, as though one could paint well something that was bad. Heknew that a great deal of attention and care was necessary in taking off thecoverings, to avoid injuring the creation itself, and to take off all thecoverings; but there was no art of painting—no technique of anysort—about it. If to a little child or to his cook were revealed what hesaw, it or she would have been able to peel the wrappings off what was seen.And the most experienced and adroit painter could not by mere mechanicalfacility paint anything if the lines of the subject were not revealed to himfirst. Besides, he saw that if it came to talking about technique, it wasimpossible to praise him for it. In all he had painted and repainted he sawfaults that hurt his eyes, coming from want of care in taking off thewrappings—faults he could not correct now without spoiling the whole. Andin almost all the figures and faces he saw, too, remnants of the wrappings notperfectly removed that spoiled the picture.“One thing might be said, if you will allow me to make theremark....” observed Golenishtchev.“Oh, I shall be delighted, I beg you,” said Mihailov with a forcedsmile.“That is, that you make Him the man-god, and not the God-man. But I knowthat was what you meant to do.”“I cannot paint a Christ that is not in my heart,” said Mihailovgloomily.“Yes; but in that case, if you will allow me to say what I think.... Yourpicture is so fine that my observation cannot detract from it, and, besides, itis only my personal opinion. With you it is different. Your very motive isdifferent. But let us take Ivanov. I imagine that if Christ is brought down tothe level of an historical character, it would have been better for Ivanov toselect some other historical subject, fresh, untouched.”“But if this is the greatest subject presented to art?”“If one looked one would find others. But the point is that art cannotsuffer doubt and discussion. And before the picture of Ivanov the questionarises for the believer and the unbeliever alike, ‘Is it God, or is itnot God?’ and the unity of the impression is destroyed.”“Why so? I think that for educated people,” said Mihailov,“the question cannot exist.”Golenishtchev did not agree with this, and confounded Mihailov by his supportof his first idea of the unity of the impression being essential to art.Mihailov was greatly perturbed, but he could say nothing in defense of his ownidea.Chapter 12Anna and Vronsky had long been exchanging glances, regretting theirfriend’s flow of cleverness. At last Vronsky, without waiting for theartist, walked away to another small picture.“Oh, how exquisite! What a lovely thing! A gem! How exquisite!”they cried with one voice.“What is it they’re so pleased with?” thought Mihailov. Hehad positively forgotten that picture he had painted three years ago. He hadforgotten all the agonies and the ecstasies he had lived through with thatpicture when for several months it had been the one thought haunting him dayand night. He had forgotten, as he always forgot, the pictures he had finished.He did not even like to look at it, and had only brought it out because he wasexpecting an Englishman who wanted to buy it.“Oh, that’s only an old study,” he said.“How fine!” said Golenishtchev, he too, with unmistakablesincerity, falling under the spell of the picture.Two boys were angling in the shade of a willow-tree. The elder had just droppedin the hook, and was carefully pulling the float from behind a bush, entirelyabsorbed in what he was doing. The other, a little younger, was lying in thegrass leaning on his elbows, with his tangled, flaxen head in his hands,staring at the water with his dreamy blue eyes. What was he thinking of?The enthusiasm over this picture stirred some of the old feeling for it inMihailov, but he feared and disliked this waste of feeling for things past, andso, even though this praise was grateful to him, he tried to draw his visitorsaway to a third picture.But Vronsky asked whether the picture was for sale. To Mihailov at that moment,excited by visitors, it was extremely distasteful to speak of money matters.“It is put up there to be sold,” he answered, scowling gloomily.When the visitors had gone, Mihailov sat down opposite the picture of Pilateand Christ, and in his mind went over what had been said, and what, though notsaid, had been implied by those visitors. And, strange to say, what had hadsuch weight with him, while they were there and while he mentally put himselfat their point of view, suddenly lost all importance for him. He began to lookat his picture with all his own full artist vision, and was soon in that moodof conviction of the perfectibility, and so of the significance, of hispicture—a conviction essential to the most intense fervor, excluding allother interests—in which alone he could work.Christ’s foreshortened leg was not right, though. He took his palette andbegan to work. As he corrected the leg he looked continually at the figure ofJohn in the background, which his visitors had not even noticed, but which heknew was beyond perfection. When he had finished the leg he wanted to touchthat figure, but he felt too much excited for it. He was equally unable to workwhen he was cold and when he was too much affected and saw everything too much.There was only one stage in the transition from coldness to inspiration, atwhich work was possible. Today he was too much agitated. He would have coveredthe picture, but he stopped, holding the cloth in his hand, and, smilingblissfully, gazed a long while at the figure of John. At last, as it wereregretfully tearing himself away, he dropped the cloth, and, exhausted buthappy, went home.Vronsky, Anna, and Golenishtchev, on their way home, were particularly livelyand cheerful. They talked of Mihailov and his pictures. The word talent,by which they meant an inborn, almost physical, aptitude apart from brain andheart, and in which they tried to find an expression for all the artist hadgained from life, recurred particularly often in their talk, as though it werenecessary for them to sum up what they had no conception of, though they wantedto talk of it. They said that there was no denying his talent, but that histalent could not develop for want of education—the common defect of ourRussian artists. But the picture of the boys had imprinted itself on theirmemories, and they were continually coming back to it. “What an exquisitething! How he has succeeded in it, and how simply! He doesn’t evencomprehend how good it is. Yes, I mustn’t let it slip; I must buyit,” said Vronsky.Chapter 13Mihailov sold Vronsky his picture, and agreed to paint a portrait of Anna. Onthe day fixed he came and began the work.From the fifth sitting the portrait impressed everyone, especially Vronsky, notonly by its resemblance, but by its characteristic beauty. It was strange howMihailov could have discovered just her characteristic beauty. “One needsto know and love her as I have loved her to discover the very sweetestexpression of her soul,” Vronsky thought, though it was only from thisportrait that he had himself learned this sweetest expression of her soul. Butthe expression was so true that he, and others too, fancied they had long knownit.“I have been struggling on for ever so long without doinganything,” he said of his own portrait of her, “and he just lookedand painted it. That’s where technique comes in.”“That will come,” was the consoling reassurance given him byGolenishtchev, in whose view Vronsky had both talent, and what was mostimportant, culture, giving him a wider outlook on art. Golenishtchev’sfaith in Vronsky’s talent was propped up by his own need ofVronsky’s sympathy and approval for his own articles and ideas, and hefelt that the praise and support must be mutual.In another man’s house, and especially in Vronsky’s palazzo,Mihailov was quite a different man from what he was in his studio. He behavedwith hostile courtesy, as though he were afraid of coming closer to people hedid not respect. He called Vronsky “your excellency,” andnotwithstanding Anna’s and Vronsky’s invitations, he would neverstay to dinner, nor come except for the sittings. Anna was even more friendlyto him than to other people, and was very grateful for her portrait. Vronskywas more than cordial with him, and was obviously interested to know theartist’s opinion of his picture. Golenishtchev never let slip anopportunity of instilling sound ideas about art into Mihailov. But Mihailovremained equally chilly to all of them. Anna was aware from his eyes that heliked looking at her, but he avoided conversation with her. Vronsky’stalk about his painting he met with stubborn silence, and he was as stubbornlysilent when he was shown Vronsky’s picture. He was unmistakably bored byGolenishtchev’s conversation, and he did not attempt to oppose him.Altogether Mihailov, with his reserved and disagreeable, as it were, hostileattitude, was quite disliked by them as they got to know him better; and theywere glad when the sittings were over, and they were left with a magnificentportrait in their possession, and he gave up coming. Golenishtchev was thefirst to give expression to an idea that had occurred to all of them, which wasthat Mihailov was simply jealous of Vronsky.“Not envious, let us say, since he has talent; but it annoys himthat a wealthy man of the highest society, and a count, too (you know they alldetest a title), can, without any particular trouble, do as well, if notbetter, than he who has devoted all his life to it. And more than all,it’s a question of culture, which he is without.”Vronsky defended Mihailov, but at the bottom of his heart he believed it,because in his view a man of a different, lower world would be sure to beenvious.Anna’s portrait—the same subject painted from nature both by himand by Mihailov—ought to have shown Vronsky the difference between himand Mihailov; but he did not see it. Only after Mihailov’s portrait waspainted he left off painting his portrait of Anna, deciding that it was now notneeded. His picture of mediæval life he went on with. And he himself, andGolenishtchev, and still more Anna, thought it very good, because it was farmore like the celebrated pictures they knew than Mihailov’s picture.Mihailov meanwhile, although Anna’s portrait greatly fascinated him, waseven more glad than they were when the sittings were over, and he had no longerto listen to Golenishtchev’s disquisitions upon art, and could forgetabout Vronsky’s painting. He knew that Vronsky could not be preventedfrom amusing himself with painting; he knew that he and all dilettanti had aperfect right to paint what they liked, but it was distasteful to him. A mancould not be prevented from making himself a big wax doll, and kissing it. Butif the man were to come with the doll and sit before a man in love, and begincaressing his doll as the lover caressed the woman he loved, it would bedistasteful to the lover. Just such a distasteful sensation was what Mihailovfelt at the sight of Vronsky’s painting: he felt it both ludicrous andirritating, both pitiable and offensive.Vronsky’s interest in painting and the Middle Ages did not last long. Hehad enough taste for painting to be unable to finish his picture. The picturecame to a standstill. He was vaguely aware that its defects, inconspicuous atfirst, would be glaring if he were to go on with it. The same experience befellhim as Golenishtchev, who felt that he had nothing to say, and continuallydeceived himself with the theory that his idea was not yet mature, that he wasworking it out and collecting materials. This exasperated and torturedGolenishtchev, but Vronsky was incapable of deceiving and torturing himself,and even more incapable of exasperation. With his characteristic decision,without explanation or apology, he simply ceased working at painting.But without this occupation, the life of Vronsky and of Anna, who wondered athis loss of interest in it, struck them as intolerably tedious in an Italiantown. The palazzo suddenly seemed so obtrusively old and dirty, the spots onthe curtains, the cracks in the floors, the broken plaster on the cornicesbecame so disagreeably obvious, and the everlasting sameness of Golenishtchev,and the Italian professor and the German traveler became so wearisome, thatthey had to make some change. They resolved to go to Russia, to the country. InPetersburg Vronsky intended to arrange a partition of the land with hisbrother, while Anna meant to see her son. The summer they intended to spend onVronsky’s great family estate.Chapter 14Levin had been married three months. He was happy, but not at all in the way hehad expected to be. At every step he found his former dreams disappointed, andnew, unexpected surprises of happiness. He was happy; but on entering uponfamily life he saw at every step that it was utterly different from what he hadimagined. At every step he experienced what a man would experience who, afteradmiring the smooth, happy course of a little boat on a lake, should gethimself into that little boat. He saw that it was not all sitting still,floating smoothly; that one had to think too, not for an instant to forgetwhere one was floating; and that there was water under one, and that one mustrow; and that his unaccustomed hands would be sore; and that it was only tolook at it that was easy; but that doing it, though very delightful, was verydifficult.As a bachelor, when he had watched other people’s married life, seen thepetty cares, the squabbles, the jealousy, he had only smiled contemptuously inhis heart. In his future married life there could be, he was convinced, nothingof that sort; even the external forms, indeed, he fancied, must be utterlyunlike the life of others in everything. And all of a sudden, instead of hislife with his wife being made on an individual pattern, it was, on thecontrary, entirely made up of the pettiest details, which he had so despisedbefore, but which now, by no will of his own, had gained an extraordinaryimportance that it was useless to contend against. And Levin saw that theorganization of all these details was by no means so easy as he had fanciedbefore. Although Levin believed himself to have the most exact conceptions ofdomestic life, unconsciously, like all men, he pictured domestic life as thehappiest enjoyment of love, with nothing to hinder and no petty cares todistract. He ought, as he conceived the position, to do his work, and to findrepose from it in the happiness of love. She ought to be beloved, and nothingmore. But, like all men, he forgot that she too would want work. And he wassurprised that she, his poetic, exquisite Kitty, could, not merely in the firstweeks, but even in the first days of their married life, think, remember, andbusy herself about tablecloths, and furniture, about mattresses for visitors,about a tray, about the cook, and the dinner, and so on. While they were stillengaged, he had been struck by the definiteness with which she had declined thetour abroad and decided to go into the country, as though she knew of somethingshe wanted, and could still think of something outside her love. This hadjarred upon him then, and now her trivial cares and anxieties jarred upon himseveral times. But he saw that this was essential for her. And, loving her ashe did, though he did not understand the reason of them, and jeered at thesedomestic pursuits, he could not help admiring them. He jeered at the way inwhich she arranged the furniture they had brought from Moscow; rearranged theirroom; hung up curtains; prepared rooms for visitors; a room for Dolly; sawafter an abode for her new maid; ordered dinner of the old cook; came intocollision with Agafea Mihalovna, taking from her the charge of the stores. Hesaw how the old cook smiled, admiring her, and listening to her inexperienced,impossible orders, how mournfully and tenderly Agafea Mihalovna shook her headover the young mistress’s new arrangements. He saw that Kitty wasextraordinarily sweet when, laughing and crying, she came to tell him that hermaid, Masha, was used to looking upon her as her young lady, and so no oneobeyed her. It seemed to him sweet, but strange, and he thought it would havebeen better without this.He did not know how great a sense of change she was experiencing; she, who athome had sometimes wanted some favorite dish, or sweets, without thepossibility of getting either, now could order what she liked, buy pounds ofsweets, spend as much money as she liked, and order any puddings she pleased.She was dreaming with delight now of Dolly’s coming to them with herchildren, especially because she would order for the children their favoritepuddings and Dolly would appreciate all her new housekeeping. She did not knowherself why and wherefore, but the arranging of her house had an irresistibleattraction for her. Instinctively feeling the approach of spring, and knowingthat there would be days of rough weather too, she built her nest as best shecould, and was in haste at the same time to build it and to learn how to do it.This care for domestic details in Kitty, so opposed to Levin’s ideal ofexalted happiness, was at first one of the disappointments; and this sweet careof her household, the aim of which he did not understand, but could not helploving, was one of the new happy surprises.Another disappointment and happy surprise came in their quarrels. Levin couldnever have conceived that between him and his wife any relations could ariseother than tender, respectful and loving, and all at once in the very earlydays they quarreled, so that she said he did not care for her, that he caredfor no one but himself, burst into tears, and wrung her arms.This first quarrel arose from Levin’s having gone out to a new farmhouseand having been away half an hour too long, because he had tried to get home bya short cut and had lost his way. He drove home thinking of nothing but her, ofher love, of his own happiness, and the nearer he drew to home, the warmer washis tenderness for her. He ran into the room with the same feeling, with aneven stronger feeling than he had had when he reached the Shtcherbatskys’house to make his offer. And suddenly he was met by a lowering expression hehad never seen in her. He would have kissed her; she pushed him away.“What is it?”“You’ve been enjoying yourself,” she began, trying to be calmand spiteful. But as soon as she opened her mouth, a stream of reproach, ofsenseless jealousy, of all that had been torturing her during that half hourwhich she had spent sitting motionless at the window, burst from her. It wasonly then, for the first time, that he clearly understood what he had notunderstood when he led her out of the church after the wedding. He felt nowthat he was not simply close to her, but that he did not know where he endedand she began. He felt this from the agonizing sensation of division that heexperienced at that instant. He was offended for the first instant, but thevery same second he felt that he could not be offended by her, that she washimself. He felt for the first moment as a man feels when, having suddenlyreceived a violent blow from behind, he turns round, angry and eager to avengehimself, to look for his antagonist, and finds that it is he himself who hasaccidentally struck himself, that there is no one to be angry with, and that hemust put up with and try to soothe the pain.Never afterwards did he feel it with such intensity, but this first time hecould not for a long while get over it. His natural feeling urged him to defendhimself, to prove to her she was wrong; but to prove her wrong would meanirritating her still more and making the rupture greater that was the cause ofall his suffering. One habitual feeling impelled him to get rid of the blameand to pass it on to her. Another feeling, even stronger, impelled him asquickly as possible to smooth over the rupture without letting it grow greater.To remain under such undeserved reproach was wretched, but to make her sufferby justifying himself was worse still. Like a man half-awake in an agony ofpain, he wanted to tear out, to fling away the aching place, and coming to hissenses, he felt that the aching place was himself. He could do nothing but tryto help the aching place to bear it, and this he tried to do.They made peace. She, recognizing that she was wrong, though she did not sayso, became tenderer to him, and they experienced new, redoubled happiness intheir love. But that did not prevent such quarrels from happening again, andexceedingly often too, on the most unexpected and trivial grounds. Thesequarrels frequently arose from the fact that they did not yet know what was ofimportance to each other and that all this early period they were both often ina bad temper. When one was in a good temper, and the other in a bad temper, thepeace was not broken; but when both happened to be in an ill-humor, quarrelssprang up from such incomprehensibly trifling causes, that they could neverremember afterwards what they had quarreled about. It is true that when theywere both in a good temper their enjoyment of life was redoubled. But stillthis first period of their married life was a difficult time for them.During all this early time they had a peculiarly vivid sense of tension, as itwere, a tugging in opposite directions of the chain by which they were bound.Altogether their honeymoon—that is to say, the month after theirwedding—from which from tradition Levin expected so much, was not merelynot a time of sweetness, but remained in the memories of both as the bitterestand most humiliating period in their lives. They both alike tried in later lifeto blot out from their memories all the monstrous, shameful incidents of thatmorbid period, when both were rarely in a normal frame of mind, both wererarely quite themselves.It was only in the third month of their married life, after their return fromMoscow, where they had been staying for a month, that their life began to gomore smoothly.Chapter 15They had just come back from Moscow, and were glad to be alone. He was sittingat the writing-table in his study, writing. She, wearing the dark lilac dressshe had worn during the first days of their married life, and put on againtoday, a dress particularly remembered and loved by him, was sitting on thesofa, the same old-fashioned leather sofa which had always stood in the studyin Levin’s father’s and grandfather’s days. She was sewing atbroderie anglaise. He thought and wrote, never losing the happyconsciousness of her presence. His work, both on the land and on the book, inwhich the principles of the new land system were to be laid down, had not beenabandoned; but just as formerly these pursuits and ideas had seemed to himpetty and trivial in comparison with the darkness that overspread all life, nowthey seemed as unimportant and petty in comparison with the life that laybefore him suffused with the brilliant light of happiness. He went on with hiswork, but he felt now that the center of gravity of his attention had passed tosomething else, and that consequently he looked at his work quite differentlyand more clearly. Formerly this work had been for him an escape from life.Formerly he had felt that without this work his life would be too gloomy. Nowthese pursuits were necessary for him that life might not be too uniformlybright. Taking up his manuscript, reading through what he had written, he foundwith pleasure that the work was worth his working at. Many of his old ideasseemed to him superfluous and extreme, but many blanks became distinct to himwhen he reviewed the whole thing in his memory. He was writing now a newchapter on the causes of the present disastrous condition of agriculture inRussia. He maintained that the poverty of Russia arises not merely from theanomalous distribution of landed property and misdirected reforms, but thatwhat had contributed of late years to this result was the civilization fromwithout abnormally grafted upon Russia, especially facilities of communication,as railways, leading to centralization in towns, the development of luxury, andthe consequent development of manufactures, credit and its accompaniment ofspeculation—all to the detriment of agriculture. It seemed to him that ina normal development of wealth in a state all these phenomena would arise onlywhen a considerable amount of labor had been put into agriculture, when it hadcome under regular, or at least definite, conditions; that the wealth of acountry ought to increase proportionally, and especially in such a way thatother sources of wealth should not outstrip agriculture; that in harmony with acertain stage of agriculture there should be means of communicationcorresponding to it, and that in our unsettled condition of the land, railways,called into being by political and not by economic needs, were premature, andinstead of promoting agriculture, as was expected of them, they were competingwith agriculture and promoting the development of manufactures and credit, andso arresting its progress; and that just as the one-sided and prematuredevelopment of one organ in an animal would hinder its general development, soin the general development of wealth in Russia, credit, facilities ofcommunication, manufacturing activity, indubitably necessary in Europe, wherethey had arisen in their proper time, had with us only done harm, by throwinginto the background the chief question calling for settlement—thequestion of the organization of agriculture.While he was writing his ideas she was thinking how unnaturally cordial herhusband had been to young Prince Tcharsky, who had, with great want of tact,flirted with her the day before they left Moscow. “He’sjealous,” she thought. “Goodness! how sweet and silly he is!He’s jealous of me! If he knew that I think no more of them than of Piotrthe cook,” she thought, looking at his head and red neck with a feelingof possession strange to herself. “Though it’s a pity to take himfrom his work (but he has plenty of time!), I must look at his face; will hefeel I’m looking at him? I wish he’d turn round ... I’llwill him to!” and she opened her eyes wide, as though to intensifythe influence of her gaze.“Yes, they draw away all the sap and give a false appearance ofprosperity,” he muttered, stopping to write, and, feeling that she waslooking at him and smiling, he looked round.“Well?” he queried, smiling, and getting up.“He looked round,” she thought.“It’s nothing; I wanted you to look round,” she said,watching him, and trying to guess whether he was vexed at being interrupted ornot.“How happy we are alone together!—I am, that is,” he said,going up to her with a radiant smile of happiness.“I’m just as happy. I’ll never go anywhere, especially not toMoscow.”“And what were you thinking about?”“I? I was thinking.... No, no, go along, go on writing; don’t breakoff,” she said, pursing up her lips, “and I must cut out theselittle holes now, do you see?”She took up her scissors and began cutting them out.“No; tell me, what was it?” he said, sitting down beside her andwatching the tiny scissors moving round.“Oh! what was I thinking about? I was thinking about Moscow, about theback of your head.”“Why should I, of all people, have such happiness! It’s unnatural,too good,” he said, kissing her hand.“I feel quite the opposite; the better things are, the more natural itseems to me.”“And you’ve got a little curl loose,” he said, carefullyturning her head round.“A little curl, oh yes. No, no, we are busy at our work!”Work did not progress further, and they darted apart from one another likeculprits when Kouzma came in to announce that tea was ready.“Have they come from the town?” Levin asked Kouzma.“They’ve just come; they’re unpacking the things.”“Come quickly,” she said to him as she went out of the study,“or else I shall read your letters without you.”Left alone, after putting his manuscripts together in the new portfolio boughtby her, he washed his hands at the new washstand with the elegant fittings,that had all made their appearance with her. Levin smiled at his own thoughts,and shook his head disapprovingly at those thoughts; a feeling akin to remorsefretted him. There was something shameful, effeminate, Capuan, as he called itto himself, in his present mode of life. “It’s not right to go onlike this,” he thought. “It’ll soon be three months, andI’m doing next to nothing. Today, almost for the first time, I set towork seriously, and what happened? I did nothing but begin and throw it aside.Even my ordinary pursuits I have almost given up. On the land I scarcely walkor drive about at all to look after things. Either I am loath to leave her, orI see she’s dull alone. And I used to think that, before marriage, lifewas nothing much, somehow didn’t count, but that after marriage, lifebegan in earnest. And here almost three months have passed, and I have spent mytime so idly and unprofitably. No, this won’t do; I must begin. Ofcourse, it’s not her fault. She’s not to blame in any way. I oughtmyself to be firmer, to maintain my masculine independence of action; or else Ishall get into such ways, and she’ll get used to them too.... Of courseshe’s not to blame,” he told himself.But it is hard for anyone who is dissatisfied not to blame someone else, andespecially the person nearest of all to him, for the ground of hisdissatisfaction. And it vaguely came into Levin’s mind that she herselfwas not to blame (she could not be to blame for anything), but what was toblame was her education, too superficial and frivolous. (“That foolTcharsky: she wanted, I know, to stop him, but didn’t know howto.”) “Yes, apart from her interest in the house (that she has),apart from dress and broderie anglaise, she has no serious interests. Nointerest in her work, in the estate, in the peasants, nor in music, thoughshe’s rather good at it, nor in reading. She does nothing, and isperfectly satisfied.” Levin, in his heart, censured this, and did not asyet understand that she was preparing for that period of activity which was tocome for her when she would at once be the wife of her husband and mistress ofthe house, and would bear, and nurse, and bring up children. He knew not thatshe was instinctively aware of this, and preparing herself for this time ofterrible toil, did not reproach herself for the moments of carelessness andhappiness in her love that she enjoyed now while gaily building her nest forthe future.Chapter 16When Levin went upstairs, his wife was sitting near the new silver samovarbehind the new tea service, and, having settled old Agafea Mihalovna at alittle table with a full cup of tea, was reading a letter from Dolly, with whomthey were in continual and frequent correspondence.“You see, your good lady’s settled me here, told me to sit a bitwith her,” said Agafea Mihalovna, smiling affectionately at Kitty.In these words of Agafea Mihalovna, Levin read the final act of the drama whichhad been enacted of late between her and Kitty. He saw that, in spite of AgafeaMihalovna’s feelings being hurt by a new mistress taking the reins ofgovernment out of her hands, Kitty had yet conquered her and made her love her.“Here, I opened your letter too,” said Kitty, handing him anilliterate letter. “It’s from that woman, I think, yourbrother’s....” she said. “I did not read it through. This isfrom my people and from Dolly. Fancy! Dolly took Tanya and Grisha to achildren’s ball at the Sarmatskys’: Tanya was a Frenchmarquise.”But Levin did not hear her. Flushing, he took the letter from Marya Nikolaevna,his brother’s former mistress, and began to read it. This was the secondletter he had received from Marya Nikolaevna. In the first letter, MaryaNikolaevna wrote that his brother had sent her away for no fault of hers, and,with touching simplicity, added that though she was in want again, she askedfor nothing, and wished for nothing, but was only tormented by the thought thatNikolay Dmitrievitch would come to grief without her, owing to the weak stateof his health, and begged his brother to look after him. Now she wrote quitedifferently. She had found Nikolay Dmitrievitch, had again made it up with himin Moscow, and had moved with him to a provincial town, where he had received apost in the government service. But that he had quarreled with the headofficial, and was on his way back to Moscow, only he had been taken so ill onthe road that it was doubtful if he would ever leave his bed again, she wrote.“It’s always of you he has talked, and, besides, he has no moremoney left.”“Read this; Dolly writes about you,” Kitty was beginning, with asmile; but she stopped suddenly, noticing the changed expression on herhusband’s face.“What is it? What’s the matter?”“She writes to me that Nikolay, my brother, is at death’s door. Ishall go to him.”Kitty’s face changed at once. Thoughts of Tanya as a marquise, of Dolly,all had vanished.“When are you going?” she said.“Tomorrow.”“And I will go with you, can I?” she said.“Kitty! What are you thinking of?” he said reproachfully.“How do you mean?” offended that he should seem to take hersuggestion unwillingly and with vexation. “Why shouldn’t I go? Ishan’t be in your way. I....”“I’m going because my brother is dying,” said Levin.“Why should you....”“Why? For the same reason as you.”“And, at a moment of such gravity for me, she only thinks of her beingdull by herself,” thought Levin. And this lack of candor in a matter ofsuch gravity infuriated him.“It’s out of the question,” he said sternly.Agafea Mihalovna, seeing that it was coming to a quarrel, gently put down hercup and withdrew. Kitty did not even notice her. The tone in which her husbandhad said the last words wounded her, especially because he evidently did notbelieve what she had said.“I tell you, that if you go, I shall come with you; I shall certainlycome,” she said hastily and wrathfully. “Why out of the question?Why do you say it’s out of the question?”“Because it’ll be going God knows where, by all sorts of roads andto all sorts of hotels. You would be a hindrance to me,” said Levin,trying to be cool.“Not at all. I don’t want anything. Where you can go, Ican....”“Well, for one thing then, because this woman’s there whom youcan’t meet.”“I don’t know and don’t care to know who’s there andwhat. I know that my husband’s brother is dying and my husband is goingto him, and I go with my husband too....”“Kitty! Don’t get angry. But just think a little: this is a matterof such importance that I can’t bear to think that you should bring in afeeling of weakness, of dislike to being left alone. Come, you’ll be dullalone, so go and stay at Moscow a little.”“There, you always ascribe base, vile motives to me,” she said withtears of wounded pride and fury. “I didn’t mean, it wasn’tweakness, it wasn’t ... I feel that it’s my duty to be with myhusband when he’s in trouble, but you try on purpose to hurt me, you tryon purpose not to understand....”“No; this is awful! To be such a slave!” cried Levin, getting up,and unable to restrain his anger any longer. But at the same second he feltthat he was beating himself.“Then why did you marry? You could have been free. Why did you, if youregret it?” she said, getting up and running away into the drawing-room.When he went to her, she was sobbing.He began to speak, trying to find words not to dissuade but simply to sootheher. But she did not heed him, and would not agree to anything. He bent down toher and took her hand, which resisted him. He kissed her hand, kissed her hair,kissed her hand again—still she was silent. But when he took her face inboth his hands and said “Kitty!” she suddenly recovered herself,and began to cry, and they were reconciled.It was decided that they should go together the next day. Levin told his wifethat he believed she wanted to go simply in order to be of use, agreed thatMarya Nikolaevna’s being with his brother did not make her goingimproper, but he set off at the bottom of his heart dissatisfied both with herand with himself. He was dissatisfied with her for being unable to make up hermind to let him go when it was necessary (and how strange it was for him tothink that he, so lately hardly daring to believe in such happiness as that shecould love him—now was unhappy because she loved him too much!), and hewas dissatisfied with himself for not showing more strength of will. Evengreater was the feeling of disagreement at the bottom of his heart as to hernot needing to consider the woman who was with his brother, and he thought withhorror of all the contingencies they might meet with. The mere idea of hiswife, his Kitty, being in the same room with a common wench, set him shudderingwith horror and loathing.Chapter 17The hotel of the provincial town where Nikolay Levin was lying ill was one ofthose provincial hotels which are constructed on the newest model of modernimprovements, with the best intentions of cleanliness, comfort, and evenelegance, but owing to the public that patronizes them, are with astoundingrapidity transformed into filthy taverns with a pretension of modernimprovement that only makes them worse than the old-fashioned, honestly filthyhotels. This hotel had already reached that stage, and the soldier in a filthyuniform smoking in the entry, supposed to stand for a hall-porter, and thecast-iron, slippery, dark, and disagreeable staircase, and the free and easywaiter in a filthy frock coat, and the common dining-room with a dusty bouquetof wax flowers adorning the table, and filth, dust, and disorder everywhere,and at the same time the sort of modern up-to-date self-complacent railwayuneasiness of this hotel, aroused a most painful feeling in Levin after theirfresh young life, especially because the impression of falsity made by thehotel was so out of keeping with what awaited them.As is invariably the case, after they had been asked at what price they wantedrooms, it appeared that there was not one decent room for them; one decent roomhad been taken by the inspector of railroads, another by a lawyer from Moscow,a third by Princess Astafieva from the country. There remained only one filthyroom, next to which they promised that another should be empty by the evening.Feeling angry with his wife because what he had expected had come to pass,which was that at the moment of arrival, when his heart throbbed with emotionand anxiety to know how his brother was getting on, he should have to be seeingafter her, instead of rushing straight to his brother, Levin conducted her tothe room assigned them.“Go, do go!” she said, looking at him with timid and guilty eyes.He went out of the door without a word, and at once stumbled over MaryaNikolaevna, who had heard of his arrival and had not dared to go in to see him.She was just the same as when he saw her in Moscow; the same woolen gown, andbare arms and neck, and the same good-naturedly stupid, pockmarked face, only alittle plumper.“Well, how is he? how is he?”“Very bad. He can’t get up. He has kept expecting you. He.... Areyou ... with your wife?”Levin did not for the first moment understand what it was confused her, but sheimmediately enlightened him.“I’ll go away. I’ll go down to the kitchen,” shebrought out. “Nikolay Dmitrievitch will be delighted. He heard about it,and knows your lady, and remembers her abroad.”Levin realized that she meant his wife, and did not know what answer to make.“Come along, come along to him!” he said.But as soon as he moved, the door of his room opened and Kitty peeped out.Levin crimsoned both from shame and anger with his wife, who had put herselfand him in such a difficult position; but Marya Nikolaevna crimsoned stillmore. She positively shrank together and flushed to the point of tears, andclutching the ends of her apron in both hands, twisted them in her red fingerswithout knowing what to say and what to do.For the first instant Levin saw an expression of eager curiosity in the eyeswith which Kitty looked at this awful woman, so incomprehensible to her; but itlasted only a single instant.“Well! how is he?” she turned to her husband and then to her.“But one can’t go on talking in the passage like this!” Levinsaid, looking angrily at a gentleman who walked jauntily at that instant acrossthe corridor, as though about his affairs.“Well then, come in,” said Kitty, turning to Marya Nikolaevna, whohad recovered herself, but noticing her husband’s face of dismay,“or go on; go, and then come for me,” she said, and went back intothe room.Levin went to his brother’s room. He had not in the least expected whathe saw and felt in his brother’s room. He had expected to find him in thesame state of self-deception which he had heard was so frequent with theconsumptive, and which had struck him so much during his brother’s visitin the autumn. He had expected to find the physical signs of the approach ofdeath more marked—greater weakness, greater emaciation, but still almostthe same condition of things. He had expected himself to feel the same distressat the loss of the brother he loved and the same horror in face of death as hehad felt then, only in a greater degree. And he had prepared himself for this;but he found something utterly different.In a little dirty room with the painted panels of its walls filthy withspittle, and conversation audible through the thin partition from the nextroom, in a stifling atmosphere saturated with impurities, on a bedstead movedaway from the wall, there lay covered with a quilt, a body. One arm of thisbody was above the quilt, and the wrist, huge as a rake-handle, was attached,inconceivably it seemed, to the thin, long bone of the arm smooth from thebeginning to the middle. The head lay sideways on the pillow. Levin could seethe scanty locks wet with sweat on the temples and tense, transparent-lookingforehead.“It cannot be that that fearful body was my brother Nikolay?”thought Levin. But he went closer, saw the face, and doubt became impossible.In spite of the terrible change in the face, Levin had only to glance at thoseeager eyes raised at his approach, only to catch the faint movement of themouth under the sticky mustache, to realize the terrible truth that thisdeath-like body was his living brother.The glittering eyes looked sternly and reproachfully at his brother as he drewnear. And immediately this glance established a living relationship betweenliving men. Levin immediately felt the reproach in the eyes fixed on him, andfelt remorse at his own happiness.When Konstantin took him by the hand, Nikolay smiled. The smile was faint,scarcely perceptible, and in spite of the smile the stern expression of theeyes was unchanged.“You did not expect to find me like this,” he articulated witheffort.“Yes ... no,” said Levin, hesitating over his words. “How wasit you didn’t let me know before, that is, at the time of my wedding? Imade inquiries in all directions.”He had to talk so as not to be silent, and he did not know what to say,especially as his brother made no reply, and simply stared without dropping hiseyes, and evidently penetrated to the inner meaning of each word. Levin toldhis brother that his wife had come with him. Nikolay expressed pleasure, butsaid he was afraid of frightening her by his condition. A silence followed.Suddenly Nikolay stirred, and began to say something. Levin expected somethingof peculiar gravity and importance from the expression of his face, but Nikolaybegan speaking of his health. He found fault with the doctor, regretting he hadnot a celebrated Moscow doctor. Levin saw that he still hoped.Seizing the first moment of silence, Levin got up, anxious to escape, if onlyfor an instant, from his agonizing emotion, and said that he would go and fetchhis wife.“Very well, and I’ll tell her to tidy up here. It’s dirty andstinking here, I expect. Marya! clear up the room,” the sick man saidwith effort. “Oh, and when you’ve cleared up, go awayyourself,” he added, looking inquiringly at his brother.Levin made no answer. Going out into the corridor, he stopped short. He hadsaid he would fetch his wife, but now, taking stock of the emotion he wasfeeling, he decided that he would try on the contrary to persuade her not to goin to the sick man. “Why should she suffer as I am suffering?” hethought.“Well, how is he?” Kitty asked with a frightened face.“Oh, it’s awful, it’s awful! What did you come for?”said Levin.Kitty was silent for a few seconds, looking timidly and ruefully at herhusband; then she went up and took him by the elbow with both hands.“Kostya! take me to him; it will be easier for us to bear it together.You only take me, take me to him, please, and go away,” she said.“You must understand that for me to see you, and not to see him, is farmore painful. There I might be a help to you and to him. Please, let me!”she besought her husband, as though the happiness of her life depended on it.Levin was obliged to agree, and regaining his composure, and completelyforgetting about Marya Nikolaevna by now, he went again in to his brother withKitty.Stepping lightly, and continually glancing at her husband, showing him avalorous and sympathetic face, Kitty went into the sick-room, and, turningwithout haste, noiselessly closed the door. With inaudible steps she wentquickly to the sick man’s bedside, and going up so that he had not toturn his head, she immediately clasped in her fresh young hand the skeleton ofhis huge hand, pressed it, and began speaking with that soft eagerness,sympathetic and not jarring, which is peculiar to women.“We have met, though we were not acquainted, at Soden,” she said.“You never thought I was to be your sister?”“You would not have recognized me?” he said, with a radiant smileat her entrance.“Yes, I should. What a good thing you let us know! Not a day has passedthat Kostya has not mentioned you, and been anxious.”But the sick man’s interest did not last long.Before she had finished speaking, there had come back into his face the stern,reproachful expression of the dying man’s envy of the living.“I am afraid you are not quite comfortable here,” she said, turningaway from his fixed stare, and looking about the room. “We must ask aboutanother room,” she said to her husband, “so that we might benearer.”Chapter 18Levin could not look calmly at his brother; he could not himself be natural andcalm in his presence. When he went in to the sick man, his eyes and hisattention were unconsciously dimmed, and he did not see and did not distinguishthe details of his brother’s position. He smelt the awful odor, saw thedirt, disorder, and miserable condition, and heard the groans, and felt thatnothing could be done to help. It never entered his head to analyze the detailsof the sick man’s situation, to consider how that body was lying underthe quilt, how those emaciated legs and thighs and spine were lying huddled up,and whether they could not be made more comfortable, whether anything could notbe done to make things, if not better, at least less bad. It made his blood runcold when he began to think of all these details. He was absolutely convincedthat nothing could be done to prolong his brother’s life or to relievehis suffering. But a sense of his regarding all aid as out of the question wasfelt by the sick man, and exasperated him. And this made it still more painfulfor Levin. To be in the sick-room was agony to him, not to be there stillworse. And he was continually, on various pretexts, going out of the room, andcoming in again, because he was unable to remain alone.But Kitty thought, and felt, and acted quite differently. On seeing the sickman, she pitied him. And pity in her womanly heart did not arouse at all thatfeeling of horror and loathing that it aroused in her husband, but a desire toact, to find out all the details of his state, and to remedy them. And sinceshe had not the slightest doubt that it was her duty to help him, she had nodoubt either that it was possible, and immediately set to work. The verydetails, the mere thought of which reduced her husband to terror, immediatelyengaged her attention. She sent for the doctor, sent to the chemist’s,set the maid who had come with her and Marya Nikolaevna to sweep and dust andscrub; she herself washed up something, washed out something else, laidsomething under the quilt. Something was by her directions brought into thesick-room, something else was carried out. She herself went several times toher room, regardless of the men she met in the corridor, got out and brought insheets, pillow cases, towels, and shirts.The waiter, who was busy with a party of engineers dining in the dining hall,came several times with an irate countenance in answer to her summons, andcould not avoid carrying out her orders, as she gave them with such graciousinsistence that there was no evading her. Levin did not approve of all this; hedid not believe it would be of any good to the patient. Above all, he fearedthe patient would be angry at it. But the sick man, though he seemed and wasindifferent about it, was not angry, but only abashed, and on the whole as itwere interested in what she was doing with him. Coming back from the doctor towhom Kitty had sent him, Levin, on opening the door, came upon the sick man atthe instant when, by Kitty’s directions, they were changing his linen.The long white ridge of his spine, with the huge, prominent shoulder blades andjutting ribs and vertebrae, was bare, and Marya Nikolaevna and the waiter werestruggling with the sleeve of the night shirt, and could not get the long, limparm into it. Kitty, hurriedly closing the door after Levin, was not lookingthat way; but the sick man groaned, and she moved rapidly towards him.“Make haste,” she said.“Oh, don’t you come,” said the sick man angrily.“I’ll do it my myself....”“What say?” queried Marya Nikolaevna. But Kitty heard and saw hewas ashamed and uncomfortable at being naked before her.“I’m not looking, I’m not looking!” she said, puttingthe arm in. “Marya Nikolaevna, you come this side, you do it,” sheadded.“Please go for me, there’s a little bottle in my small bag,”she said, turning to her husband, “you know, in the side pocket; bringit, please, and meanwhile they’ll finish clearing up here.”Returning with the bottle, Levin found the sick man settled comfortably andeverything about him completely changed. The heavy smell was replaced by thesmell of aromatic vinegar, which Kitty with pouting lips and puffed-out, rosycheeks was squirting through a little pipe. There was no dust visible anywhere,a rug was laid by the bedside. On the table stood medicine bottles anddecanters tidily arranged, and the linen needed was folded up there, andKitty’s broderie anglaise. On the other table by thepatient’s bed there were candles and drink and powders. The sick manhimself, washed and combed, lay in clean sheets on high raised pillows, in aclean night-shirt with a white collar about his astoundingly thin neck, andwith a new expression of hope looked fixedly at Kitty.The doctor brought by Levin, and found by him at the club, was not the one whohad been attending Nikolay Levin, as the patient was dissatisfied with him. Thenew doctor took up a stethoscope and sounded the patient, shook his head,prescribed medicine, and with extreme minuteness explained first how to takethe medicine and then what diet was to be kept to. He advised eggs, raw orhardly cooked, and seltzer water, with warm milk at a certain temperature. Whenthe doctor had gone away the sick man said something to his brother, of whichLevin could distinguish only the last words: “Your Katya.” By theexpression with which he gazed at her, Levin saw that he was praising her. Hecalled indeed to Katya, as he called her.“I’m much better already,” he said. “Why, with you Ishould have got well long ago. How nice it is!” he took her hand and drewit towards his lips, but as though afraid she would dislike it he changed hismind, let it go, and only stroked it. Kitty took his hand in both hers andpressed it.“Now turn me over on the left side and go to bed,” he said.No one could make out what he said but Kitty; she alone understood. Sheunderstood because she was all the while mentally keeping watch on what heneeded.“On the other side,” she said to her husband, “he alwayssleeps on that side. Turn him over, it’s so disagreeable calling theservants. I’m not strong enough. Can you?” she said to MaryaNikolaevna.“I’m afraid not,” answered Marya Nikolaevna.Terrible as it was to Levin to put his arms round that terrible body, to takehold of that under the quilt, of which he preferred to know nothing, under hiswife’s influence he made his resolute face that she knew so well, andputting his arms into the bed took hold of the body, but in spite of his ownstrength he was struck by the strange heaviness of those powerless limbs. Whilehe was turning him over, conscious of the huge emaciated arm about his neck,Kitty swiftly and noiselessly turned the pillow, beat it up and settled in itthe sick man’s head, smoothing back his hair, which was sticking again tohis moist brow.The sick man kept his brother’s hand in his own. Levin felt that he meantto do something with his hand and was pulling it somewhere. Levin yielded witha sinking heart: yes, he drew it to his mouth and kissed it. Levin, shakingwith sobs and unable to articulate a word, went out of the room.Chapter 19“Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealedthem unto babes.” So Levin thought about his wife as he talked to herthat evening.Levin thought of the text, not because he considered himself “wise andprudent.” He did not so consider himself, but he could not help knowingthat he had more intellect than his wife and Agafea Mihalovna, and he could nothelp knowing that when he thought of death, he thought with all the force ofhis intellect. He knew too that the brains of many great men, whose thoughts hehad read, had brooded over death and yet knew not a hundredth part of what hiswife and Agafea Mihalovna knew about it. Different as those two women were,Agafea Mihalovna and Katya, as his brother Nikolay had called her, and as Levinparticularly liked to call her now, they were quite alike in this. Both knew,without a shade of doubt, what sort of thing life was and what was death, andthough neither of them could have answered, and would even not have understoodthe questions that presented themselves to Levin, both had no doubt of thesignificance of this event, and were precisely alike in their way of looking atit, which they shared with millions of people. The proof that they knew for acertainty the nature of death lay in the fact that they knew without a secondof hesitation how to deal with the dying, and were not frightened of them.Levin and other men like him, though they could have said a great deal aboutdeath, obviously did not know this since they were afraid of death, and wereabsolutely at a loss what to do when people were dying. If Levin had been alonenow with his brother Nikolay, he would have looked at him with terror, and withstill greater terror waited, and would not have known what else to do.More than that, he did not know what to say, how to look, how to move. To talkof outside things seemed to him shocking, impossible, to talk of death anddepressing subjects—also impossible. To be silent, also impossible.“If I look at him he will think I am studying him, I am afraid; if Idon’t look at him, he’ll think I’m thinking of other things.If I walk on tiptoe, he will be vexed; to tread firmly, I’mashamed.” Kitty evidently did not think of herself, and had no time tothink about herself: she was thinking about him because she knew something, andall went well. She told him about herself even and about her wedding, andsmiled and sympathized with him and petted him, and talked of cases of recoveryand all went well; so then she must know. The proof that her behavior andAgafea Mihalovna’s was not instinctive, animal, irrational, was thatapart from the physical treatment, the relief of suffering, both AgafeaMihalovna and Kitty required for the dying man something else more importantthan the physical treatment, and something which had nothing in common withphysical conditions. Agafea Mihalovna, speaking of the man just dead, had said:“Well, thank God, he took the sacrament and received absolution; Godgrant each one of us such a death.” Katya in just the same way, besidesall her care about linen, bedsores, drink, found time the very first day topersuade the sick man of the necessity of taking the sacrament and receivingabsolution.On getting back from the sick-room to their own two rooms for the night, Levinsat with hanging head not knowing what to do. Not to speak of supper, ofpreparing for bed, of considering what they were going to do, he could not eventalk to his wife; he was ashamed to. Kitty, on the contrary, was more activethan usual. She was even livelier than usual. She ordered supper to be brought,herself unpacked their things, and herself helped to make the beds, and did noteven forget to sprinkle them with Persian powder. She showed that alertness,that swiftness of reflection which comes out in men before a battle, inconflict, in the dangerous and decisive moments of life—those momentswhen a man shows once and for all his value, and that all his past has not beenwasted but has been a preparation for these moments.Everything went rapidly in her hands, and before it was twelve o’clockall their things were arranged cleanly and tidily in her rooms, in such a waythat the hotel rooms seemed like home: the beds were made, brushes, combs,looking-glasses were put out, table napkins were spread.Levin felt that it was unpardonable to eat, to sleep, to talk even now, and itseemed to him that every movement he made was unseemly. She arranged thebrushes, but she did it all so that there was nothing shocking in it.They could neither of them eat, however, and for a long while they could notsleep, and did not even go to bed.“I am very glad I persuaded him to receive extreme unctiontomorrow,” she said, sitting in her dressing jacket before her foldinglooking-glass, combing her soft, fragrant hair with a fine comb. “I havenever seen it, but I know, mamma has told me, there are prayers said forrecovery.”“Do you suppose he can possibly recover?” said Levin, watching aslender tress at the back of her round little head that was continually hiddenwhen she passed the comb through the front.“I asked the doctor; he said he couldn’t live more than three days.But can they be sure? I’m very glad, anyway, that I persuaded him,”she said, looking askance at her husband through her hair. “Anything ispossible,” she added with that peculiar, rather sly expression that wasalways in her face when she spoke of religion.Since their conversation about religion when they were engaged neither of themhad ever started a discussion of the subject, but she performed all theceremonies of going to church, saying her prayers, and so on, always with theunvarying conviction that this ought to be so. In spite of his assertion to thecontrary, she was firmly persuaded that he was as much a Christian as she, andindeed a far better one; and all that he said about it was simply one of hisabsurd masculine freaks, just as he would say about her broderieanglaise that good people patch holes, but that she cut them on purpose,and so on.“Yes, you see this woman, Marya Nikolaevna, did not know how to manageall this,” said Levin. “And ... I must own I’m very, veryglad you came. You are such purity that....” He took her hand and did notkiss it (to kiss her hand in such closeness to death seemed to him improper);he merely squeezed it with a penitent air, looking at her brightening eyes.“It would have been miserable for you to be alone,” she said, andlifting her hands which hid her cheeks flushing with pleasure, twisted her coilof hair on the nape of her neck and pinned it there. “No,” she wenton, “she did not know how.... Luckily, I learned a lot at Soden.”“Surely there are not people there so ill?”“Worse.”“What’s so awful to me is that I can’t see him as he was whenhe was young. You would not believe how charming he was as a youth, but I didnot understand him then.”“I can quite, quite believe it. How I feel that we might have beenfriends!” she said; and, distressed at what she had said, she lookedround at her husband, and tears came into her eyes.“Yes, might have been,” he said mournfully.“He’s just one of those people of whom they say they’re notfor this world.”“But we have many days before us; we must go to bed,” said Kitty,glancing at her tiny watch.Chapter 20The next day the sick man received the sacrament and extreme unction. Duringthe ceremony Nikolay Levin prayed fervently. His great eyes, fastened on theholy image that was set out on a card-table covered with a colored napkin,expressed such passionate prayer and hope that it was awful to Levin to see it.Levin knew that this passionate prayer and hope would only make him feel morebitterly parting from the life he so loved. Levin knew his brother and theworkings of his intellect: he knew that his unbelief came not from life beingeasier for him without faith, but had grown up because step by step thecontemporary scientific interpretation of natural phenomena crushed out thepossibility of faith; and so he knew that his present return was not alegitimate one, brought about by way of the same working of his intellect, butsimply a temporary, interested return to faith in a desperate hope of recovery.Levin knew too that Kitty had strengthened his hope by accounts of themarvelous recoveries she had heard of. Levin knew all this; and it wasagonizingly painful to him to behold the supplicating, hopeful eyes and theemaciated wrist, lifted with difficulty, making the sign of the cross on thetense brow, and the prominent shoulders and hollow, gasping chest, which onecould not feel consistent with the life the sick man was praying for. Duringthe sacrament Levin did what he, an unbeliever, had done a thousand times. Hesaid, addressing God, “If Thou dost exist, make this man torecover” (of course this same thing has been repeated many times),“and Thou wilt save him and me.”After extreme unction the sick man became suddenly much better. He did notcough once in the course of an hour, smiled, kissed Kitty’s hand,thanking her with tears, and said he was comfortable, free from pain, and thathe felt strong and had an appetite. He even raised himself when his soup wasbrought, and asked for a cutlet as well. Hopelessly ill as he was, obvious asit was at the first glance that he could not recover, Levin and Kitty were forthat hour both in the same state of excitement, happy, though fearful of beingmistaken.“Is he better?”“Yes, much.”“It’s wonderful.”“There’s nothing wonderful in it.”“Anyway, he’s better,” they said in a whisper, smiling to oneanother.This self-deception was not of long duration. The sick man fell into a quietsleep, but he was waked up half an hour later by his cough. And all at onceevery hope vanished in those about him and in himself. The reality of hissuffering crushed all hopes in Levin and Kitty and in the sick man himself,leaving no doubt, no memory even of past hopes.Without referring to what he had believed in half an hour before, as thoughashamed even to recall it, he asked for iodine to inhale in a bottle coveredwith perforated paper. Levin gave him the bottle, and the same look ofpassionate hope with which he had taken the sacrament was now fastened on hisbrother, demanding from him the confirmation of the doctor’s words thatinhaling iodine worked wonders.“Is Katya not here?” he gasped, looking round while Levinreluctantly assented to the doctor’s words. “No; so I can sayit.... It was for her sake I went through that farce. She’s so sweet; butyou and I can’t deceive ourselves. This is what I believe in,” hesaid, and, squeezing the bottle in his bony hand, he began breathing over it.At eight o’clock in the evening Levin and his wife were drinking tea intheir room when Marya Nikolaevna ran in to them breathlessly. She was pale, andher lips were quivering. “He is dying!” she whispered.“I’m afraid will die this minute.”Both of them ran to him. He was sitting raised up with one elbow on the bed,his long back bent, and his head hanging low.“How do you feel?” Levin asked in a whisper, after a silence.“I feel I’m setting off,” Nikolay said with difficulty, butwith extreme distinctness, screwing the words out of himself. He did not raisehis head, but simply turned his eyes upwards, without their reaching hisbrother’s face. “Katya, go away!” he added.Levin jumped up, and with a peremptory whisper made her go out.“I’m setting off,” he said again.“Why do you think so?” said Levin, so as to say something.“Because I’m setting off,” he repeated, as though he had aliking for the phrase. “It’s the end.”Marya Nikolaevna went up to him.“You had better lie down; you’d be easier,” she said.“I shall lie down soon enough,” he pronounced slowly, “whenI’m dead,” he said sarcastically, wrathfully. “Well, you canlay me down if you like.”Levin laid his brother on his back, sat down beside him, and gazed at his face,holding his breath. The dying man lay with closed eyes, but the musclestwitched from time to time on his forehead, as with one thinking deeply andintensely. Levin involuntarily thought with him of what it was that washappening to him now, but in spite of all his mental efforts to go along withhim he saw by the expression of that calm, stern face that for the dying manall was growing clearer and clearer that was still as dark as ever for Levin.“Yes, yes, so,” the dying man articulated slowly at intervals.“Wait a little.” He was silent. “Right!” he pronouncedall at once reassuringly, as though all were solved for him. “OLord!” he murmured, and sighed deeply.Marya Nikolaevna felt his feet. “They’re getting cold,” shewhispered.For a long while, a very long while it seemed to Levin, the sick man laymotionless. But he was still alive, and from time to time he sighed. Levin bynow was exhausted from mental strain. He felt that, with no mental effort,could he understand what it was that was right. He could not even thinkof the problem of death itself, but with no will of his own thoughts keptcoming to him of what he had to do next; closing the dead man’s eyes,dressing him, ordering the coffin. And, strange to say, he felt utterly cold,and was not conscious of sorrow nor of loss, less still of pity for hisbrother. If he had any feeling for his brother at that moment, it was envy forthe knowledge the dying man had now that he could not have.A long time more he sat over him so, continually expecting the end. But the enddid not come. The door opened and Kitty appeared. Levin got up to stop her. Butat the moment he was getting up, he caught the sound of the dying man stirring.“Don’t go away,” said Nikolay and held out his hand. Levingave him his, and angrily waved to his wife to go away.With the dying man’s hand in his hand, he sat for half an hour, an hour,another hour. He did not think of death at all now. He wondered what Kitty wasdoing; who lived in the next room; whether the doctor lived in a house of hisown. He longed for food and for sleep. He cautiously drew away his hand andfelt the feet. The feet were cold, but the sick man was still breathing. Levintried again to move away on tiptoe, but the sick man stirred again and said:“Don’t go.”The dawn came; the sick man’s condition was unchanged. Levin stealthilywithdrew his hand, and without looking at the dying man, went off to his ownroom and went to sleep. When he woke up, instead of news of his brother’sdeath which he expected, he learned that the sick man had returned to hisearlier condition. He had begun sitting up again, coughing, had begun eatingagain, talking again, and again had ceased to talk of death, again had begun toexpress hope of his recovery, and had become more irritable and more gloomythan ever. No one, neither his brother nor Kitty, could soothe him. He wasangry with everyone, and said nasty things to everyone, reproached everyone forhis sufferings, and insisted that they should get him a celebrated doctor fromMoscow. To all inquiries made him as to how he felt, he made the same answerwith an expression of vindictive reproachfulness, “I’m sufferinghorribly, intolerably!”The sick man was suffering more and more, especially from bedsores, which itwas impossible now to remedy, and grew more and more angry with everyone abouthim, blaming them for everything, and especially for not having brought him adoctor from Moscow. Kitty tried in every possible way to relieve him, to soothehim; but it was all in vain, and Levin saw that she herself was exhausted bothphysically and morally, though she would not admit it. The sense of death,which had been evoked in all by his taking leave of life on the night when hehad sent for his brother, was broken up. Everyone knew that he must inevitablydie soon, that he was half dead already. Everyone wished for nothing but thathe should die as soon as possible, and everyone, concealing this, gave himmedicines, tried to find remedies and doctors, and deceived him and themselvesand each other. All this was falsehood, disgusting, irreverent deceit. Andowing to the bent of his character, and because he loved the dying man morethan anyone else did, Levin was most painfully conscious of this deceit.Levin, who had long been possessed by the idea of reconciling his brothers, atleast in face of death, had written to his brother, Sergey Ivanovitch, andhaving received an answer from him, he read this letter to the sick man. SergeyIvanovitch wrote that he could not come himself, and in touching terms hebegged his brother’s forgiveness.The sick man said nothing.“What am I to write to him?” said Levin. “I hope you are notangry with him?”“No, not the least!” Nikolay answered, vexed at the question.“Tell him to send me a doctor.”Three more days of agony followed; the sick man was still in the samecondition. The sense of longing for his death was felt by everyone now at themere sight of him, by the waiters and the hotel-keeper and all the peoplestaying in the hotel, and the doctor and Marya Nikolaevna and Levin and Kitty.The sick man alone did not express this feeling, but on the contrary wasfurious at their not getting him doctors, and went on taking medicine andtalking of life. Only at rare moments, when the opium gave him aninstant’s relief from the never-ceasing pain, he would sometimes, halfasleep, utter what was ever more intense in his heart than in all the others:“Oh, if it were only the end!” or: “When will it beover?”His sufferings, steadily growing more intense, did their work and prepared himfor death. There was no position in which he was not in pain, there was not aminute in which he was unconscious of it, not a limb, not a part of his bodythat did not ache and cause him agony. Even the memories, the impressions, thethoughts of this body awakened in him now the same aversion as the body itself.The sight of other people, their remarks, his own reminiscences, everything wasfor him a source of agony. Those about him felt this, and instinctively did notallow themselves to move freely, to talk, to express their wishes before him.All his life was merged in the one feeling of suffering and desire to be rid ofit.There was evidently coming over him that revulsion that would make him lookupon death as the goal of his desires, as happiness. Hitherto each individualdesire, aroused by suffering or privation, such as hunger, fatigue, thirst, hadbeen satisfied by some bodily function giving pleasure. But now no physicalcraving or suffering received relief, and the effort to relieve them onlycaused fresh suffering. And so all desires were merged in one—the desireto be rid of all his sufferings and their source, the body. But he had no wordsto express this desire of deliverance, and so he did not speak of it, and fromhabit asked for the satisfaction of desires which could not now be satisfied.“Turn me over on the other side,” he would say, and immediatelyafter he would ask to be turned back again as before. “Give me somebroth. Take away the broth. Talk of something: why are you silent?” Anddirectly they began to talk he would close his eyes, and would show weariness,indifference, and loathing.On the tenth day from their arrival at the town, Kitty was unwell. She sufferedfrom headache and sickness, and she could not get up all the morning.The doctor opined that the indisposition arose from fatigue and excitement, andprescribed rest.After dinner, however, Kitty got up and went as usual with her work to the sickman. He looked at her sternly when she came in, and smiled contemptuously whenshe said she had been unwell. That day he was continually blowing his nose, andgroaning piteously.“How do you feel?” she asked him.“Worse,” he articulated with difficulty. “In pain!”“In pain, where?”“Everywhere.”“It will be over today, you will see,” said Marya Nikolaevna.Though it was said in a whisper, the sick man, whose hearing Levin had noticedwas very keen, must have heard. Levin said hush to her, and looked round at thesick man. Nikolay had heard; but these words produced no effect on him. Hiseyes had still the same intense, reproachful look.“Why do you think so?” Levin asked her, when she had followed himinto the corridor.“He has begun picking at himself,” said Marya Nikolaevna.“How do you mean?”“Like this,” she said, tugging at the folds of her woolen skirt.Levin noticed, indeed, that all that day the patient pulled at himself, as itwere, trying to snatch something away.Marya Nikolaevna’s prediction came true. Towards night the sick man wasnot able to lift his hands, and could only gaze before him with the sameintensely concentrated expression in his eyes. Even when his brother or Kittybent over him, so that he could see them, he looked just the same. Kitty sentfor the priest to read the prayer for the dying.While the priest was reading it, the dying man did not show any sign of life;his eyes were closed. Levin, Kitty, and Marya Nikolaevna stood at the bedside.The priest had not quite finished reading the prayer when the dying manstretched, sighed, and opened his eyes. The priest, on finishing the prayer,put the cross to the cold forehead, then slowly returned it to the stand, andafter standing for two minutes more in silence, he touched the huge, bloodlesshand that was turning cold.“He is gone,” said the priest, and would have moved away; butsuddenly there was a faint stir in the mustaches of the dead man that seemedglued together, and quite distinctly in the hush they heard from the bottom ofthe chest the sharply defined sounds:“Not quite ... soon.”And a minute later the face brightened, a smile came out under the mustaches,and the women who had gathered round began carefully laying out the corpse.The sight of his brother, and the nearness of death, revived in Levin thatsense of horror in face of the insoluble enigma, together with the nearness andinevitability of death, that had come upon him that autumn evening when hisbrother had come to him. This feeling was now even stronger than before; evenless than before did he feel capable of apprehending the meaning of death, andits inevitability rose up before him more terrible than ever. But now, thanksto his wife’s presence, that feeling did not reduce him to despair. Inspite of death, he felt the need of life and love. He felt that love saved himfrom despair, and that this love, under the menace of despair, had become stillstronger and purer. The one mystery of death, still unsolved, had scarcelypassed before his eyes, when another mystery had arisen, as insoluble, urginghim to love and to life.The doctor confirmed his suppositions in regard to Kitty. Her indisposition wasa symptom that she was with child.Chapter 21From the moment when Alexey Alexandrovitch understood from his interviews withBetsy and with Stepan Arkadyevitch that all that was expected of him was toleave his wife in peace, without burdening her with his presence, and that hiswife herself desired this, he felt so distraught that he could come to nodecision of himself; he did not know himself what he wanted now, and puttinghimself in the hands of those who were so pleased to interest themselves in hisaffairs, he met everything with unqualified assent. It was only when Anna hadleft his house, and the English governess sent to ask him whether she shoulddine with him or separately, that for the first time he clearly comprehendedhis position, and was appalled by it. Most difficult of all in this positionwas the fact that he could not in any way connect and reconcile his past withwhat was now. It was not the past when he had lived happily with his wife thattroubled him. The transition from that past to a knowledge of his wife’sunfaithfulness he had lived through miserably already; that state was painful,but he could understand it. If his wife had then, on declaring to him herunfaithfulness, left him, he would have been wounded, unhappy, but he would nothave been in the hopeless position—incomprehensible to himself—inwhich he felt himself now. He could not now reconcile his immediate past, histenderness, his love for his sick wife, and for the other man’s childwith what was now the case, that is with the fact that, as it were, in returnfor all this he now found himself alone, put to shame, a laughing-stock, neededby no one, and despised by everyone.For the first two days after his wife’s departure Alexey Alexandrovitchreceived applicants for assistance and his chief secretary, drove to thecommittee, and went down to dinner in the dining-room as usual. Without givinghimself a reason for what he was doing, he strained every nerve of his beingfor those two days, simply to preserve an appearance of composure, and even ofindifference. Answering inquiries about the disposition of AnnaArkadyevna’s rooms and belongings, he had exercised immense self-controlto appear like a man in whose eyes what had occurred was not unforeseen nor outof the ordinary course of events, and he attained his aim: no one could havedetected in him signs of despair. But on the second day after her departure,when Korney gave him a bill from a fashionable draper’s shop, which Annahad forgotten to pay, and announced that the clerk from the shop was waiting,Alexey Alexandrovitch told him to show the clerk up.“Excuse me, your excellency, for venturing to trouble you. But if youdirect us to apply to her excellency, would you graciously oblige us with heraddress?”Alexey Alexandrovitch pondered, as it seemed to the clerk, and all at once,turning round, he sat down at the table. Letting his head sink into his hands,he sat for a long while in that position, several times attempted to speak andstopped short. Korney, perceiving his master’s emotion, asked the clerkto call another time. Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch recognized that he hadnot the strength to keep up the line of firmness and composure any longer. Hegave orders for the carriage that was awaiting him to be taken back, and for noone to be admitted, and he did not go down to dinner.He felt that he could not endure the weight of universal contempt andexasperation, which he had distinctly seen in the face of the clerk and ofKorney, and of everyone, without exception, whom he had met during those twodays. He felt that he could not turn aside from himself the hatred of men,because that hatred did not come from his being bad (in that case he could havetried to be better), but from his being shamefully and repulsively unhappy. Heknew that for this, for the very fact that his heart was torn with grief, theywould be merciless to him. He felt that men would crush him as dogs strangle atorn dog yelping with pain. He knew that his sole means of security againstpeople was to hide his wounds from them, and instinctively he tried to do thisfor two days, but now he felt incapable of keeping up the unequal struggle.His despair was even intensified by the consciousness that he was utterly alonein his sorrow. In all Petersburg there was not a human being to whom he couldexpress what he was feeling, who would feel for him, not as a high official,not as a member of society, but simply as a suffering man; indeed he had notsuch a one in the whole world.Alexey Alexandrovitch grew up an orphan. There were two brothers. They did notremember their father, and their mother died when Alexey Alexandrovitch was tenyears old. The property was a small one. Their uncle, Karenin, a governmentofficial of high standing, at one time a favorite of the late Tsar, had broughtthem up.On completing his high school and university courses with medals, AlexeyAlexandrovitch had, with his uncle’s aid, immediately started in aprominent position in the service, and from that time forward he had devotedhimself exclusively to political ambition. In the high school and theuniversity, and afterwards in the service, Alexey Alexandrovitch had neverformed a close friendship with anyone. His brother had been the person nearestto his heart, but he had a post in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and wasalways abroad, where he had died shortly after Alexey Alexandrovitch’smarriage.While he was governor of a province, Anna’s aunt, a wealthy provinciallady, had thrown him—middle-aged as he was, though young for agovernor—with her niece, and had succeeded in putting him in such aposition that he had either to declare himself or to leave the town. AlexeyAlexandrovitch was not long in hesitation. There were at the time as manyreasons for the step as against it, and there was no overbalancingconsideration to outweigh his invariable rule of abstaining when in doubt. ButAnna’s aunt had through a common acquaintance insinuated that he hadalready compromised the girl, and that he was in honor bound to make her anoffer. He made the offer, and concentrated on his betrothed and his wife allthe feeling of which he was capable.The attachment he felt to Anna precluded in his heart every need of intimaterelations with others. And now among all his acquaintances he had not onefriend. He had plenty of so-called connections, but no friendships. AlexeyAlexandrovitch had plenty of people whom he could invite to dinner, to whosesympathy he could appeal in any public affair he was concerned about, whoseinterest he could reckon upon for anyone he wished to help, with whom he couldcandidly discuss other people’s business and affairs of state. But hisrelations with these people were confined to one clearly defined channel, andhad a certain routine from which it was impossible to depart. There was oneman, a comrade of his at the university, with whom he had made friends later,and with whom he could have spoken of a personal sorrow; but this friend had apost in the Department of Education in a remote part of Russia. Of the peoplein Petersburg the most intimate and most possible were his chief secretary andhis doctor.Mihail Vassilievitch Sludin, the chief secretary, was a straightforward,intelligent, good-hearted, and conscientious man, and Alexey Alexandrovitch wasaware of his personal goodwill. But their five years of official work togetherseemed to have put a barrier between them that cut off warmer relations.After signing the papers brought him, Alexey Alexandrovitch had sat for a longwhile in silence, glancing at Mihail Vassilievitch, and several times heattempted to speak, but could not. He had already prepared the phrase:“You have heard of my trouble?” But he ended by saying, as usual:“So you’ll get this ready for me?” and with that dismissedhim.The other person was the doctor, who had also a kindly feeling for him; butthere had long existed a taciturn understanding between them that both wereweighed down by work, and always in a hurry.Of his women friends, foremost amongst them Countess Lidia Ivanovna, AlexeyAlexandrovitch never thought. All women, simply as women, were terrible anddistasteful to him.Chapter 22Alexey Alexandrovitch had forgotten the Countess Lidia Ivanovna, but she hadnot forgotten him. At the bitterest moment of his lonely despair she came tohim, and without waiting to be announced, walked straight into his study. Shefound him as he was sitting with his head in both hands.“J’ai forcé la consigne,” she said, walking in withrapid steps and breathing hard with excitement and rapid exercise. “Ihave heard all! Alexey Alexandrovitch! Dear friend!” she went on, warmlysqueezing his hand in both of hers and gazing with her fine pensive eyes intohis.Alexey Alexandrovitch, frowning, got up, and disengaging his hand, moved her achair.“Won’t you sit down, countess? I’m seeing no one becauseI’m unwell, countess,” he said, and his lips twitched.“Dear friend!” repeated Countess Lidia Ivanovna, never taking hereyes off his, and suddenly her eyebrows rose at the inner corners, describing atriangle on her forehead, her ugly yellow face became still uglier, but AlexeyAlexandrovitch felt that she was sorry for him and was preparing to cry. And hetoo was softened; he snatched her plump hand and proceeded to kiss it.“Dear friend!” she said in a voice breaking with emotion.“You ought not to give way to grief. Your sorrow is a great one, but youought to find consolation.”“I am crushed, I am annihilated, I am no longer a man!” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, letting go her hand, but still gazing into her brimming eyes.“My position is so awful because I can find nowhere, I cannot find withinme strength to support me.”“You will find support; seek it—not in me, though I beseech you tobelieve in my friendship,” she said, with a sigh. “Our support islove, that love that He has vouchsafed us. His burden is light,” shesaid, with the look of ecstasy Alexey Alexandrovitch knew so well. “Hewill be your support and your succor.”Although there was in these words a flavor of that sentimental emotion at herown lofty feelings, and that new mystical fervor which had lately gained groundin Petersburg, and which seemed to Alexey Alexandrovitch disproportionate,still it was pleasant to him to hear this now.“I am weak. I am crushed. I foresaw nothing, and now I understandnothing.”“Dear friend,” repeated Lidia Ivanovna.“It’s not the loss of what I have not now, it’s notthat!” pursued Alexey Alexandrovitch. “I do not grieve for that.But I cannot help feeling humiliated before other people for the position I amplaced in. It is wrong, but I can’t help it, I can’t helpit.”“Not you it was performed that noble act of forgiveness, at which I wasmoved to ecstasy, and everyone else too, but He, working within yourheart,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, raising her eyes rapturously,“and so you cannot be ashamed of your act.”Alexey Alexandrovitch knitted his brows, and crooking his hands, he cracked hisfingers.“One must know all the facts,” he said in his thin voice. “Aman’s strength has its limits, countess, and I have reached my limits.The whole day I have had to be making arrangements, arrangements abouthousehold matters arising” (he emphasized the word arising)“from my new, solitary position. The servants, the governess, theaccounts.... These pinpricks have stabbed me to the heart, and I have not thestrength to bear it. At dinner ... yesterday, I was almost getting up from thedinner-table. I could not bear the way my son looked at me. He did not ask methe meaning of it all, but he wanted to ask, and I could not bear the look inhis eyes. He was afraid to look at me, but that is not all....” AlexeyAlexandrovitch would have referred to the bill that had been brought him, buthis voice shook, and he stopped. That bill on blue paper, for a hat andribbons, he could not recall without a rush of self-pity.“I understand, dear friend,” said Lidia Ivanovna. “Iunderstand it all. Succor and comfort you will find not in me, though I havecome only to aid you if I can. If I could take from off you all these petty,humiliating cares ... I understand that a woman’s word, a woman’ssuperintendence is needed. You will intrust it to me?”Silently and gratefully Alexey Alexandrovitch pressed her hand.“Together we will take care of Seryozha. Practical affairs are not mystrong point. But I will set to work. I will be your housekeeper. Don’tthank me. I do it not from myself....”“I cannot help thanking you.”“But, dear friend, do not give way to the feeling of which youspoke—being ashamed of what is the Christian’s highest glory: hewho humbles himself shall be exalted. And you cannot thank me. You mustthank Him, and pray to Him for succor. In Him alone we find peace, consolation,salvation, and love,” she said, and turning her eyes heavenwards, shebegan praying, as Alexey Alexandrovitch gathered from her silence.Alexey Alexandrovitch listened to her now, and those expressions which hadseemed to him, if not distasteful, at least exaggerated, now seemed to himnatural and consolatory. Alexey Alexandrovitch had disliked this newenthusiastic fervor. He was a believer, who was interested in religionprimarily in its political aspect, and the new doctrine which ventured uponseveral new interpretations, just because it paved the way to discussion andanalysis, was in principle disagreeable to him. He had hitherto taken up a coldand even antagonistic attitude to this new doctrine, and with Countess LidiaIvanovna, who had been carried away by it, he had never argued, but by silencehad assiduously parried her attempts to provoke him into argument. Now for thefirst time he heard her words with pleasure, and did not inwardly oppose them.“I am very, very grateful to you, both for your deeds and for yourwords,” he said, when she had finished praying.Countess Lidia Ivanovna once more pressed both her friend’s hands.“Now I will enter upon my duties,” she said with a smile after apause, as she wiped away the traces of tears. “I am going to Seryozha.Only in the last extremity shall I apply to you.” And she got up and wentout.Countess Lidia Ivanovna went into Seryozha’s part of the house, anddropping tears on the scared child’s cheeks, she told him that his fatherwas a saint and his mother was dead.Countess Lidia Ivanovna kept her promise. She did actually take upon herselfthe care of the organization and management of Alexey Alexandrovitch’shousehold. But she had not overstated the case when saying that practicalaffairs were not her strong point. All her arrangements had to be modifiedbecause they could not be carried out, and they were modified by Korney, AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s valet, who, though no one was aware of the fact, nowmanaged Karenin’s household, and quietly and discreetly reported to hismaster while he was dressing all it was necessary for him to know. But LidiaIvanovna’s help was none the less real; she gave Alexey Alexandrovitchmoral support in the consciousness of her love and respect for him, and stillmore, as it was soothing to her to believe, in that she almost turned him toChristianity—that is, from an indifferent and apathetic believer sheturned him into an ardent and steadfast adherent of the new interpretation ofChristian doctrine, which had been gaining ground of late in Petersburg. It waseasy for Alexey Alexandrovitch to believe in this teaching. AlexeyAlexandrovitch, like Lidia Ivanovna indeed, and others who shared their views,was completely devoid of vividness of imagination, that spiritual faculty invirtue of which the conceptions evoked by the imagination become so vivid thatthey must needs be in harmony with other conceptions, and with actual fact. Hesaw nothing impossible and inconceivable in the idea that death, thoughexisting for unbelievers, did not exist for him, and that, as he was possessedof the most perfect faith, of the measure of which he was himself the judge,therefore there was no sin in his soul, and he was experiencing completesalvation here on earth.It is true that the erroneousness and shallowness of this conception of hisfaith was dimly perceptible to Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he knew that when,without the slightest idea that his forgiveness was the action of a higherpower, he had surrendered directly to the feeling of forgiveness, he had feltmore happiness than now when he was thinking every instant that Christ was inhis heart, and that in signing official papers he was doing His will. But forAlexey Alexandrovitch it was a necessity to think in that way; it was such anecessity for him in his humiliation to have some elevated standpoint, howeverimaginary, from which, looked down upon by all, he could look down on others,that he clung, as to his one salvation, to his delusion of salvation.Chapter 23The Countess Lidia Ivanovna had, as a very young and sentimental girl, beenmarried to a wealthy man of high rank, an extremely good-natured, jovial, andextremely dissipated rake. Two months after marriage her husband abandoned her,and her impassioned protestations of affection he met with a sarcasm and evenhostility that people knowing the count’s good heart, and seeing nodefects in the sentimental Lidia, were at a loss to explain. Though they weredivorced and lived apart, yet whenever the husband met the wife, he invariablybehaved to her with the same malignant irony, the cause of which wasincomprehensible.Countess Lidia Ivanovna had long given up being in love with her husband, butfrom that time she had never given up being in love with someone. She was inlove with several people at once, both men and women; she had been in love withalmost everyone who had been particularly distinguished in any way. She was inlove with all the new princes and princesses who married into the imperialfamily; she had been in love with a high dignitary of the Church, a vicar, anda parish priest; she had been in love with a journalist, three Slavophiles,with Komissarov, with a minister, a doctor, an English missionary and Karenin.All these passions constantly waning or growing more ardent, did not preventher from keeping up the most extended and complicated relations with the courtand fashionable society. But from the time that after Karenin’s troubleshe took him under her special protection, from the time that she set to workin Karenin’s household looking after his welfare, she felt that all herother attachments were not the real thing, and that she was now genuinely inlove, and with no one but Karenin. The feeling she now experienced for himseemed to her stronger than any of her former feelings. Analyzing her feeling,and comparing it with former passions, she distinctly perceived that she wouldnot have been in love with Komissarov if he had not saved the life of the Tsar,that she would not have been in love with Ristitch-Kudzhitsky if there had beenno Slavonic question, but that she loved Karenin for himself, for his lofty,uncomprehended soul, for the sweet—to her—high notes of his voice,for his drawling intonation, his weary eyes, his character, and his soft whitehands with their swollen veins. She was not simply overjoyed at meeting him,but she sought in his face signs of the impression she was making on him. Shetried to please him, not by her words only, but in her whole person. For hissake it was that she now lavished more care on her dress than before. Shecaught herself in reveries on what might have been, if she had not been marriedand he had been free. She blushed with emotion when he came into the room, shecould not repress a smile of rapture when he said anything amiable to her.For several days now Countess Lidia Ivanovna had been in a state of intenseexcitement. She had learned that Anna and Vronsky were in Petersburg. AlexeyAlexandrovitch must be saved from seeing her, he must be saved even from thetorturing knowledge that that awful woman was in the same town with him, andthat he might meet her any minute.Lidia Ivanovna made inquiries through her friends as to what those infamouspeople, as she called Anna and Vronsky, intended doing, and she endeavoredso to guide every movement of her friend during those days that he could notcome across them. The young adjutant, an acquaintance of Vronsky, through whomshe obtained her information, and who hoped through Countess Lidia Ivanovna toobtain a concession, told her that they had finished their business and weregoing away next day. Lidia Ivanovna had already begun to calm down, when thenext morning a note was brought her, the handwriting of which she recognizedwith horror. It was the handwriting of Anna Karenina. The envelope was of paperas thick as bark; on the oblong yellow paper there was a huge monogram, and theletter smelt of agreeable scent.“Who brought it?”“A commissionaire from the hotel.”It was some time before Countess Lidia Ivanovna could sit down to read theletter. Her excitement brought on an attack of asthma, to which she wassubject. When she had recovered her composure, she read the following letter inFrench:  “Madame la Comtesse,“The Christian feelings with which your heart is filled give me the, Ifeel, unpardonable boldness to write to you. I am miserable at being separatedfrom my son. I entreat permission to see him once before my departure. Forgiveme for recalling myself to your memory. I apply to you and not to AlexeyAlexandrovitch, simply because I do not wish to cause that generous man tosuffer in remembering me. Knowing your friendship for him, I know you willunderstand me. Could you send Seryozha to me, or should I come to the house atsome fixed hour, or will you let me know when and where I could see him awayfrom home? I do not anticipate a refusal, knowing the magnanimity of him withwhom it rests. You cannot conceive the craving I have to see him, and so cannotconceive the gratitude your help will arouse in me.“Anna.” Everything in this letter exasperated Countess Lidia Ivanovna: its contents andthe allusion to magnanimity, and especially its free and easy—as sheconsidered—tone.“Say that there is no answer,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, andimmediately opening her blotting-book, she wrote to Alexey Alexandrovitch thatshe hoped to see him at one o’clock at the levee.“I must talk with you of a grave and painful subject. There we willarrange where to meet. Best of all at my house, where I will order tea asyou like it. Urgent. He lays the cross, but He gives the strength to bearit,” she added, so as to give him some slight preparation. Countess LidiaIvanovna usually wrote some two or three letters a day to AlexeyAlexandrovitch. She enjoyed that form of communication, which gave opportunityfor a refinement and air of mystery not afforded by their personal interviews.Chapter 24The levee was drawing to a close. People met as they were going away, andgossiped of the latest news, of the newly bestowed honors and the changes inthe positions of the higher functionaries.“If only Countess Marya Borissovna were Minister of War, and PrincessVatkovskaya were Commander-in-Chief,” said a gray-headed, little old manin a gold-embroidered uniform, addressing a tall, handsome maid of honor whohad questioned him about the new appointments.“And me among the adjutants,” said the maid of honor, smiling.“You have an appointment already. You’re over the ecclesiasticaldepartment. And your assistant’s Karenin.”“Good-day, prince!” said the little old man to a man who came up tohim.“What were you saying of Karenin?” said the prince.“He and Putyatov have received the Alexander Nevsky.”“I thought he had it already.”“No. Just look at him,” said the little old man, pointing with hisembroidered hat to Karenin in a court uniform with the new red ribbon acrosshis shoulders, standing in the doorway of the hall with an influential memberof the Imperial Council. “Pleased and happy as a brass farthing,”he added, stopping to shake hands with a handsome gentleman of the bedchamberof colossal proportions.“No; he’s looking older,” said the gentleman of thebedchamber.“From overwork. He’s always drawing up projects nowadays. Hewon’t let a poor devil go nowadays till he’s explained it all tohim under heads.”“Looking older, did you say? Il fait des passions. I believeCountess Lidia Ivanovna’s jealous now of his wife.”“Oh, come now, please don’t say any harm of Countess LidiaIvanovna.”“Why, is there any harm in her being in love with Karenin?”“But is it true Madame Karenina’s here?”“Well, not here in the palace, but in Petersburg. I met her yesterdaywith Alexey Vronsky, bras dessous, bras dessous, in the Morsky.”“C’est un homme qui n’a pas,...” the gentlemanof the bedchamber was beginning, but he stopped to make room, bowing, for amember of the Imperial family to pass.Thus people talked incessantly of Alexey Alexandrovitch, finding fault with himand laughing at him, while he, blocking up the way of the member of theImperial Council he had captured, was explaining to him point by point his newfinancial project, never interrupting his discourse for an instant for fear heshould escape.Almost at the same time that his wife left Alexey Alexandrovitch there had cometo him that bitterest moment in the life of an official—the moment whenhis upward career comes to a full stop. This full stop had arrived and everyoneperceived it, but Alexey Alexandrovitch himself was not yet aware that hiscareer was over. Whether it was due to his feud with Stremov, or his misfortunewith his wife, or simply that Alexey Alexandrovitch had reached his destinedlimits, it had become evident to everyone in the course of that year that hiscareer was at an end. He still filled a position of consequence, he sat on manycommissions and committees, but he was a man whose day was over, and from whomnothing was expected. Whatever he said, whatever he proposed, was heard asthough it were something long familiar, and the very thing that was not needed.But Alexey Alexandrovitch was not aware of this, and, on the contrary, beingcut off from direct participation in governmental activity, he saw more clearlythan ever the errors and defects in the action of others, and thought it hisduty to point out means for their correction. Shortly after his separation fromhis wife, he began writing his first note on the new judicial procedure, thefirst of the endless series of notes he was destined to write in the future.Alexey Alexandrovitch did not merely fail to observe his hopeless position inthe official world, he was not merely free from anxiety on this head, he waspositively more satisfied than ever with his own activity.“He that is unmarried careth for the things that belong to the Lord, howhe may please the Lord: but he that is married careth for the things that areof the world, how he may please his wife,” says the Apostle Paul, andAlexey Alexandrovitch, who was now guided in every action by Scripture, oftenrecalled this text. It seemed to him that ever since he had been left without awife, he had in these very projects of reform been serving the Lord morezealously than before.The unmistakable impatience of the member of the Council trying to get awayfrom him did not trouble Alexey Alexandrovitch; he gave up his exposition onlywhen the member of the Council, seizing his chance when one of the Imperialfamily was passing, slipped away from him.Left alone, Alexey Alexandrovitch looked down, collecting his thoughts, thenlooked casually about him and walked towards the door, where he hoped to meetCountess Lidia Ivanovna.“And how strong they all are, how sound physically,” thought AlexeyAlexandrovitch, looking at the powerfully built gentleman of the bedchamberwith his well-combed, perfumed whiskers, and at the red neck of the prince,pinched by his tight uniform. He had to pass them on his way. “Truly isit said that all the world is evil,” he thought, with another sidelongglance at the calves of the gentleman of the bedchamber.Moving forward deliberately, Alexey Alexandrovitch bowed with his customary airof weariness and dignity to the gentleman who had been talking about him, andlooking towards the door, his eyes sought Countess Lidia Ivanovna.“Ah! Alexey Alexandrovitch!” said the little old man, with amalicious light in his eyes, at the moment when Karenin was on a level withthem, and was nodding with a frigid gesture, “I haven’tcongratulated you yet,” said the old man, pointing to his newly receivedribbon.“Thank you,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch. “What anexquisite day today,” he added, laying emphasis in his peculiarway on the word exquisite.That they laughed at him he was well aware, but he did not expect anything buthostility from them; he was used to that by now.Catching sight of the yellow shoulders of Lidia Ivanovna jutting out above hercorset, and her fine pensive eyes bidding him to her, Alexey Alexandrovitchsmiled, revealing untarnished white teeth, and went towards her.Lidia Ivanovna’s dress had cost her great pains, as indeed all herdresses had done of late. Her aim in dress was now quite the reverse of thatshe had pursued thirty years before. Then her desire had been to adorn herselfwith something, and the more adorned the better. Now, on the contrary, she wasperforce decked out in a way so inconsistent with her age and her figure, thather one anxiety was to contrive that the contrast between these adornments andher own exterior should not be too appalling. And as far as AlexeyAlexandrovitch was concerned she succeeded, and was in his eyes attractive. Forhim she was the one island not only of goodwill to him, but of love in themidst of the sea of hostility and jeering that surrounded him.Passing through rows of ironical eyes, he was drawn as naturally to her lovingglance as a plant to the sun.“I congratulate you,” she said to him, her eyes on his ribbon.Suppressing a smile of pleasure, he shrugged his shoulders, closing his eyes,as though to say that that could not be a source of joy to him. Countess LidiaIvanovna was very well aware that it was one of his chief sources ofsatisfaction, though he never admitted it.“How is our angel?” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, meaning Seryozha.“I can’t say I was quite pleased with him,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch, raising his eyebrows and opening his eyes. “And Sitnikovis not satisfied with him.” (Sitnikov was the tutor to whomSeryozha’s secular education had been intrusted.) “As I havementioned to you, there’s a sort of coldness in him towards the mostimportant questions which ought to touch the heart of every man and everychild....” Alexey Alexandrovitch began expounding his views on the solequestion that interested him besides the service—the education of hisson.When Alexey Alexandrovitch with Lidia Ivanovna’s help had been broughtback anew to life and activity, he felt it his duty to undertake the educationof the son left on his hands. Having never before taken any interest ineducational questions, Alexey Alexandrovitch devoted some time to thetheoretical study of the subject. After reading several books on anthropology,education, and didactics, Alexey Alexandrovitch drew up a plan of education,and engaging the best tutor in Petersburg to superintend it, he set to work,and the subject continually absorbed him.“Yes, but the heart. I see in him his father’s heart, and with sucha heart a child cannot go far wrong,” said Lidia Ivanovna withenthusiasm.“Yes, perhaps.... As for me, I do my duty. It’s all I cando.”“You’re coming to me,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, after apause; “we have to speak of a subject painful for you. I would giveanything to have spared you certain memories, but others are not of the samemind. I have received a letter from her. She is here inPetersburg.”Alexey Alexandrovitch shuddered at the allusion to his wife, but immediatelyhis face assumed the deathlike rigidity which expressed utter helplessness inthe matter.“I was expecting it,” he said.Countess Lidia Ivanovna looked at him ecstatically, and tears of rapture at thegreatness of his soul came into her eyes.Chapter 25When Alexey Alexandrovitch came into the Countess Lidia Ivanovna’s snuglittle boudoir, decorated with old china and hung with portraits, the ladyherself had not yet made her appearance.She was changing her dress.A cloth was laid on a round table, and on it stood a china tea service and asilver spirit-lamp and tea kettle. Alexey Alexandrovitch looked idly about atthe endless familiar portraits which adorned the room, and sitting down to thetable, he opened a New Testament lying upon it. The rustle of thecountess’s silk skirt drew his attention off.“Well now, we can sit quietly,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna,slipping hurriedly with an agitated smile between the table and the sofa,“and talk over our tea.”After some words of preparation, Countess Lidia Ivanovna, breathing hard andflushing crimson, gave into Alexey Alexandrovitch’s hands the letter shehad received.After reading the letter, he sat a long while in silence.“I don’t think I have the right to refuse her,” he said,timidly lifting his eyes.“Dear friend, you never see evil in anyone!”“On the contrary, I see that all is evil. But whether it isjust....”His face showed irresolution, and a seeking for counsel, support, and guidancein a matter he did not understand.“No,” Countess Lidia Ivanovna interrupted him; “there arelimits to everything. I can understand immorality,” she said, not quitetruthfully, since she never could understand that which leads women toimmorality; “but I don’t understand cruelty: to whom? to you! Howcan she stay in the town where you are? No, the longer one lives the more onelearns. And I’m learning to understand your loftiness and herbaseness.”“Who is to throw a stone?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, unmistakablypleased with the part he had to play. “I have forgiven all, and so Icannot deprive her of what is exacted by love in her—by her love for herson....”“But is that love, my friend? Is it sincere? Admitting that you haveforgiven—that you forgive—have we the right to work on the feelingsof that angel? He looks on her as dead. He prays for her, and beseeches God tohave mercy on her sins. And it is better so. But now what will he think?”“I had not thought of that,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, evidentlyagreeing.Countess Lidia Ivanovna hid her face in her hands and was silent. She waspraying.“If you ask my advice,” she said, having finished her prayer anduncovered her face, “I do not advise you to do this. Do you suppose Idon’t see how you are suffering, how this has torn open your wounds? Butsupposing that, as always, you don’t think of yourself, what can it leadto?—to fresh suffering for you, to torture for the child. If there were atrace of humanity left in her, she ought not to wish for it herself. No, I haveno hesitation in saying I advise not, and if you will intrust it to me, I willwrite to her.”And Alexey Alexandrovitch consented, and Countess Lidia Ivanovna sent thefollowing letter in French:  “Dear Madame,“To be reminded of you might have results for your son in leading toquestions on his part which could not be answered without implanting in thechild’s soul a spirit of censure towards what should be for him sacred,and therefore I beg you to interpret your husband’s refusal in the spiritof Christian love. I pray to Almighty God to have mercy on you.“Countess Lidia.”  This letter attained the secret object which Countess Lidia Ivanovna hadconcealed from herself. It wounded Anna to the quick.For his part, Alexey Alexandrovitch, on returning home from LidiaIvanovna’s, could not all that day concentrate himself on his usualpursuits, and find that spiritual peace of one saved and believing which he hadfelt of late.The thought of his wife, who had so greatly sinned against him, and towardswhom he had been so saintly, as Countess Lidia Ivanovna had so justly told him,ought not to have troubled him; but he was not easy; he could not understandthe book he was reading; he could not drive away harassing recollections of hisrelations with her, of the mistake which, as it now seemed, he had made inregard to her. The memory of how he had received her confession of infidelityon their way home from the races (especially that he had insisted only on theobservance of external decorum, and had not sent a challenge) tortured him likea remorse. He was tortured too by the thought of the letter he had written her;and most of all, his forgiveness, which nobody wanted, and his care of theother man’s child made his heart burn with shame and remorse.And just the same feeling of shame and regret he felt now, as he reviewed allhis past with her, recalling the awkward words in which, after long wavering,he had made her an offer.“But how have I been to blame?” he said to himself. And thisquestion always excited another question in him—whether they feltdifferently, did their loving and marrying differently, these Vronskys andOblonskys ... these gentlemen of the bedchamber, with their fine calves. Andthere passed before his mind a whole series of these mettlesome, vigorous,self-confident men, who always and everywhere drew his inquisitive attention inspite of himself. He tried to dispel these thoughts, he tried to persuadehimself that he was not living for this transient life, but for the life ofeternity, and that there was peace and love in his heart.But the fact that he had in this transient, trivial life made, as it seemed tohim, a few trivial mistakes tortured him as though the eternal salvation inwhich he believed had no existence. But this temptation did not last long, andsoon there was reestablished once more in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s soulthe peace and the elevation by virtue of which he could forget what he did notwant to remember.Chapter 26“Well, Kapitonitch?” said Seryozha, coming back rosy andgood-humored from his walk the day before his birthday, and giving his overcoatto the tall old hall-porter, who smiled down at the little person from theheight of his long figure. “Well, has the bandaged clerk been here today?Did papa see him?”“He saw him. The minute the chief secretary came out, I announcedhim,” said the hall-porter with a good-humored wink. “Here,I’ll take it off.”“Seryozha!” said the tutor, stopping in the doorway leading to theinner rooms. “Take it off yourself.” But Seryozha, though he heardhis tutor’s feeble voice, did not pay attention to it. He stood keepinghold of the hall-porter’s belt, and gazing into his face.“Well, and did papa do what he wanted for him?”The hall-porter nodded his head affirmatively. The clerk with his face tied up,who had already been seven times to ask some favor of Alexey Alexandrovitch,interested both Seryozha and the hall-porter. Seryozha had come upon him in thehall, and had heard him plaintively beg the hall-porter to announce him, sayingthat he and his children had death staring them in the face.Since then Seryozha, having met him a second time in the hall, took greatinterest in him.“Well, was he very glad?” he asked.“Glad? I should think so! Almost dancing as he walked away.”“And has anything been left?” asked Seryozha, after a pause.“Come, sir,” said the hall-porter; then with a shake of his head hewhispered, “Something from the countess.”Seryozha understood at once that what the hall-porter was speaking of was apresent from Countess Lidia Ivanovna for his birthday.“What do you say? Where?”“Korney took it to your papa. A fine plaything it must be too!”“How big? Like this?”“Rather small, but a fine thing.”“A book.”“No, a thing. Run along, run along, Vassily Lukitch is callingyou,” said the porter, hearing the tutor’s steps approaching, andcarefully taking away from his belt the little hand in the glove half pulledoff, he signed with his head towards the tutor.“Vassily Lukitch, in a tiny minute!” answered Seryozha with thatgay and loving smile which always won over the conscientious Vassily Lukitch.Seryozha was too happy, everything was too delightful for him to be able tohelp sharing with his friend the porter the family good fortune of which he hadheard during his walk in the public gardens from Lidia Ivanovna’s niece.This piece of good news seemed to him particularly important from its coming atthe same time with the gladness of the bandaged clerk and his own gladness attoys having come for him. It seemed to Seryozha that this was a day on whicheveryone ought to be glad and happy.“You know papa’s received the Alexander Nevsky today?”“To be sure I do! People have been already to congratulate him.”“And is he glad?”“Glad at the Tsar’s gracious favor! I should think so! It’s aproof he’s deserved it,” said the porter severely and seriously.Seryozha fell to dreaming, gazing up at the face of the porter, which he hadthoroughly studied in every detail, especially the chin that hung down betweenthe gray whiskers, never seen by anyone but Seryozha, who saw him only frombelow.“Well, and has your daughter been to see you lately?”The porter’s daughter was a ballet dancer.“When is she to come on week-days? They’ve their lessons to learntoo. And you’ve your lesson, sir; run along.”On coming into the room, Seryozha, instead of sitting down to his lessons, toldhis tutor of his supposition that what had been brought him must be a machine.“What do you think?” he inquired.But Vassily Lukitch was thinking of nothing but the necessity of learning thegrammar lesson for the teacher, who was coming at two.“No, do just tell me, Vassily Lukitch,” he asked suddenly, when hewas seated at their work table with the book in his hands, “what isgreater than the Alexander Nevsky? You know papa’s received the AlexanderNevsky?”Vassily Lukitch replied that the Vladimir was greater than the AlexanderNevsky.“And higher still?”“Well, highest of all is the Andrey Pervozvanny.”“And higher than the Andrey?”“I don’t know.”“What, you don’t know?” and Seryozha, leaning on his elbows,sank into deep meditation.His meditations were of the most complex and diverse character. He imagined hisfather’s having suddenly been presented with both the Vladimir and theAndrey today, and in consequence being much better tempered at his lesson, anddreamed how, when he was grown up, he would himself receive all the orders, andwhat they might invent higher than the Andrey. Directly any higher order wereinvented, he would win it. They would make a higher one still, and he wouldimmediately win that too.The time passed in such meditations, and when the teacher came, the lessonabout the adverbs of place and time and manner of action was not ready, and theteacher was not only displeased, but hurt. This touched Seryozha. He felt hewas not to blame for not having learned the lesson; however much he tried, hewas utterly unable to do that. As long as the teacher was explaining to him, hebelieved him and seemed to comprehend, but as soon as he was left alone, he waspositively unable to recollect and to understand that the short and familiarword “suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action. Still he wassorry that he had disappointed the teacher.He chose a moment when the teacher was looking in silence at the book.“Mihail Ivanitch, when is your birthday?” he asked all, of asudden.“You’d much better be thinking about your work. Birthdays are of noimportance to a rational being. It’s a day like any other on which onehas to do one’s work.”Seryozha looked intently at the teacher, at his scanty beard, at hisspectacles, which had slipped down below the ridge on his nose, and fell intoso deep a reverie that he heard nothing of what the teacher was explaining tohim. He knew that the teacher did not think what he said; he felt it from thetone in which it was said. “But why have they all agreed to speak just inthe same manner always the dreariest and most useless stuff? Why does he keepme off; why doesn’t he love me?” he asked himself mournfully, andcould not think of an answer.Chapter 27After the lesson with the grammar teacher came his father’s lesson. Whilewaiting for his father, Seryozha sat at the table playing with a penknife, andfell to dreaming. Among Seryozha’s favorite occupations was searching forhis mother during his walks. He did not believe in death generally, and in herdeath in particular, in spite of what Lidia Ivanovna had told him and hisfather had confirmed, and it was just because of that, and after he had beentold she was dead, that he had begun looking for her when out for a walk. Everywoman of full, graceful figure with dark hair was his mother. At the sight ofsuch a woman such a feeling of tenderness was stirred within him that hisbreath failed him, and tears came into his eyes. And he was on the tiptoe ofexpectation that she would come up to him, would lift her veil. All her facewould be visible, she would smile, she would hug him, he would sniff herfragrance, feel the softness of her arms, and cry with happiness, just as hehad one evening lain on her lap while she tickled him, and he laughed and bither white, ring-covered fingers. Later, when he accidentally learned from hisold nurse that his mother was not dead, and his father and Lidia Ivanovna hadexplained to him that she was dead to him because she was wicked (which hecould not possibly believe, because he loved her), he went on seeking her andexpecting her in the same way. That day in the public gardens there had been alady in a lilac veil, whom he had watched with a throbbing heart, believing itto be she as she came towards them along the path. The lady had not come up tothem, but had disappeared somewhere. That day, more intensely than ever,Seryozha felt a rush of love for her, and now, waiting for his father, heforgot everything, and cut all round the edge of the table with his penknife,staring straight before him with sparkling eyes and dreaming of her.“Here is your papa!” said Vassily Lukitch, rousing him.Seryozha jumped up and went up to his father, and kissing his hand, looked athim intently, trying to discover signs of his joy at receiving the AlexanderNevsky.“Did you have a nice walk?” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, sittingdown in his easy chair, pulling the volume of the Old Testament to him andopening it. Although Alexey Alexandrovitch had more than once told Seryozhathat every Christian ought to know Scripture history thoroughly, he oftenreferred to the Bible himself during the lesson, and Seryozha observed this.“Yes, it was very nice indeed, papa,” said Seryozha, sittingsideways on his chair and rocking it, which was forbidden. “I sawNadinka” (Nadinka was a niece of Lidia Ivanovna’s who was beingbrought up in her house). “She told me you’d been given a new star.Are you glad, papa?”“First of all, don’t rock your chair, please,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch. “And secondly, it’s not the reward that’sprecious, but the work itself. And I could have wished you understood that. Ifyou now are going to work, to study in order to win a reward, then the workwill seem hard to you; but when you work” (Alexey Alexandrovitch, as hespoke, thought of how he had been sustained by a sense of duty through thewearisome labor of the morning, consisting of signing one hundred and eightypapers), “loving your work, you will find your reward in it.”Seryozha’s eyes, that had been shining with gaiety and tenderness, grewdull and dropped before his father’s gaze. This was the samelong-familiar tone his father always took with him, and Seryozha had learned bynow to fall in with it. His father always talked to him—so Seryozhafelt—as though he were addressing some boy of his own imagination, one ofthose boys that exist in books, utterly unlike himself. And Seryozha alwaystried with his father to act being the story-book boy.“You understand that, I hope?” said his father.“Yes, papa,” answered Seryozha, acting the part of the imaginaryboy.The lesson consisted of learning by heart several verses out of the Gospel andthe repetition of the beginning of the Old Testament. The verses from theGospel Seryozha knew fairly well, but at the moment when he was saying them hebecame so absorbed in watching the sharply protruding, bony knobbiness of hisfather’s forehead, that he lost the thread, and he transposed the end ofone verse and the beginning of another. So it was evident to AlexeyAlexandrovitch that he did not understand what he was saying, and thatirritated him.He frowned, and began explaining what Seryozha had heard many times before andnever could remember, because he understood it too well, just as that“suddenly” is an adverb of manner of action. Seryozha looked withscared eyes at his father, and could think of nothing but whether his fatherwould make him repeat what he had said, as he sometimes did. And this thoughtso alarmed Seryozha that he now understood nothing. But his father did not makehim repeat it, and passed on to the lesson out of the Old Testament. Seryozharecounted the events themselves well enough, but when he had to answerquestions as to what certain events prefigured, he knew nothing, though he hadalready been punished over this lesson. The passage at which he was utterlyunable to say anything, and began fidgeting and cutting the table and swinginghis chair, was where he had to repeat the patriarchs before the Flood. He didnot know one of them, except Enoch, who had been taken up alive to heaven. Lasttime he had remembered their names, but now he had forgotten them utterly,chiefly because Enoch was the personage he liked best in the whole of the OldTestament, and Enoch’s translation to heaven was connected in his mindwith a whole long train of thought, in which he became absorbed now while hegazed with fascinated eyes at his father’s watch-chain and ahalf-unbuttoned button on his waistcoat.In death, of which they talked to him so often, Seryozha disbelieved entirely.He did not believe that those he loved could die, above all that he himselfwould die. That was to him something utterly inconceivable and impossible. Buthe had been told that all men die; he had asked people, indeed, whom hetrusted, and they too, had confirmed it; his old nurse, too, said the same,though reluctantly. But Enoch had not died, and so it followed that everyonedid not die. “And why cannot anyone else so serve God and be taken aliveto heaven?” thought Seryozha. Bad people, that is those Seryozha did notlike, they might die, but the good might all be like Enoch.“Well, what are the names of the patriarchs?”“Enoch, Enos—”“But you have said that already. This is bad, Seryozha, very bad. If youdon’t try to learn what is more necessary than anything for aChristian,” said his father, getting up, “whatever can interestyou? I am displeased with you, and Piotr Ignatitch” (this was the mostimportant of his teachers) “is displeased with you.... I shall have topunish you.”His father and his teacher were both displeased with Seryozha, and he certainlydid learn his lessons very badly. But still it could not be said he was astupid boy. On the contrary, he was far cleverer than the boys his teacher heldup as examples to Seryozha. In his father’s opinion, he did not want tolearn what he was taught. In reality he could not learn that. He could not,because the claims of his own soul were more binding on him than those claimshis father and his teacher made upon him. Those claims were in opposition, andhe was in direct conflict with his education. He was nine years old; he was achild; but he knew his own soul, it was precious to him, he guarded it as theeyelid guards the eye, and without the key of love he let no one into his soul.His teachers complained that he would not learn, while his soul was brimmingover with thirst for knowledge. And he learned from Kapitonitch, from hisnurse, from Nadinka, from Vassily Lukitch, but not from his teachers. Thespring his father and his teachers reckoned upon to turn their mill-wheels hadlong dried up at the source, but its waters did their work in another channel.His father punished Seryozha by not letting him go to see Nadinka, LidiaIvanovna’s niece; but this punishment turned out happily for Seryozha.Vassily Lukitch was in a good humor, and showed him how to make windmills. Thewhole evening passed over this work and in dreaming how to make a windmill onwhich he could turn himself—clutching at the sails or tying himself onand whirling round. Of his mother Seryozha did not think all the evening, butwhen he had gone to bed, he suddenly remembered her, and prayed in his ownwords that his mother tomorrow for his birthday might leave off hiding herselfand come to him.“Vassily Lukitch, do you know what I prayed for tonight extra besides theregular things?”“That you might learn your lessons better?”“No.”“Toys?”“No. You’ll never guess. A splendid thing; but it’s a secret!When it comes to pass I’ll tell you. Can’t you guess!”“No, I can’t guess. You tell me,” said Vassily Lukitch with asmile, which was rare with him. “Come, lie down, I’m putting outthe candle.”“Without the candle I can see better what I see and what I prayed for.There! I was almost telling the secret!” said Seryozha, laughing gaily.When the candle was taken away, Seryozha heard and felt his mother. She stoodover him, and with loving eyes caressed him. But then came windmills, a knife,everything began to be mixed up, and he fell asleep.Chapter 28On arriving in Petersburg, Vronsky and Anna stayed at one of the best hotels;Vronsky apart in a lower story, Anna above with her child, its nurse, and hermaid, in a large suite of four rooms.On the day of his arrival Vronsky went to his brother’s. There he foundhis mother, who had come from Moscow on business. His mother and sister-in-lawgreeted him as usual: they asked him about his stay abroad, and talked of theircommon acquaintances, but did not let drop a single word in allusion to hisconnection with Anna. His brother came the next morning to see Vronsky, and ofhis own accord asked him about her, and Alexey Vronsky told him directly thathe looked upon his connection with Madame Karenina as marriage; that he hopedto arrange a divorce, and then to marry her, and until then he considered heras much a wife as any other wife, and he begged him to tell their mother andhis wife so.“If the world disapproves, I don’t care,” said Vronsky;“but if my relations want to be on terms of relationship with me, theywill have to be on the same terms with my wife.”The elder brother, who had always a respect for his younger brother’sjudgment, could not well tell whether he was right or not till the world haddecided the question; for his part he had nothing against it, and with Alexeyhe went up to see Anna.Before his brother, as before everyone, Vronsky addressed Anna with a certainformality, treating her as he might a very intimate friend, but it wasunderstood that his brother knew their real relations, and they talked aboutAnna’s going to Vronsky’s estate.In spite of all his social experience Vronsky was, in consequence of the newposition in which he was placed, laboring under a strange misapprehension. Onewould have thought he must have understood that society was closed for him andAnna; but now some vague ideas had sprung up in his brain that this was onlythe case in old-fashioned days, and that now with the rapidity of modernprogress (he had unconsciously become by now a partisan of every sort ofprogress) the views of society had changed, and that the question whether theywould be received in society was not a foregone conclusion. “Ofcourse,” he thought, “she would not be received at court, butintimate friends can and must look at it in the proper light.” One maysit for several hours at a stretch with one’s legs crossed in the sameposition, if one knows that there’s nothing to prevent one’schanging one’s position; but if a man knows that he must remain sittingso with crossed legs, then cramps come on, the legs begin to twitch and tostrain towards the spot to which one would like to draw them. This was whatVronsky was experiencing in regard to the world. Though at the bottom of hisheart he knew that the world was shut on them, he put it to the test whetherthe world had not changed by now and would not receive them. But he veryquickly perceived that though the world was open for him personally, it wasclosed for Anna. Just as in the game of cat and mouse, the hands raised for himwere dropped to bar the way for Anna.One of the first ladies of Petersburg society whom Vronsky saw was his cousinBetsy.“At last!” she greeted him joyfully. “And Anna? How glad Iam! Where are you stopping? I can fancy after your delightful travels you mustfind our poor Petersburg horrid. I can fancy your honeymoon in Rome. How aboutthe divorce? Is that all over?”Vronsky noticed that Betsy’s enthusiasm waned when she learned that nodivorce had as yet taken place.“People will throw stones at me, I know,” she said, “but Ishall come and see Anna; yes, I shall certainly come. You won’t be herelong, I suppose?”And she did certainly come to see Anna the same day, but her tone was not atall the same as in former days. She unmistakably prided herself on her courage,and wished Anna to appreciate the fidelity of her friendship. She only stayedten minutes, talking of society gossip, and on leaving she said:“You’ve never told me when the divorce is to be? SupposingI’m ready to fling my cap over the mill, other starchy people will giveyou the cold shoulder until you’re married. And that’s so simplenowadays. Ça se fait. So you’re going on Friday? Sorry weshan’t see each other again.”From Betsy’s tone Vronsky might have grasped what he had to expect fromthe world; but he made another effort in his own family. His mother he did notreckon upon. He knew that his mother, who had been so enthusiastic over Anna attheir first acquaintance, would have no mercy on her now for having ruined herson’s career. But he had more hope of Varya, his brother’s wife. Hefancied she would not throw stones, and would go simply and directly to seeAnna, and would receive her in her own house.The day after his arrival Vronsky went to her, and finding her alone, expressedhis wishes directly.“You know, Alexey,” she said after hearing him, “how fond Iam of you, and how ready I am to do anything for you; but I have not spoken,because I knew I could be of no use to you and to Anna Arkadyevna,” shesaid, articulating the name “Anna Arkadyevna” with particular care.“Don’t suppose, please, that I judge her. Never; perhaps in herplace I should have done the same. I don’t and can’t enter intothat,” she said, glancing timidly at his gloomy face. “But one mustcall things by their names. You want me to go and see her, to ask her here, andto rehabilitate her in society; but do understand that I cannot do so. Ihave daughters growing up, and I must live in the world for my husband’ssake. Well, I’m ready to come and see Anna Arkadyevna: she willunderstand that I can’t ask her here, or I should have to do so in such away that she would not meet people who look at things differently; that wouldoffend her. I can’t raise her....”“Oh, I don’t regard her as fallen more than hundreds of women youdo receive!” Vronsky interrupted her still more gloomily, and he got upin silence, understanding that his sister-in-law’s decision was not to beshaken.“Alexey! don’t be angry with me. Please understand that I’mnot to blame,” began Varya, looking at him with a timid smile.“I’m not angry with you,” he said still as gloomily;“but I’m sorry in two ways. I’m sorry, too, that this meansbreaking up our friendship—if not breaking up, at least weakening it. Youwill understand that for me, too, it cannot be otherwise.”And with that he left her.Vronsky knew that further efforts were useless, and that he had to spend thesefew days in Petersburg as though in a strange town, avoiding every sort ofrelation with his own old circle in order not to be exposed to the annoyancesand humiliations which were so intolerable to him. One of the most unpleasantfeatures of his position in Petersburg was that Alexey Alexandrovitch and hisname seemed to meet him everywhere. He could not begin to talk of anythingwithout the conversation turning on Alexey Alexandrovitch; he could not goanywhere without risk of meeting him. So at least it seemed to Vronsky, just asit seems to a man with a sore finger that he is continually, as though onpurpose, grazing his sore finger on everything.Their stay in Petersburg was the more painful to Vronsky that he perceived allthe time a sort of new mood that he could not understand in Anna. At one timeshe would seem in love with him, and then she would become cold, irritable, andimpenetrable. She was worrying over something, and keeping something back fromhim, and did not seem to notice the humiliations which poisoned his existence,and for her, with her delicate intuition, must have been still more unbearable.Chapter 29One of Anna’s objects in coming back to Russia had been to see her son.From the day she left Italy the thought of it had never ceased to agitate her.And as she got nearer to Petersburg, the delight and importance of this meetinggrew ever greater in her imagination. She did not even put to herself thequestion how to arrange it. It seemed to her natural and simple to see her sonwhen she should be in the same town with him. But on her arrival in Petersburgshe was suddenly made distinctly aware of her present position in society, andshe grasped the fact that to arrange this meeting was no easy matter.She had now been two days in Petersburg. The thought of her son never left herfor a single instant, but she had not yet seen him. To go straight to thehouse, where she might meet Alexey Alexandrovitch, that she felt she had noright to do. She might be refused admittance and insulted. To write and soenter into relations with her husband—that it made her miserable to thinkof doing; she could only be at peace when she did not think of her husband. Toget a glimpse of her son out walking, finding out where and when he went out,was not enough for her; she had so looked forward to this meeting, she had somuch she must say to him, she so longed to embrace him, to kiss him.Seryozha’s old nurse might be a help to her and show her what to do. Butthe nurse was not now living in Alexey Alexandrovitch’s house. In thisuncertainty, and in efforts to find the nurse, two days had slipped by.Hearing of the close intimacy between Alexey Alexandrovitch and Countess LidiaIvanovna, Anna decided on the third day to write to her a letter, which costher great pains, and in which she intentionally said that permission to see herson must depend on her husband’s generosity. She knew that if the letterwere shown to her husband, he would keep up his character of magnanimity, andwould not refuse her request.The commissionaire who took the letter had brought her back the most cruel andunexpected answer, that there was no answer. She had never felt so humiliatedas at the moment when, sending for the commissionaire, she heard from him theexact account of how he had waited, and how afterwards he had been told therewas no answer. Anna felt humiliated, insulted, but she saw that from her pointof view Countess Lidia Ivanovna was right. Her suffering was the more poignantthat she had to bear it in solitude. She could not and would not share it withVronsky. She knew that to him, although he was the primary cause of herdistress, the question of her seeing her son would seem a matter of very littleconsequence. She knew that he would never be capable of understanding all thedepth of her suffering, that for his cool tone at any allusion to it she wouldbegin to hate him. And she dreaded that more than anything in the world, and soshe hid from him everything that related to her son. Spending the whole day athome she considered ways of seeing her son, and had reached a decision to writeto her husband. She was just composing this letter when she was handed theletter from Lidia Ivanovna. The countess’s silence had subdued anddepressed her, but the letter, all that she read between the lines in it, soexasperated her, this malice was so revolting beside her passionate, legitimatetenderness for her son, that she turned against other people and left offblaming herself.“This coldness—this pretense of feeling!” she said toherself. “They must needs insult me and torture the child, and I am tosubmit to it! Not on any consideration! She is worse than I am. I don’tlie, anyway.” And she decided on the spot that next day, Seryozha’sbirthday, she would go straight to her husband’s house, bribe or deceivethe servants, but at any cost see her son and overturn the hideous deceptionwith which they were encompassing the unhappy child.She went to a toy shop, bought toys and thought over a plan of action. Shewould go early in the morning at eight o’clock, when AlexeyAlexandrovitch would be certain not to be up. She would have money in her handto give the hall-porter and the footman, so that they should let her in, andnot raising her veil, she would say that she had come from Seryozha’sgodfather to congratulate him, and that she had been charged to leave the toysat his bedside. She had prepared everything but the words she should say to herson. Often as she had dreamed of it, she could never think of anything.The next day, at eight o’clock in the morning, Anna got out of a hiredsledge and rang at the front entrance of her former home.“Run and see what’s wanted. Some lady,” said Kapitonitch,who, not yet dressed, in his overcoat and galoshes, had peeped out of thewindow and seen a lady in a veil standing close up to the door. His assistant,a lad Anna did not know, had no sooner opened the door to her than she came in,and pulling a three-rouble note out of her muff put it hurriedly into his hand.“Seryozha—Sergey Alexeitch,” she said, and was going on.Scrutinizing the note, the porter’s assistant stopped her at the secondglass door.“Whom do you want?” he asked.She did not hear his words and made no answer.Noticing the embarrassment of the unknown lady, Kapitonitch went out to her,opened the second door for her, and asked her what she was pleased to want.“From Prince Skorodumov for Sergey Alexeitch,” she said.“His honor’s not up yet,” said the porter, looking at herattentively.Anna had not anticipated that the absolutely unchanged hall of the house whereshe had lived for nine years would so greatly affect her. Memories sweet andpainful rose one after another in her heart, and for a moment she forgot whatshe was here for.“Would you kindly wait?” said Kapitonitch, taking off her furcloak.As he took off the cloak, Kapitonitch glanced at her face, recognized her, andmade her a low bow in silence.“Please walk in, your excellency,” he said to her.She tried to say something, but her voice refused to utter any sound; with aguilty and imploring glance at the old man she went with light, swift steps upthe stairs. Bent double, and his galoshes catching in the steps, Kapitonitchran after her, trying to overtake her.“The tutor’s there; maybe he’s not dressed. I’ll lethim know.”Anna still mounted the familiar staircase, not understanding what the old manwas saying.“This way, to the left, if you please. Excuse its not being tidy. Hishonor’s in the old parlor now,” the hall-porter said, panting.“Excuse me, wait a little, your excellency; I’ll just see,”he said, and overtaking her, he opened the high door and disappeared behind it.Anna stood still waiting. “He’s only just awake,” said thehall-porter, coming out. And at the very instant the porter said this, Annacaught the sound of a childish yawn. From the sound of this yawn alone she knewher son and seemed to see him living before her eyes.“Let me in; go away!” she said, and went in through the highdoorway. On the right of the door stood a bed, and sitting up in the bed wasthe boy. His little body bent forward with his nightshirt unbuttoned, he wasstretching and still yawning. The instant his lips came together they curvedinto a blissfully sleepy smile, and with that smile he slowly and deliciouslyrolled back again.“Seryozha!” she whispered, going noiselessly up to him.When she was parted from him, and all this latter time when she had beenfeeling a fresh rush of love for him, she had pictured him as he was at fouryears old, when she had loved him most of all. Now he was not even the same aswhen she had left him; he was still further from the four-year-old baby, moregrown and thinner. How thin his face was, how short his hair was! What longhands! How he had changed since she left him! But it was he with his head, hislips, his soft neck and broad little shoulders.“Seryozha!” she repeated just in the child’s ear.He raised himself again on his elbow, turned his tangled head from side to sideas though looking for something, and opened his eyes. Slowly and inquiringly helooked for several seconds at his mother standing motionless before him, thenall at once he smiled a blissful smile, and shutting his eyes, rolled notbackwards but towards her into her arms.“Seryozha! my darling boy!” she said, breathing hard and puttingher arms round his plump little body. “Mother!” he said, wrigglingabout in her arms so as to touch her hands with different parts of him.Smiling sleepily still with closed eyes, he flung fat little arms round hershoulders, rolled towards her, with the delicious sleepy warmth and fragrancethat is only found in children, and began rubbing his face against her neck andshoulders.“I know,” he said, opening his eyes; “it’s my birthdaytoday. I knew you’d come. I’ll get up directly.”And saying that he dropped asleep.Anna looked at him hungrily; she saw how he had grown and changed in herabsence. She knew, and did not know, the bare legs so long now, that werethrust out below the quilt, those short-cropped curls on his neck in which shehad so often kissed him. She touched all this and could say nothing; tearschoked her.“What are you crying for, mother?” he said, waking completely up.“Mother, what are you crying for?” he cried in a tearful voice.“I won’t cry ... I’m crying for joy. It’s so long sinceI’ve seen you. I won’t, I won’t,” she said, gulpingdown her tears and turning away. “Come, it’s time for you to dressnow,” she added, after a pause, and, never letting go his hands, she satdown by his bedside on the chair, where his clothes were put ready for him.“How do you dress without me? How....” she tried to begin talkingsimply and cheerfully, but she could not, and again she turned away.“I don’t have a cold bath, papa didn’t order it. Andyou’ve not seen Vassily Lukitch? He’ll come in soon. Why,you’re sitting on my clothes!”And Seryozha went off into a peal of laughter. She looked at him and smiled.“Mother, darling, sweet one!” he shouted, flinging himself on heragain and hugging her. It was as though only now, on seeing her smile, he fullygrasped what had happened.“I don’t want that on,” he said, taking off her hat. And asit were, seeing her afresh without her hat, he fell to kissing her again.“But what did you think about me? You didn’t think I wasdead?”“I never believed it.”“You didn’t believe it, my sweet?”“I knew, I knew!” he repeated his favorite phrase, and snatchingthe hand that was stroking his hair, he pressed the open palm to his mouth andkissed it.Chapter 30Meanwhile Vassily Lukitch had not at first understood who this lady was, andhad learned from their conversation that it was no other person than the motherwho had left her husband, and whom he had not seen, as he had entered the houseafter her departure. He was in doubt whether to go in or not, or whether tocommunicate with Alexey Alexandrovitch. Reflecting finally that his duty was toget Seryozha up at the hour fixed, and that it was therefore not his businessto consider who was there, the mother or anyone else, but simply to do hisduty, he finished dressing, went to the door and opened it.But the embraces of the mother and child, the sound of their voices, and whatthey were saying, made him change his mind.He shook his head, and with a sigh he closed the door. “I’ll waitanother ten minutes,” he said to himself, clearing his throat and wipingaway tears.Among the servants of the household there was intense excitement all this time.All had heard that their mistress had come, and that Kapitonitch had let herin, and that she was even now in the nursery, and that their master always wentin person to the nursery at nine o’clock, and everyone fully comprehendedthat it was impossible for the husband and wife to meet, and that they mustprevent it. Korney, the valet, going down to the hall-porter’s room,asked who had let her in, and how it was he had done so, and ascertaining thatKapitonitch had admitted her and shown her up, he gave the old man atalking-to. The hall-porter was doggedly silent, but when Korney told him heought to be sent away, Kapitonitch darted up to him, and waving his hands inKorney’s face, began:“Oh yes, to be sure you’d not have let her in! After tenyears’ service, and never a word but of kindness, and there you’dup and say, ‘Be off, go along, get away with you!’ Oh yes,you’re a shrewd one at politics, I dare say! You don’t need to betaught how to swindle the master, and to filch fur coats!”“Soldier!” said Korney contemptuously, and he turned to the nursewho was coming in. “Here, what do you think, Marya Efimovna: he let herin without a word to anyone,” Korney said addressing her. “AlexeyAlexandrovitch will be down immediately—and go into the nursery!”“A pretty business, a pretty business!” said the nurse. “You,Korney Vassilievitch, you’d best keep him some way or other, the master,while I’ll run and get her away somehow. A pretty business!”When the nurse went into the nursery, Seryozha was telling his mother how heand Nadinka had had a fall in sledging downhill, and had turned over threetimes. She was listening to the sound of his voice, watching his face and theplay of expression on it, touching his hand, but she did not follow what he wassaying. She must go, she must leave him,—this was the only thing she wasthinking and feeling. She heard the steps of Vassily Lukitch coming up to thedoor and coughing; she heard, too, the steps of the nurse as she came near; butshe sat like one turned to stone, incapable of beginning to speak or to get up.“Mistress, darling!” began the nurse, going up to Anna and kissingher hands and shoulders. “God has brought joy indeed to our boy on hisbirthday. You aren’t changed one bit.”“Oh, nurse dear, I didn’t know you were in the house,” saidAnna, rousing herself for a moment.“I’m not living here, I’m living with my daughter. I came forthe birthday, Anna Arkadyevna, darling!”The nurse suddenly burst into tears, and began kissing her hand again.Seryozha, with radiant eyes and smiles, holding his mother by one hand and hisnurse by the other, pattered on the rug with his fat little bare feet. Thetenderness shown by his beloved nurse to his mother threw him into an ecstasy.“Mother! She often comes to see me, and when she comes....” he wasbeginning, but he stopped, noticing that the nurse was saying something in awhisper to his mother, and that in his mother’s face there was a look ofdread and something like shame, which was so strangely unbecoming to her.She went up to him.“My sweet!” she said.She could not say good-bye, but the expression on her face said it, andhe understood. “Darling, darling Kootik!” she used the name bywhich she had called him when he was little, “you won’t forget me?You....” but she could not say more.How often afterwards she thought of words she might have said. But now she didnot know how to say it, and could say nothing. But Seryozha knew all she wantedto say to him. He understood that she was unhappy and loved him. He understoodeven what the nurse had whispered. He had caught the words “always atnine o’clock,” and he knew that this was said of his father, andthat his father and mother could not meet. That he understood, but one thing hecould not understand—why there should be a look of dread and shame in herface?... She was not in fault, but she was afraid of him and ashamed ofsomething. He would have liked to put a question that would have set at restthis doubt, but he did not dare; he saw that she was miserable, and he felt forher. Silently he pressed close to her and whispered, “Don’t go yet.He won’t come just yet.”The mother held him away from her to see what he was thinking, what to say tohim, and in his frightened face she read not only that he was speaking of hisfather, but, as it were, asking her what he ought to think about his father.“Seryozha, my darling,” she said, “love him; he’sbetter and kinder than I am, and I have done him wrong. When you grow up youwill judge.”“There’s no one better than you!...” he cried in despairthrough his tears, and, clutching her by the shoulders, he began squeezing herwith all his force to him, his arms trembling with the strain.“My sweet, my little one!” said Anna, and she cried as weakly andchildishly as he.At that moment the door opened. Vassily Lukitch came in.At the other door there was the sound of steps, and the nurse in a scaredwhisper said, “He’s coming,” and gave Anna her hat.Seryozha sank onto the bed and sobbed, hiding his face in his hands. Annaremoved his hands, once more kissed his wet face, and with rapid steps went tothe door. Alexey Alexandrovitch walked in, meeting her. Seeing her, he stoppedshort and bowed his head.Although she had just said he was better and kinder than she, in the rapidglance she flung at him, taking in his whole figure in all its details,feelings of repulsion and hatred for him and jealousy over her son tookpossession of her. With a swift gesture she put down her veil, and, quickeningher pace, almost ran out of the room.She had not time to undo, and so carried back with her, the parcel of toys shehad chosen the day before in a toy shop with such love and sorrow.Chapter 31As intensely as Anna had longed to see her son, and long as she had beenthinking of it and preparing herself for it, she had not in the least expectedthat seeing him would affect her so deeply. On getting back to her lonely roomsin the hotel she could not for a long while understand why she was there.“Yes, it’s all over, and I am again alone,” she said toherself, and without taking off her hat she sat down in a low chair by thehearth. Fixing her eyes on a bronze clock standing on a table between thewindows, she tried to think.The French maid brought from abroad came in to suggest she should dress. Shegazed at her wonderingly and said, “Presently.” A footman offeredher coffee. “Later on,” she said.The Italian nurse, after having taken the baby out in her best, came in withher, and brought her to Anna. The plump, well-fed little baby, on seeing hermother, as she always did, held out her fat little hands, and with a smile onher toothless mouth, began, like a fish with a float, bobbing her fingers upand down the starched folds of her embroidered skirt, making them rustle. Itwas impossible not to smile, not to kiss the baby, impossible not to hold out afinger for her to clutch, crowing and prancing all over; impossible not tooffer her a lip which she sucked into her little mouth by way of a kiss. Andall this Anna did, and took her in her arms and made her dance, and kissed herfresh little cheek and bare little elbows; but at the sight of this child itwas plainer than ever to her that the feeling she had for her could not becalled love in comparison with what she felt for Seryozha. Everything in thisbaby was charming, but for some reason all this did not go deep to her heart.On her first child, though the child of an unloved father, had beenconcentrated all the love that had never found satisfaction. Her baby girl hadbeen born in the most painful circumstances and had not had a hundredth part ofthe care and thought which had been concentrated on her first child. Besides,in the little girl everything was still in the future, while Seryozha was bynow almost a personality, and a personality dearly loved. In him there was aconflict of thought and feeling; he understood her, he loved her, he judgedher, she thought, recalling his words and his eyes. And she wasforever—not physically only but spiritually—divided from him, andit was impossible to set this right.She gave the baby back to the nurse, let her go, and opened the locket in whichthere was Seryozha’s portrait when he was almost of the same age as thegirl. She got up, and, taking off her hat, took up from a little table an albumin which there were photographs of her son at different ages. She wanted tocompare them, and began taking them out of the album. She took them all outexcept one, the latest and best photograph. In it he was in a white smock,sitting astride a chair, with frowning eyes and smiling lips. It was his best,most characteristic expression. With her little supple hands, her white,delicate fingers, that moved with a peculiar intensity today, she pulled at acorner of the photograph, but the photograph had caught somewhere, and shecould not get it out. There was no paper-knife on the table, and so, pullingout the photograph that was next to her son’s (it was a photograph ofVronsky taken at Rome in a round hat and with long hair), she used it to pushout her son’s photograph. “Oh, here is he!” she said,glancing at the portrait of Vronsky, and she suddenly recalled that he was thecause of her present misery. She had not once thought of him all the morning.But now, coming all at once upon that manly, noble face, so familiar and sodear to her, she felt a sudden rush of love for him.“But where is he? How is it he leaves me alone in my misery?” shethought all at once with a feeling of reproach, forgetting she had herself keptfrom him everything concerning her son. She sent to ask him to come to herimmediately; with a throbbing heart she awaited him, rehearsing to herself thewords in which she would tell him all, and the expressions of love with whichhe would console her. The messenger returned with the answer that he had avisitor with him, but that he would come immediately, and that he asked whethershe would let him bring with him Prince Yashvin, who had just arrived inPetersburg. “He’s not coming alone, and since dinner yesterday hehas not seen me,” she thought; “he’s not coming so that Icould tell him everything, but coming with Yashvin.” And all at once astrange idea came to her: what if he had ceased to love her?And going over the events of the last few days, it seemed to her that she sawin everything a confirmation of this terrible idea. The fact that he had notdined at home yesterday, and the fact that he had insisted on their takingseparate sets of rooms in Petersburg, and that even now he was not coming toher alone, as though he were trying to avoid meeting her face to face.“But he ought to tell me so. I must know that it is so. If I knew it,then I know what I should do,” she said to herself, utterly unable topicture to herself the position she would be in if she were convinced of hisnot caring for her. She thought he had ceased to love her, she felt close upondespair, and consequently she felt exceptionally alert. She rang for her maidand went to her dressing-room. As she dressed, she took more care over herappearance than she had done all those days, as though he might, if he hadgrown cold to her, fall in love with her again because she had dressed andarranged her hair in the way most becoming to her.She heard the bell ring before she was ready. When she went into thedrawing-room it was not he, but Yashvin, who met her eyes. Vronsky was lookingthrough the photographs of her son, which she had forgotten on the table, andhe made no haste to look round at her.“We have met already,” she said, putting her little hand into thehuge hand of Yashvin, whose bashfulness was so queerly out of keeping with hisimmense frame and coarse face. “We met last year at the races. Give themto me,” she said, with a rapid movement snatching from Vronsky thephotographs of her son, and glancing significantly at him with flashing eyes.“Were the races good this year? Instead of them I saw the races in theCorso in Rome. But you don’t care for life abroad,” she said with acordial smile. “I know you and all your tastes, though I have seen solittle of you.”“I’m awfully sorry for that, for my tastes are mostly bad,”said Yashvin, gnawing at his left mustache.Having talked a little while, and noticing that Vronsky glanced at the clock,Yashvin asked her whether she would be staying much longer in Petersburg, andunbending his huge figure reached after his cap.“Not long, I think,” she said hesitatingly, glancing at Vronsky.“So then we shan’t meet again?”“Come and dine with me,” said Anna resolutely, angry it seemed withherself for her embarrassment, but flushing as she always did when she definedher position before a fresh person. “The dinner here is not good, but atleast you will see him. There is no one of his old friends in the regimentAlexey cares for as he does for you.”“Delighted,” said Yashvin with a smile, from which Vronsky couldsee that he liked Anna very much.Yashvin said good-bye and went away; Vronsky stayed behind.“Are you going too?” she said to him.“I’m late already,” he answered. “Run along! I’llcatch you up in a moment,” he called to Yashvin.She took him by the hand, and without taking her eyes off him, gazed at himwhile she ransacked her mind for the words to say that would keep him.“Wait a minute, there’s something I want to say to you,” andtaking his broad hand she pressed it on her neck. “Oh, was it right myasking him to dinner?”“You did quite right,” he said with a serene smile that showed hiseven teeth, and he kissed her hand.“Alexey, you have not changed to me?” she said, pressing his handin both of hers. “Alexey, I am miserable here. When are we goingaway?”“Soon, soon. You wouldn’t believe how disagreeable our way ofliving here is to me too,” he said, and he drew away his hand.“Well, go, go!” she said in a tone of offense, and she walkedquickly away from him.Chapter 32When Vronsky returned home, Anna was not yet home. Soon after he had left, somelady, so they told him, had come to see her, and she had gone out with her.That she had gone out without leaving word where she was going, that she hadnot yet come back, and that all the morning she had been going about somewherewithout a word to him—all this, together with the strange look ofexcitement in her face in the morning, and the recollection of the hostile tonewith which she had before Yashvin almost snatched her son’s photographsout of his hands, made him serious. He decided he absolutely must speak openlywith her. And he waited for her in her drawing-room. But Anna did not returnalone, but brought with her her old unmarried aunt, Princess Oblonskaya. Thiswas the lady who had come in the morning, and with whom Anna had gone outshopping. Anna appeared not to notice Vronsky’s worried and inquiringexpression, and began a lively account of her morning’s shopping. He sawthat there was something working within her; in her flashing eyes, when theyrested for a moment on him, there was an intense concentration, and in herwords and movements there was that nervous rapidity and grace which, during theearly period of their intimacy, had so fascinated him, but which now sodisturbed and alarmed him.The dinner was laid for four. All were gathered together and about to go intothe little dining-room when Tushkevitch made his appearance with a message fromPrincess Betsy. Princess Betsy begged her to excuse her not having come to saygood-bye; she had been indisposed, but begged Anna to come to her betweenhalf-past six and nine o’clock. Vronsky glanced at Anna at the preciselimit of time, so suggestive of steps having been taken that she should meet noone; but Anna appeared not to notice it.“Very sorry that I can’t come just between half-past six andnine,” she said with a faint smile.“The princess will be very sorry.”“And so am I.”“You’re going, no doubt, to hear Patti?” said Tushkevitch.“Patti? You suggest the idea to me. I would go if it were possible to geta box.”“I can get one,” Tushkevitch offered his services.“I should be very, very grateful to you,” said Anna. “Butwon’t you dine with us?”Vronsky gave a hardly perceptible shrug. He was at a complete loss tounderstand what Anna was about. What had she brought the old PrincessOblonskaya home for, what had she made Tushkevitch stay to dinner for, and,most amazing of all, why was she sending him for a box? Could she possiblythink in her position of going to Patti’s benefit, where all the circleof her acquaintances would be? He looked at her with serious eyes, but sheresponded with that defiant, half-mirthful, half-desperate look, the meaning ofwhich he could not comprehend. At dinner Anna was in aggressively highspirits—she almost flirted both with Tushkevitch and with Yashvin. Whenthey got up from dinner and Tushkevitch had gone to get a box at the opera,Yashvin went to smoke, and Vronsky went down with him to his own rooms. Aftersitting there for some time he ran upstairs. Anna was already dressed in alow-necked gown of light silk and velvet that she had had made in Paris, andwith costly white lace on her head, framing her face, and particularlybecoming, showing up her dazzling beauty.“Are you really going to the theater?” he said, trying not to lookat her.“Why do you ask with such alarm?” she said, wounded again at hisnot looking at her. “Why shouldn’t I go?”She appeared not to understand the motive of his words.“Oh, of course, there’s no reason whatever,” he said,frowning.“That’s just what I say,” she said, willfully refusing to seethe irony of his tone, and quietly turning back her long, perfumed glove.“Anna, for God’s sake! what is the matter with you?” he said,appealing to her exactly as once her husband had done.“I don’t understand what you are asking.”“You know that it’s out of the question to go.”“Why so? I’m not going alone. Princess Varvara has gone to dress,she is going with me.”He shrugged his shoulders with an air of perplexity and despair.“But do you mean to say you don’t know?...” he began.“But I don’t care to know!” she almost shrieked. “Idon’t care to. Do I regret what I have done? No, no, no! If it were allto do again from the beginning, it would be the same. For us, for you and forme, there is only one thing that matters, whether we love each other. Otherpeople we need not consider. Why are we living here apart and not seeing eachother? Why can’t I go? I love you, and I don’t care foranything,” she said in Russian, glancing at him with a peculiar gleam inher eyes that he could not understand. “If you have not changed to me,why don’t you look at me?”He looked at her. He saw all the beauty of her face and full dress, always sobecoming to her. But now her beauty and elegance were just what irritated him.“My feeling cannot change, you know, but I beg you, I entreat you,”he said again in French, with a note of tender supplication in his voice, butwith coldness in his eyes.She did not hear his words, but she saw the coldness of his eyes, and answeredwith irritation:“And I beg you to explain why I should not go.”“Because it might cause you....” he hesitated.“I don’t understand. Yashvin n’est pas compromettant,and Princess Varvara is no worse than others. Oh, here she is!”Chapter 33Vronsky for the first time experienced a feeling of anger against Anna, almosta hatred for her willfully refusing to understand her own position. Thisfeeling was aggravated by his being unable to tell her plainly the cause of hisanger. If he had told her directly what he was thinking, he would have said:“In that dress, with a princess only too well known to everyone, to showyourself at the theater is equivalent not merely to acknowledging your positionas a fallen woman, but is flinging down a challenge to society, that is to say,cutting yourself off from it forever.”He could not say that to her. “But how can she fail to see it, and whatis going on in her?” he said to himself. He felt at the same time thathis respect for her was diminished while his sense of her beauty wasintensified.He went back scowling to his rooms, and sitting down beside Yashvin, who, withhis long legs stretched out on a chair, was drinking brandy and seltzer water,he ordered a glass of the same for himself.“You were talking of Lankovsky’s Powerful. That’s a finehorse, and I would advise you to buy him,” said Yashvin, glancing at hiscomrade’s gloomy face. “His hind-quarters aren’t quitefirst-rate, but the legs and head—one couldn’t wish for anythingbetter.”“I think I will take him,” answered Vronsky.Their conversation about horses interested him, but he did not for an instantforget Anna, and could not help listening to the sound of steps in the corridorand looking at the clock on the chimney piece.“Anna Arkadyevna gave orders to announce that she has gone to thetheater.”Yashvin, tipping another glass of brandy into the bubbling water, drank it andgot up, buttoning his coat.“Well, let’s go,” he said, faintly smiling under hismustache, and showing by this smile that he knew the cause of Vronsky’sgloominess, and did not attach any significance to it.“I’m not going,” Vronsky answered gloomily.“Well, I must, I promised to. Good-bye, then. If you do, come to thestalls; you can take Kruzin’s stall,” added Yashvin as he went out.“No, I’m busy.”“A wife is a care, but it’s worse when she’s not awife,” thought Yashvin, as he walked out of the hotel.Vronsky, left alone, got up from his chair and began pacing up and down theroom.“And what’s today? The fourth night.... Yegor and his wife arethere, and my mother, most likely. Of course all Petersburg’s there. Nowshe’s gone in, taken off her cloak and come into the light. Tushkevitch,Yashvin, Princess Varvara,” he pictured them to himself.... “Whatabout me? Either that I’m frightened or have given up to Tushkevitch theright to protect her? From every point of view—stupid, stupid!... And whyis she putting me in such a position?” he said with a gesture of despair.With that gesture he knocked against the table, on which there was standing theseltzer water and the decanter of brandy, and almost upset it. He tried tocatch it, let it slip, and angrily kicked the table over and rang.“If you care to be in my service,” he said to the valet who camein, “you had better remember your duties. This shouldn’t be here.You ought to have cleared away.”The valet, conscious of his own innocence, would have defended himself, butglancing at his master, he saw from his face that the only thing to do was tobe silent, and hurriedly threading his way in and out, dropped down on thecarpet and began gathering up the whole and broken glasses and bottles.“That’s not your duty; send the waiter to clear away, and get mydress coat out.”Vronsky went into the theater at half-past eight. The performance was in fullswing. The little old box-keeper, recognizing Vronsky as he helped him off withhis fur coat, called him “Your Excellency,” and suggested he shouldnot take a number but should simply call Fyodor. In the brightly lightedcorridor there was no one but the box-opener and two attendants with fur cloakson their arms listening at the doors. Through the closed doors came the soundsof the discreet staccato accompaniment of the orchestra, and a singlefemale voice rendering distinctly a musical phrase. The door opened to let thebox-opener slip through, and the phrase drawing to the end reachedVronsky’s hearing clearly. But the doors were closed again at once, andVronsky did not hear the end of the phrase and the cadence of theaccompaniment, though he knew from the thunder of applause that it was over.When he entered the hall, brilliantly lighted with chandeliers and gas jets,the noise was still going on. On the stage the singer, bowing and smiling, withbare shoulders flashing with diamonds, was, with the help of the tenor who hadgiven her his arm, gathering up the bouquets that were flying awkwardly overthe footlights. Then she went up to a gentleman with glossy pomaded hair parteddown the center, who was stretching across the footlights holding out somethingto her, and all the public in the stalls as well as in the boxes was inexcitement, craning forward, shouting and clapping. The conductor in his highchair assisted in passing the offering, and straightened his white tie. Vronskywalked into the middle of the stalls, and, standing still, began looking abouthim. That day less than ever was his attention turned upon the familiar,habitual surroundings, the stage, the noise, all the familiar, uninteresting,particolored herd of spectators in the packed theater.There were, as always, the same ladies of some sort with officers of some sortin the back of the boxes; the same gaily dressed women—God knowswho—and uniforms and black coats; the same dirty crowd in the uppergallery; and among the crowd, in the boxes and in the front rows, were someforty of the real people. And to those oases Vronsky at once directedhis attention, and with them he entered at once into relation.The act was over when he went in, and so he did not go straight to hisbrother’s box, but going up to the first row of stalls stopped at thefootlights with Serpuhovskoy, who, standing with one knee raised and his heelon the footlights, caught sight of him in the distance and beckoned to him,smiling.Vronsky had not yet seen Anna. He purposely avoided looking in her direction.But he knew by the direction of people’s eyes where she was. He lookedround discreetly, but he was not seeking her; expecting the worst, his eyessought for Alexey Alexandrovitch. To his relief Alexey Alexandrovitch was notin the theater that evening.“How little of the military man there is left in you!” Serpuhovskoywas saying to him. “A diplomat, an artist, something of that sort, onewould say.”“Yes, it was like going back home when I put on a black coat,”answered Vronsky, smiling and slowly taking out his opera-glass.“Well, I’ll own I envy you there. When I come back from abroad andput on this,” he touched his epaulets, “I regret my freedom.”Serpuhovskoy had long given up all hope of Vronsky’s career, but he likedhim as before, and was now particularly cordial to him.“What a pity you were not in time for the first act!”Vronsky, listening with one ear, moved his opera-glass from the stalls andscanned the boxes. Near a lady in a turban and a bald old man, who seemed towave angrily in the moving opera-glass, Vronsky suddenly caught sight ofAnna’s head, proud, strikingly beautiful, and smiling in the frame oflace. She was in the fifth box, twenty paces from him. She was sitting infront, and slightly turning, was saying something to Yashvin. The setting ofher head on her handsome, broad shoulders, and the restrained excitement andbrilliance of her eyes and her whole face reminded him of her just as he hadseen her at the ball in Moscow. But he felt utterly different towards herbeauty now. In his feeling for her now there was no element of mystery, and soher beauty, though it attracted him even more intensely than before, gave himnow a sense of injury. She was not looking in his direction, but Vronsky feltthat she had seen him already.When Vronsky turned the opera-glass again in that direction, he noticed thatPrincess Varvara was particularly red, and kept laughing unnaturally andlooking round at the next box. Anna, folding her fan and tapping it on the redvelvet, was gazing away and did not see, and obviously did not wish to see,what was taking place in the next box. Yashvin’s face wore the expressionwhich was common when he was losing at cards. Scowling, he sucked the left endof his mustache further and further into his mouth, and cast sidelong glancesat the next box.In that box on the left were the Kartasovs. Vronsky knew them, and knew thatAnna was acquainted with them. Madame Kartasova, a thin little woman, wasstanding up in her box, and, her back turned upon Anna, she was putting on amantle that her husband was holding for her. Her face was pale and angry, andshe was talking excitedly. Kartasov, a fat, bald man, was continually lookinground at Anna, while he attempted to soothe his wife. When the wife had goneout, the husband lingered a long while, and tried to catch Anna’s eye,obviously anxious to bow to her. But Anna, with unmistakable intention, avoidednoticing him, and talked to Yashvin, whose cropped head was bent down to her.Kartasov went out without making his salutation, and the box was left empty.Vronsky could not understand exactly what had passed between the Kartasovs andAnna, but he saw that something humiliating for Anna had happened. He knew thisboth from what he had seen, and most of all from the face of Anna, who, hecould see, was taxing every nerve to carry through the part she had taken up.And in maintaining this attitude of external composure she was completelysuccessful. Anyone who did not know her and her circle, who had not heard allthe utterances of the women expressive of commiseration, indignation, andamazement, that she should show herself in society, and show herself soconspicuously with her lace and her beauty, would have admired the serenity andloveliness of this woman without a suspicion that she was undergoing thesensations of a man in the stocks.Knowing that something had happened, but not knowing precisely what, Vronskyfelt a thrill of agonizing anxiety, and hoping to find out something, he wenttowards his brother’s box. Purposely choosing the way round furthest fromAnna’s box, he jostled as he came out against the colonel of his oldregiment talking to two acquaintances. Vronsky heard the name of MadameKarenina, and noticed how the colonel hastened to address Vronsky loudly byname, with a meaning glance at his companions.“Ah, Vronsky! When are you coming to the regiment? We can’t let youoff without a supper. You’re one of the old set,” said the colonelof his regiment.“I can’t stop, awfully sorry, another time,” said Vronsky,and he ran upstairs towards his brother’s box.The old countess, Vronsky’s mother, with her steel-gray curls, was in hisbrother’s box. Varya with the young Princess Sorokina met him in thecorridor.Leaving the Princess Sorokina with her mother, Varya held out her hand to herbrother-in-law, and began immediately to speak of what interested him. She wasmore excited than he had ever seen her.“I think it’s mean and hateful, and Madame Kartasova had no rightto do it. Madame Karenina....” she began.“But what is it? I don’t know.”“What? you’ve not heard?”“You know I should be the last person to hear of it.”“There isn’t a more spiteful creature than that MadameKartasova!”“But what did she do?”“My husband told me.... She has insulted Madame Karenina. Her husbandbegan talking to her across the box, and Madame Kartasova made a scene. Shesaid something aloud, he says, something insulting, and went away.”“Count, your maman is asking for you,” said the young PrincessSorokina, peeping out of the door of the box.“I’ve been expecting you all the while,” said his mother,smiling sarcastically. “You were nowhere to be seen.”Her son saw that she could not suppress a smile of delight.“Good evening, maman. I have come to you,” he said coldly.“Why aren’t you going to faire la cour à MadameKarenina?” she went on, when Princess Sorokina had moved away.“Elle fait sensation. On oublie la Patti pour elle.”“Maman, I have asked you not to say anything to me of that,” heanswered, scowling.“I’m only saying what everyone’s saying.”Vronsky made no reply, and saying a few words to Princess Sorokina, he wentaway. At the door he met his brother.“Ah, Alexey!” said his brother. “How disgusting! Idiot of awoman, nothing else.... I wanted to go straight to her. Let’s gotogether.”Vronsky did not hear him. With rapid steps he went downstairs; he felt that hemust do something, but he did not know what. Anger with her for having putherself and him in such a false position, together with pity for her suffering,filled his heart. He went down, and made straight for Anna’s box. At herbox stood Stremov, talking to her.“There are no more tenors. Le moule en est brisé!”Vronsky bowed to her and stopped to greet Stremov.“You came in late, I think, and have missed the best song,” Annasaid to Vronsky, glancing ironically, he thought, at him.“I am a poor judge of music,” he said, looking sternly at her.“Like Prince Yashvin,” she said smiling, “who considers thatPatti sings too loud.”“Thank you,” she said, her little hand in its long glove taking theplaybill Vronsky picked up, and suddenly at that instant her lovely facequivered. She got up and went into the interior of the box.Noticing in the next act that her box was empty, Vronsky, rousing indignant“hushes” in the silent audience, went out in the middle of a soloand drove home.Anna was already at home. When Vronsky went up to her, she was in the samedress as she had worn at the theater. She was sitting in the first armchairagainst the wall, looking straight before her. She looked at him, and at onceresumed her former position.“Anna,” he said.“You, you are to blame for everything!” she cried, with tears ofdespair and hatred in her voice, getting up.“I begged, I implored you not to go, I knew it would beunpleasant....”“Unpleasant!” she cried—“hideous! As long as I live Ishall never forget it. She said it was a disgrace to sit beside me.”“A silly woman’s chatter,” he said: “but why risk it,why provoke?...”“I hate your calm. You ought not to have brought me to this. If you hadloved me....”“Anna! How does the question of my love come in?”“Oh, if you loved me, as I love, if you were tortured as I am!...”she said, looking at him with an expression of terror.He was sorry for her, and angry notwithstanding. He assured her of his lovebecause he saw that this was the only means of soothing her, and he did notreproach her in words, but in his heart he reproached her.And the asseverations of his love, which seemed to him so vulgar that he wasashamed to utter them, she drank in eagerly, and gradually became calmer. Thenext day, completely reconciled, they left for the country.PART SIXChapter 1Darya Alexandrovna spent the summer with her children at Pokrovskoe, at hersister Kitty Levin’s. The house on her own estate was quite in ruins, andLevin and his wife had persuaded her to spend the summer with them. StepanArkadyevitch greatly approved of the arrangement. He said he was very sorry hisofficial duties prevented him from spending the summer in the country with hisfamily, which would have been the greatest happiness for him; and remaining inMoscow, he came down to the country from time to time for a day or two. Besidesthe Oblonskys, with all their children and their governess, the old princesstoo came to stay that summer with the Levins, as she considered it her duty towatch over her inexperienced daughter in her interesting condition.Moreover, Varenka, Kitty’s friend abroad, kept her promise to come toKitty when she was married, and stayed with her friend. All of these werefriends or relations of Levin’s wife. And though he liked them all, herather regretted his own Levin world and ways, which was smothered by thisinflux of the “Shtcherbatsky element,” as he called it to himself.Of his own relations there stayed with him only Sergey Ivanovitch, but he toowas a man of the Koznishev and not the Levin stamp, so that the Levin spiritwas utterly obliterated.In the Levins’ house, so long deserted, there were now so many peoplethat almost all the rooms were occupied, and almost every day it happened thatthe old princess, sitting down to table, counted them all over, and put thethirteenth grandson or granddaughter at a separate table. And Kitty, with hercareful housekeeping, had no little trouble to get all the chickens, turkeys,and geese, of which so many were needed to satisfy the summer appetites of thevisitors and children.The whole family were sitting at dinner. Dolly’s children, with theirgoverness and Varenka, were making plans for going to look for mushrooms.Sergey Ivanovitch, who was looked up to by all the party for his intellect andlearning, with a respect that almost amounted to awe, surprised everyone byjoining in the conversation about mushrooms.“Take me with you. I am very fond of picking mushrooms,” he said,looking at Varenka; “I think it’s a very nice occupation.”“Oh, we shall be delighted,” answered Varenka, coloring a little.Kitty exchanged meaningful glances with Dolly. The proposal of the learned andintellectual Sergey Ivanovitch to go looking for mushrooms with Varenkaconfirmed certain theories of Kitty’s with which her mind had been verybusy of late. She made haste to address some remark to her mother, so that herlook should not be noticed. After dinner Sergey Ivanovitch sat with his cup ofcoffee at the drawing-room window, and while he took part in a conversation hehad begun with his brother, he watched the door through which the childrenwould start on the mushroom-picking expedition. Levin was sitting in the windownear his brother.Kitty stood beside her husband, evidently awaiting the end of a conversationthat had no interest for her, in order to tell him something.“You have changed in many respects since your marriage, and for thebetter,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, smiling to Kitty, and obviously littleinterested in the conversation, “but you have remained true to yourpassion for defending the most paradoxical theories.”“Katya, it’s not good for you to stand,” her husband said toher, putting a chair for her and looking significantly at her.“Oh, and there’s no time either,” added Sergey Ivanovitch,seeing the children running out.At the head of them all Tanya galloped sideways, in her tightly-drawnstockings, and waving a basket and Sergey Ivanovitch’s hat, she ranstraight up to him.Boldly running up to Sergey Ivanovitch with shining eyes, so like herfather’s fine eyes, she handed him his hat and made as though she wouldput it on for him, softening her freedom by a shy and friendly smile.“Varenka’s waiting,” she said, carefully putting his hat on,seeing from Sergey Ivanovitch’s smile that she might do so.Varenka was standing at the door, dressed in a yellow print gown, with a whitekerchief on her head.“I’m coming, I’m coming, Varvara Andreevna,” saidSergey Ivanovitch, finishing his cup of coffee, and putting into their separatepockets his handkerchief and cigar-case.“And how sweet my Varenka is! eh?” said Kitty to her husband, assoon as Sergey Ivanovitch rose. She spoke so that Sergey Ivanovitch could hear,and it was clear that she meant him to do so. “And how good-looking sheis—such a refined beauty! Varenka!” Kitty shouted. “Shall yoube in the mill copse? We’ll come out to you.”“You certainly forget your condition, Kitty,” said the oldprincess, hurriedly coming out at the door. “You mustn’t shout likethat.”Varenka, hearing Kitty’s voice and her mother’s reprimand, wentwith light, rapid steps up to Kitty. The rapidity of her movement, her flushedand eager face, everything betrayed that something out of the common was goingon in her. Kitty knew what this was, and had been watching her intently. Shecalled Varenka at that moment merely in order mentally to give her a blessingfor the important event which, as Kitty fancied, was bound to come to pass thatday after dinner in the wood.“Varenka, I should be very happy if a certain something were tohappen,” she whispered as she kissed her.“And are you coming with us?” Varenka said to Levin in confusion,pretending not to have heard what had been said.“I am coming, but only as far as the threshing-floor, and there I shallstop.”“Why, what do you want there?” said Kitty.“I must go to have a look at the new wagons, and to check theinvoice,” said Levin; “and where will you be?”“On the terrace.”Chapter 2On the terrace were assembled all the ladies of the party. They always likedsitting there after dinner, and that day they had work to do there too. Besidesthe sewing and knitting of baby clothes, with which all of them were busy, thatafternoon jam was being made on the terrace by a method new to AgafeaMihalovna, without the addition of water. Kitty had introduced this new method,which had been in use in her home. Agafea Mihalovna, to whom the task ofjam-making had always been intrusted, considering that what had been done inthe Levin household could not be amiss, had nevertheless put water with thestrawberries, maintaining that the jam could not be made without it. She hadbeen caught in the act, and was now making jam before everyone, and it was tobe proved to her conclusively that jam could be very well made without water.Agafea Mihalovna, her face heated and angry, her hair untidy, and her thin armsbare to the elbows, was turning the preserving-pan over the charcoal stove,looking darkly at the raspberries and devoutly hoping they would stick and notcook properly. The princess, conscious that Agafea Mihalovna’s wrath mustbe chiefly directed against her, as the person responsible for the raspberryjam-making, tried to appear to be absorbed in other things and not interestedin the jam, talked of other matters, but cast stealthy glances in the directionof the stove.“I always buy my maids’ dresses myself, of some cheapmaterial,” the princess said, continuing the previous conversation.“Isn’t it time to skim it, my dear?” she added, addressingAgafea Mihalovna. “There’s not the slightest need for you to do it,and it’s hot for you,” she said, stopping Kitty.“I’ll do it,” said Dolly, and getting up, she carefullypassed the spoon over the frothing sugar, and from time to time shook off theclinging jam from the spoon by knocking it on a plate that was covered withyellow-red scum and blood-colored syrup. “How they’ll enjoy this attea-time!” she thought of her children, remembering how she herself as achild had wondered how it was the grown-up people did not eat what was best ofall—the scum of the jam.“Stiva says it’s much better to give money.” Dolly took upmeanwhile the weighty subject under discussion, what presents should be made toservants. “But....”“Money’s out of the question!” the princess and Kittyexclaimed with one voice. “They appreciate a present....”“Well, last year, for instance, I bought our Matrona Semyenovna, not apoplin, but something of that sort,” said the princess.“I remember she was wearing it on your nameday.”“A charming pattern—so simple and refined,—I should haveliked it myself, if she hadn’t had it. Something like Varenka’s. Sopretty and inexpensive.”“Well, now I think it’s done,” said Dolly, dropping the syrupfrom the spoon.“When it sets as it drops, it’s ready. Cook it a little longer,Agafea Mihalovna.”“The flies!” said Agafea Mihalovna angrily. “It’ll bejust the same,” she added.“Ah! how sweet it is! don’t frighten it!” Kitty saidsuddenly, looking at a sparrow that had settled on the step and was pecking atthe center of a raspberry.“Yes, but you keep a little further from the stove,” said hermother.“À propos de Varenka,” said Kitty, speaking in French, asthey had been doing all the while, so that Agafea Mihalovna should notunderstand them, “you know, mamma, I somehow expect things to be settledtoday. You know what I mean. How splendid it would be!”“But what a famous matchmaker she is!” said Dolly. “Howcarefully and cleverly she throws them together!...”“No; tell me, mamma, what do you think?”“Why, what is one to think? He” (he meant Sergey Ivanovitch)“might at any time have been a match for anyone in Russia; now, ofcourse, he’s not quite a young man, still I know ever so many girls wouldbe glad to marry him even now.... She’s a very nice girl, but hemight....”“Oh, no, mamma, do understand why, for him and for her too, nothingbetter could be imagined. In the first place, she’s charming!” saidKitty, crooking one of her fingers.“He thinks her very attractive, that’s certain,” assentedDolly.“Then he occupies such a position in society that he has no need to lookfor either fortune or position in his wife. All he needs is a good, sweetwife—a restful one.”“Well, with her he would certainly be restful,” Dolly assented.“Thirdly, that she should love him. And so it is ... that is, it would beso splendid!... I look forward to seeing them coming out of theforest—and everything settled. I shall see at once by their eyes. Ishould be so delighted! What do you think, Dolly?”“But don’t excite yourself. It’s not at all the thing for youto be excited,” said her mother.“Oh, I’m not excited, mamma. I fancy he will make her an offertoday.”“Ah, that’s so strange, how and when a man makes an offer!... Thereis a sort of barrier, and all at once it’s broken down,” saidDolly, smiling pensively and recalling her past with Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Mamma, how did papa make you an offer?” Kitty asked suddenly.“There was nothing out of the way, it was very simple,” answeredthe princess, but her face beamed all over at the recollection.“Oh, but how was it? You loved him, anyway, before you were allowed tospeak?”Kitty felt a peculiar pleasure in being able now to talk to her mother on equalterms about those questions of such paramount interest in a woman’s life.“Of course I did; he had come to stay with us in the country.”“But how was it settled between you, mamma?”“You imagine, I dare say, that you invented something quite new?It’s always just the same: it was settled by the eyes, bysmiles....”“How nicely you said that, mamma! It’s just by the eyes, by smilesthat it’s done,” Dolly assented.“But what words did he say?”“What did Kostya say to you?”“He wrote it in chalk. It was wonderful.... How long ago it seems!”she said.And the three women all fell to musing on the same thing. Kitty was the firstto break the silence. She remembered all that last winter before her marriage,and her passion for Vronsky.“There’s one thing ... that old love affair ofVarenka’s,” she said, a natural chain of ideas bringing her to thispoint. “I should have liked to say something to Sergey Ivanovitch, toprepare him. They’re all—all men, I mean,” she added,“awfully jealous over our past.”“Not all,” said Dolly. “You judge by your own husband. Itmakes him miserable even now to remember Vronsky. Eh? that’s true,isn’t it?”“Yes,” Kitty answered, a pensive smile in her eyes.“But I really don’t know,” the mother put in in defense ofher motherly care of her daughter, “what there was in your past thatcould worry him? That Vronsky paid you attentions—that happens to everygirl.”“Oh, yes, but we didn’t mean that,” Kitty said, flushing alittle.“No, let me speak,” her mother went on, “why, you yourselfwould not let me have a talk to Vronsky. Don’t you remember?”“Oh, mamma!” said Kitty, with an expression of suffering.“There’s no keeping you young people in check nowadays.... Yourfriendship could not have gone beyond what was suitable. I should myself havecalled upon him to explain himself. But, my darling, it’s not right foryou to be agitated. Please remember that, and calm yourself.”“I’m perfectly calm, maman.”“How happy it was for Kitty that Anna came then,” said Dolly,“and how unhappy for her. It turned out quite the opposite,” shesaid, struck by her own ideas. “Then Anna was so happy, and Kitty thoughtherself unhappy. Now it is just the opposite. I often think of her.”“A nice person to think about! Horrid, repulsive woman—noheart,” said her mother, who could not forget that Kitty had married notVronsky, but Levin.“What do you want to talk of it for?” Kitty said with annoyance.“I never think about it, and I don’t want to think of it.... And Idon’t want to think of it,” she said, catching the sound of herhusband’s well-known step on the steps of the terrace.“What’s that you don’t want to think about?” inquiredLevin, coming onto the terrace.But no one answered him, and he did not repeat the question.“I’m sorry I’ve broken in on your feminine parliament,”he said, looking round on everyone discontentedly, and perceiving that they hadbeen talking of something which they would not talk about before him.For a second he felt that he was sharing the feeling of Agafea Mihalovna,vexation at their making jam without water, and altogether at the outsideShtcherbatsky element. He smiled, however, and went up to Kitty.“Well, how are you?” he asked her, looking at her with theexpression with which everyone looked at her now.“Oh, very well,” said Kitty, smiling, “and how have thingsgone with you?”“The wagons held three times as much as the old carts did. Well, are wegoing for the children? I’ve ordered the horses to be put in.”“What! you want to take Kitty in the wagonette?” her mother saidreproachfully.“Yes, at a walking pace, princess.”Levin never called the princess “maman” as men often do call theirmothers-in-law, and the princess disliked his not doing so. But though he likedand respected the princess, Levin could not call her so without a sense ofprofaning his feeling for his dead mother.“Come with us, maman,” said Kitty.“I don’t like to see such imprudence.”“Well, I’ll walk then, I’m so well.” Kitty got up andwent to her husband and took his hand.“You may be well, but everything in moderation,” said the princess.“Well, Agafea Mihalovna, is the jam done?” said Levin, smiling toAgafea Mihalovna, and trying to cheer her up. “Is it all right in the newway?”“I suppose it’s all right. For our notions it’s boiled toolong.”“It’ll be all the better, Agafea Mihalovna, it won’t mildew,even though our ice has begun to thaw already, so that we’ve no coolcellar to store it,” said Kitty, at once divining her husband’smotive, and addressing the old housekeeper with the same feeling; “butyour pickle’s so good, that mamma says she never tasted any likeit,” she added, smiling, and putting her kerchief straight.Agafea Mihalovna looked angrily at Kitty.“You needn’t try to console me, mistress. I need only to look atyou with him, and I feel happy,” she said, and something in the roughfamiliarity of that with him touched Kitty.“Come along with us to look for mushrooms, you will show us the bestplaces.” Agafea Mihalovna smiled and shook her head, as though to say:“I should like to be angry with you too, but I can’t.”“Do it, please, by my receipt,” said the princess; “put somepaper over the jam, and moisten it with a little rum, and without even ice, itwill never go mildewy.”Chapter 3Kitty was particularly glad of a chance of being alone with her husband, forshe had noticed the shade of mortification that had passed over hisface—always so quick to reflect every feeling—at the moment when hehad come onto the terrace and asked what they were talking of, and had got noanswer.When they had set off on foot ahead of the others, and had come out of sight ofthe house onto the beaten dusty road, marked with rusty wheels and sprinkledwith grains of corn, she clung faster to his arm and pressed it closer to her.He had quite forgotten the momentary unpleasant impression, and alone with herhe felt, now that the thought of her approaching motherhood was never for amoment absent from his mind, a new and delicious bliss, quite pure from allalloy of sense, in the being near to the woman he loved. There was no need ofspeech, yet he longed to hear the sound of her voice, which like her eyes hadchanged since she had been with child. In her voice, as in her eyes, there wasthat softness and gravity which is found in people continually concentrated onsome cherished pursuit.“So you’re not tired? Lean more on me,” said he.“No, I’m so glad of a chance of being alone with you, and I mustown, though I’m happy with them, I do regret our winter eveningsalone.”“That was good, but this is even better. Both are better,” he said,squeezing her hand.“Do you know what we were talking about when you came in?”“About jam?”“Oh, yes, about jam too; but afterwards, about how men makeoffers.”“Ah!” said Levin, listening more to the sound of her voice than tothe words she was saying, and all the while paying attention to the road, whichpassed now through the forest, and avoiding places where she might make a falsestep.“And about Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka. You’ve noticed?...I’m very anxious for it,” she went on. “What do you thinkabout it?” And she peeped into his face.“I don’t know what to think,” Levin answered, smiling.“Sergey seems very strange to me in that way. I told you, youknow....”“Yes, that he was in love with that girl who died....”“That was when I was a child; I know about it from hearsay and tradition.I remember him then. He was wonderfully sweet. But I’ve watched him sincewith women; he is friendly, some of them he likes, but one feels that to himthey’re simply people, not women.”“Yes, but now with Varenka ... I fancy there’s something....”“Perhaps there is.... But one has to know him.... He’s a peculiar,wonderful person. He lives a spiritual life only. He’s too pure, tooexalted a nature.”“Why? Would this lower him, then?”“No, but he’s so used to a spiritual life that he can’treconcile himself with actual fact, and Varenka is after all fact.”Levin had grown used by now to uttering his thought boldly, without taking thetrouble of clothing it in exact language. He knew that his wife, in suchmoments of loving tenderness as now, would understand what he meant to say froma hint, and she did understand him.“Yes, but there’s not so much of that actual fact about her asabout me. I can see that he would never have cared for me. She is altogetherspiritual.”“Oh, no, he is so fond of you, and I am always so glad when my peoplelike you....”“Yes, he’s very nice to me; but....”“It’s not as it was with poor Nikolay ... you really cared for eachother,” Levin finished. “Why not speak of him?” he added.“I sometimes blame myself for not; it ends in one’s forgetting. Ah,how terrible and dear he was!... Yes, what were we talking about?” Levinsaid, after a pause.“You think he can’t fall in love,” said Kitty, translatinginto her own language.“It’s not so much that he can’t fall in love,” Levinsaid, smiling, “but he has not the weakness necessary.... I’vealways envied him, and even now, when I’m so happy, I still envyhim.”“You envy him for not being able to fall in love?”“I envy him for being better than I,” said Levin. “He doesnot live for himself. His whole life is subordinated to his duty. Andthat’s why he can be calm and contented.”“And you?” Kitty asked, with an ironical and loving smile.She could never have explained the chain of thought that made her smile; butthe last link in it was that her husband, in exalting his brother and abasinghimself, was not quite sincere. Kitty knew that this insincerity came from hislove for his brother, from his sense of shame at being too happy, and above allfrom his unflagging craving to be better—she loved it in him, and so shesmiled.“And you? What are you dissatisfied with?” she asked, with the samesmile.Her disbelief in his self-dissatisfaction delighted him, and unconsciously hetried to draw her into giving utterance to the grounds of her disbelief.“I am happy, but dissatisfied with myself....” he said.“Why, how can you be dissatisfied with yourself if you are happy?”“Well, how shall I say?... In my heart I really care for nothing whateverbut that you should not stumble—see? Oh, but really you mustn’tskip about like that!” he cried, breaking off to scold her for too agilea movement in stepping over a branch that lay in the path. “But when Ithink about myself, and compare myself with others, especially with my brother,I feel I’m a poor creature.”“But in what way?” Kitty pursued with the same smile.“Don’t you too work for others? What about your co-operativesettlement, and your work on the estate, and your book?...”“Oh, but I feel, and particularly just now—it’s yourfault,” he said, pressing her hand—“that all thatdoesn’t count. I do it in a way halfheartedly. If I could care for allthat as I care for you!... Instead of that, I do it in these days like a taskthat is set me.”“Well, what would you say about papa?” asked Kitty. “Is he apoor creature then, as he does nothing for the public good?”“He?—no! But then one must have the simplicity, thestraightforwardness, the goodness of your father: and I haven’t got that.I do nothing, and I fret about it. It’s all your doing. Before there wasyou—and this too,” he added with a glance towards her waistthat she understood—“I put all my energies into work; now Ican’t, and I’m ashamed; I do it just as though it were a task setme, I’m pretending....”“Well, but would you like to change this minute with SergeyIvanovitch?” said Kitty. “Would you like to do this work for thegeneral good, and to love the task set you, as he does, and nothingelse?”“Of course not,” said Levin. “But I’m so happy that Idon’t understand anything. So you think he’ll make her an offertoday?” he added after a brief silence.“I think so, and I don’t think so. Only, I’m awfully anxiousfor it. Here, wait a minute.” She stooped down and picked a wild camomileat the edge of the path. “Come, count: he does propose, hedoesn’t,” she said, giving him the flower.“He does, he doesn’t,” said Levin, tearing off the whitepetals.“No, no!” Kitty, snatching at his hand, stopped him. She had beenwatching his fingers with interest. “You picked off two.”“Oh, but see, this little one shan’t count to make up,” saidLevin, tearing off a little half-grown petal. “Here’s the wagonetteovertaking us.”“Aren’t you tired, Kitty?” called the princess.“Not in the least.”“If you are you can get in, as the horses are quiet and walking.”But it was not worth while to get in, they were quite near the place, and allwalked on together.Chapter 4Varenka, with her white kerchief on her black hair, surrounded by the children,gaily and good-humoredly looking after them, and at the same time visiblyexcited at the possibility of receiving a declaration from the man she caredfor, was very attractive. Sergey Ivanovitch walked beside her, and never leftoff admiring her. Looking at her, he recalled all the delightful things he hadheard from her lips, all the good he knew about her, and became more and moreconscious that the feeling he had for her was something special that he hadfelt long, long ago, and only once, in his early youth. The feeling ofhappiness in being near her continually grew, and at last reached such a pointthat, as he put a huge, slender-stalked agaric fungus in her basket, he lookedstraight into her face, and noticing the flush of glad and alarmed excitementthat overspread her face, he was confused himself, and smiled to her in silencea smile that said too much.“If so,” he said to himself, “I ought to think it over andmake up my mind, and not give way like a boy to the impulse of a moment.”“I’m going to pick by myself apart from all the rest, or else myefforts will make no show,” he said, and he left the edge of the forestwhere they were walking on low silky grass between old birch trees standing farapart, and went more into the heart of the wood, where between the white birchtrunks there were gray trunks of aspen and dark bushes of hazel. Walking someforty paces away, Sergey Ivanovitch, knowing he was out of sight, stood stillbehind a bushy spindle-tree in full flower with its rosy red catkins. It wasperfectly still all round him. Only overhead in the birches under which hestood, the flies, like a swarm of bees, buzzed unceasingly, and from time totime the children’s voices were floated across to him. All at once heheard, not far from the edge of the wood, the sound of Varenka’scontralto voice, calling Grisha, and a smile of delight passed over SergeyIvanovitch’s face. Conscious of this smile, he shook his headdisapprovingly at his own condition, and taking out a cigar, he began lightingit. For a long while he could not get a match to light against the trunk of abirch tree. The soft scales of the white bark rubbed off the phosphorus, andthe light went out. At last one of the matches burned, and the fragrant cigarsmoke, hovering uncertainly in flat, wide coils, stretched away forwards andupwards over a bush under the overhanging branches of a birch tree. Watchingthe streak of smoke, Sergey Ivanovitch walked gently on, deliberating on hisposition.“Why not?” he thought. “If it were only a passing fancy or apassion, if it were only this attraction—this mutual attraction (I cancall it a mutual attraction), but if I felt that it was in contradictionwith the whole bent of my life—if I felt that in giving way to thisattraction I should be false to my vocation and my duty ... but it’s notso. The only thing I can say against it is that, when I lost Marie, I said tomyself that I would remain faithful to her memory. That’s the only thingI can say against my feeling.... That’s a great thing,” SergeyIvanovitch said to himself, feeling at the same time that this considerationhad not the slightest importance for him personally, but would only perhapsdetract from his romantic character in the eyes of others. “But apartfrom that, however much I searched, I should never find anything to say againstmy feeling. If I were choosing by considerations of suitability alone, I couldnot have found anything better.”However many women and girls he thought of whom he knew, he could not think ofa girl who united to such a degree all, positively all, the qualities he wouldwish to see in his wife. She had all the charm and freshness of youth, but shewas not a child; and if she loved him, she loved him consciously as a womanought to love; that was one thing. Another point: she was not only far frombeing worldly, but had an unmistakable distaste for worldly society, and at thesame time she knew the world, and had all the ways of a woman of the bestsociety, which were absolutely essential to Sergey Ivanovitch’sconception of the woman who was to share his life. Thirdly: she was religious,and not like a child, unconsciously religious and good, as Kitty, for example,was, but her life was founded on religious principles. Even in triflingmatters, Sergey Ivanovitch found in her all that he wanted in his wife: she waspoor and alone in the world, so she would not bring with her a mass ofrelations and their influence into her husband’s house, as he saw now inKitty’s case. She would owe everything to her husband, which was what hehad always desired too for his future family life. And this girl, who unitedall these qualities, loved him. He was a modest man, but he could not helpseeing it. And he loved her. There was one consideration against it—hisage. But he came of a long-lived family, he had not a single gray hair, no onewould have taken him for forty, and he remembered Varenka’s saying thatit was only in Russia that men of fifty thought themselves old, and that inFrance a man of fifty considers himself dans la force de l’âge,while a man of forty is un jeune homme. But what did the mere reckoningof years matter when he felt as young in heart as he had been twenty years ago?Was it not youth to feel as he felt now, when coming from the other side to theedge of the wood he saw in the glowing light of the slanting sunbeams thegracious figure of Varenka in her yellow gown with her basket, walking lightlyby the trunk of an old birch tree, and when this impression of the sight ofVarenka blended so harmoniously with the beauty of the view, of the yellowoatfield lying bathed in the slanting sunshine, and beyond it the distantancient forest flecked with yellow and melting into the blue of the distance?His heart throbbed joyously. A softened feeling came over him. He felt that hehad made up his mind. Varenka, who had just crouched down to pick a mushroom,rose with a supple movement and looked round. Flinging away the cigar, SergeyIvanovitch advanced with resolute steps towards her.Chapter 5“Varvara Andreevna, when I was very young, I set before myself the idealof the woman I loved and should be happy to call my wife. I have lived througha long life, and now for the first time I have met what I sought—in you.I love you, and offer you my hand.”Sergey Ivanovitch was saying this to himself while he was ten paces fromVarvara. Kneeling down, with her hands over the mushrooms to guard them fromGrisha, she was calling little Masha.“Come here, little ones! There are so many!” she was saying in hersweet, deep voice.Seeing Sergey Ivanovitch approaching, she did not get up and did not change herposition, but everything told him that she felt his presence and was glad ofit.“Well, did you find some?” she asked from under the white kerchief,turning her handsome, gently smiling face to him.“Not one,” said Sergey Ivanovitch. “Did you?”She did not answer, busy with the children who thronged about her.“That one too, near the twig,” she pointed out to little Masha alittle fungus, split in half across its rosy cap by the dry grass from underwhich it thrust itself. Varenka got up while Masha picked the fungus, breakingit into two white halves. “This brings back my childhood,” sheadded, moving apart from the children beside Sergey Ivanovitch.They walked on for some steps in silence. Varenka saw that he wanted to speak;she guessed of what, and felt faint with joy and panic. They had walked so faraway that no one could hear them now, but still he did not begin to speak. Itwould have been better for Varenka to be silent. After a silence it would havebeen easier for them to say what they wanted to say than after talking aboutmushrooms. But against her own will, as it were accidentally, Varenka said:“So you found nothing? In the middle of the wood there are always fewer,though.” Sergey Ivanovitch sighed and made no answer. He was annoyed thatshe had spoken about the mushrooms. He wanted to bring her back to the firstwords she had uttered about her childhood; but after a pause of some length, asthough against his own will, he made an observation in response to her lastwords.“I have heard that the white edible funguses are found principally at theedge of the wood, though I can’t tell them apart.”Some minutes more passed, they moved still further away from the children, andwere quite alone. Varenka’s heart throbbed so that she heard it beating,and felt that she was turning red and pale and red again.To be the wife of a man like Koznishev, after her position with Madame Stahl,was to her imagination the height of happiness. Besides, she was almost certainthat she was in love with him. And this moment it would have to be decided. Shefelt frightened. She dreaded both his speaking and his not speaking.Now or never it must be said—that Sergey Ivanovitch felt too. Everythingin the expression, the flushed cheeks and the downcast eyes of Varenka betrayeda painful suspense. Sergey Ivanovitch saw it and felt sorry for her. He felteven that to say nothing now would be a slight to her. Rapidly in his own mindhe ran over all the arguments in support of his decision. He even said over tohimself the words in which he meant to put his offer, but instead of thosewords, some utterly unexpected reflection that occurred to him made him ask:“What is the difference between the ‘birch’ mushroom and the‘white’ mushroom?”Varenka’s lips quivered with emotion as she answered:“In the top part there is scarcely any difference, it’s in thestalk.”And as soon as these words were uttered, both he and she felt that it was over,that what was to have been said would not be said; and their emotion, which hadup to then been continually growing more intense, began to subside.“The birch mushroom’s stalk suggests a dark man’s chin aftertwo days without shaving,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, speaking quite calmlynow.“Yes, that’s true,” answered Varenka smiling, andunconsciously the direction of their walk changed. They began to turn towardsthe children. Varenka felt both sore and ashamed; at the same time she had asense of relief.When he had got home again and went over the whole subject, Sergey Ivanovitchthought his previous decision had been a mistaken one. He could not be false tothe memory of Marie.“Gently, children, gently!” Levin shouted quite angrily to thechildren, standing before his wife to protect her when the crowd of childrenflew with shrieks of delight to meet them.Behind the children Sergey Ivanovitch and Varenka walked out of the wood. Kittyhad no need to ask Varenka; she saw from the calm and somewhat crestfallenfaces of both that her plans had not come off.“Well?” her husband questioned her as they were going home again.“It doesn’t bite,” said Kitty, her smile and manner ofspeaking recalling her father, a likeness Levin often noticed with pleasure.“How doesn’t bite?”“I’ll show you,” she said, taking her husband’s hand,lifting it to her mouth, and just faintly brushing it with closed lips.“Like a kiss on a priest’s hand.”“Which didn’t it bite with?” he said, laughing.“Both. But it should have been like this....”“There are some peasants coming....”“Oh, they didn’t see.”Chapter 6During the time of the children’s tea the grown-up people sat in thebalcony and talked as though nothing had happened, though they all, especiallySergey Ivanovitch and Varenka, were very well aware that there had happened anevent which, though negative, was of very great importance. They both had thesame feeling, rather like that of a schoolboy after an examination, which hasleft him in the same class or shut him out of the school forever. Everyonepresent, feeling too that something had happened, talked eagerly aboutextraneous subjects. Levin and Kitty were particularly happy and conscious oftheir love that evening. And their happiness in their love seemed to imply adisagreeable slur on those who would have liked to feel the same and couldnot—and they felt a prick of conscience.“Mark my words, Alexander will not come,” said the old princess.That evening they were expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch to come down by train, andthe old prince had written that possibly he might come too.“And I know why,” the princess went on; “he says that youngpeople ought to be left alone for a while at first.”“But papa has left us alone. We’ve never seen him,” saidKitty. “Besides, we’re not young people!—we’re old,married people by now.”“Only if he doesn’t come, I shall say good-bye to youchildren,” said the princess, sighing mournfully.“What nonsense, mamma!” both the daughters fell upon her at once.“How do you suppose he is feeling? Why, now....”And suddenly there was an unexpected quiver in the princess’s voice. Herdaughters were silent, and looked at one another. “Maman always findssomething to be miserable about,” they said in that glance. They did notknow that happy as the princess was in her daughter’s house, and usefulas she felt herself to be there, she had been extremely miserable, both on herown account and her husband’s, ever since they had married their last andfavorite daughter, and the old home had been left empty.“What is it, Agafea Mihalovna?” Kitty asked suddenly of AgafeaMihalovna, who was standing with a mysterious air, and a face full of meaning.“About supper.”“Well, that’s right,” said Dolly; “you go and arrangeabout it, and I’ll go and hear Grisha repeat his lesson, or else he willhave nothing done all day.”“That’s my lesson! No, Dolly, I’m going,” said Levin,jumping up.Grisha, who was by now at a high school, had to go over the lessons of the termin the summer holidays. Darya Alexandrovna, who had been studying Latin withher son in Moscow before, had made it a rule on coming to the Levins’ togo over with him, at least once a day, the most difficult lessons of Latin andarithmetic. Levin had offered to take her place, but the mother, having onceoverheard Levin’s lesson, and noticing that it was not given exactly asthe teacher in Moscow had given it, said resolutely, though with muchembarrassment and anxiety not to mortify Levin, that they must keep strictly tothe book as the teacher had done, and that she had better undertake it againherself. Levin was amazed both at Stepan Arkadyevitch, who, by neglecting hisduty, threw upon the mother the supervision of studies of which she had nocomprehension, and at the teachers for teaching the children so badly. But hepromised his sister-in-law to give the lessons exactly as she wished. And hewent on teaching Grisha, not in his own way, but by the book, and so tooklittle interest in it, and often forgot the hour of the lesson. So it had beentoday.“No, I’m going, Dolly, you sit still,” he said.“We’ll do it all properly, like the book. Only when Stiva comes,and we go out shooting, then we shall have to miss it.”And Levin went to Grisha.Varenka was saying the same thing to Kitty. Even in the happy, well-orderedhousehold of the Levins Varenka had succeeded in making herself useful.“I’ll see to the supper, you sit still,” she said, and got upto go to Agafea Mihalovna.“Yes, yes, most likely they’ve not been able to get chickens. Ifso, ours....”“Agafea Mihalovna and I will see about it,” and Varenka vanishedwith her.“What a nice girl!” said the princess.“Not nice, maman; she’s an exquisite girl; there’s no oneelse like her.”“So you are expecting Stepan Arkadyevitch today?” said SergeyIvanovitch, evidently not disposed to pursue the conversation about Varenka.“It would be difficult to find two sons-in-law more unlike thanyours,” he said with a subtle smile. “One all movement, only livingin society, like a fish in water; the other our Kostya, lively, alert, quick ineverything, but as soon as he is in society, he either sinks into apathy, orstruggles helplessly like a fish on land.”“Yes, he’s very heedless,” said the princess, addressingSergey Ivanovitch. “I’ve been meaning, indeed, to ask you to tellhim that it’s out of the question for her” (she indicated Kitty)“to stay here; that she positively must come to Moscow. He talks ofgetting a doctor down....”“Maman, he’ll do everything; he has agreed to everything,”Kitty said, angry with her mother for appealing to Sergey Ivanovitch to judgein such a matter.In the middle of their conversation they heard the snorting of horses and thesound of wheels on the gravel. Dolly had not time to get up to go and meet herhusband, when from the window of the room below, where Grisha was having hislesson, Levin leaped out and helped Grisha out after him.“It’s Stiva!” Levin shouted from under the balcony.“We’ve finished, Dolly, don’t be afraid!” he added, andstarted running like a boy to meet the carriage.“Is ea id, ejus, ejus, ejus!” shouted Grisha, skipping alongthe avenue.“And someone else too! Papa, of course!” cried Levin, stopping atthe entrance of the avenue. “Kitty, don’t come down the steepstaircase, go round.”But Levin had been mistaken in taking the person sitting in the carriage forthe old prince. As he got nearer to the carriage he saw beside StepanArkadyevitch not the prince but a handsome, stout young man in a Scotch cap,with long ends of ribbon behind. This was Vassenka Veslovsky, a distant cousinof the Shtcherbatskys, a brilliant young gentleman in Petersburg and Moscowsociety. “A capital fellow, and a keen sportsman,” as StepanArkadyevitch said, introducing him.Not a whit abashed by the disappointment caused by his having come in place ofthe old prince, Veslovsky greeted Levin gaily, claiming acquaintance with himin the past, and snatching up Grisha into the carriage, lifted him over thepointer that Stepan Arkadyevitch had brought with him.Levin did not get into the carriage, but walked behind. He was rather vexed atthe non-arrival of the old prince, whom he liked more and more the more he sawof him, and also at the arrival of this Vassenka Veslovsky, a quite uncongenialand superfluous person. He seemed to him still more uncongenial and superfluouswhen, on approaching the steps where the whole party, children and grown-up,were gathered together in much excitement, Levin saw Vassenka Veslovsky, with aparticularly warm and gallant air, kissing Kitty’s hand.“Your wife and I are cousins and very old friends,” said VassenkaVeslovsky, once more shaking Levin’s hand with great warmth.“Well, are there plenty of birds?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said toLevin, hardly leaving time for everyone to utter their greetings.“We’ve come with the most savage intentions. Why, maman,they’ve not been in Moscow since! Look, Tanya, here’s something foryou! Get it, please, it’s in the carriage, behind!” he talked inall directions. “How pretty you’ve grown, Dolly,” he said tohis wife, once more kissing her hand, holding it in one of his, and patting itwith the other.Levin, who a minute before had been in the happiest frame of mind, now lookeddarkly at everyone, and everything displeased him.“Who was it he kissed yesterday with those lips?” he thought,looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch’s tender demonstrations to his wife. Helooked at Dolly, and he did not like her either.“She doesn’t believe in his love. So what is she so pleased about?Revolting!” thought Levin.He looked at the princess, who had been so dear to him a minute before, and hedid not like the manner in which she welcomed this Vassenka, with his ribbons,just as though she were in her own house.Even Sergey Ivanovitch, who had come out too onto the steps, seemed to himunpleasant with the show of cordiality with which he met Stepan Arkadyevitch,though Levin knew that his brother neither liked nor respected Oblonsky.And Varenka, even she seemed hateful, with her air sainte nitouchemaking the acquaintance of this gentleman, while all the while she was thinkingof nothing but getting married.And more hateful than anyone was Kitty for falling in with the tone of gaietywith which this gentleman regarded his visit in the country, as though it werea holiday for himself and everyone else. And, above all, unpleasant was thatparticular smile with which she responded to his smile.Noisily talking, they all went into the house; but as soon as they were allseated, Levin turned and went out.Kitty saw something was wrong with her husband. She tried to seize a moment tospeak to him alone, but he made haste to get away from her, saying he waswanted at the counting-house. It was long since his own work on the estate hadseemed to him so important as at that moment. “It’s all holiday forthem,” he thought; “but these are no holiday matters, theywon’t wait, and there’s no living without them.”Chapter 7Levin came back to the house only when they sent to summon him to supper. Onthe stairs were standing Kitty and Agafea Mihalovna, consulting about wines forsupper.“But why are you making all this fuss? Have what we usually do.”“No, Stiva doesn’t drink ... Kostya, stop, what’s thematter?” Kitty began, hurrying after him, but he strode ruthlessly awayto the dining-room without waiting for her, and at once joined in the livelygeneral conversation which was being maintained there by Vassenka Veslovsky andStepan Arkadyevitch.“Well, what do you say, are we going shooting tomorrow?” saidStepan Arkadyevitch.“Please, do let’s go,” said Veslovsky, moving to anotherchair, where he sat down sideways, with one fat leg crossed under him.“I shall be delighted, we will go. And have you had any shooting yet thisyear?” said Levin to Veslovsky, looking intently at his leg, but speakingwith that forced amiability that Kitty knew so well in him, and that was so outof keeping with him. “I can’t answer for our finding grouse, butthere are plenty of snipe. Only we ought to start early. You’re nottired? Aren’t you tired, Stiva?”“Me tired? I’ve never been tired yet. Suppose we stay up all night.Let’s go for a walk!”“Yes, really, let’s not go to bed at all! Capital!” Veslovskychimed in.“Oh, we all know you can do without sleep, and keep other people uptoo,” Dolly said to her husband, with that faint note of irony in hervoice which she almost always had now with her husband. “But to mythinking, it’s time for bed now.... I’m going, I don’t wantsupper.”“No, do stay a little, Dolly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, goinground to her side behind the table where they were having supper.“I’ve so much still to tell you.”“Nothing really, I suppose.”“Do you know Veslovsky has been at Anna’s, and he’s going tothem again? You know they’re hardly fifty miles from you, and I too mustcertainly go over there. Veslovsky, come here!”Vassenka crossed over to the ladies, and sat down beside Kitty.“Ah, do tell me, please; you have stayed with her? How was she?”Darya Alexandrovna appealed to him.Levin was left at the other end of the table, and though never pausing in hisconversation with the princess and Varenka, he saw that there was an eager andmysterious conversation going on between Stepan Arkadyevitch, Dolly, Kitty, andVeslovsky. And that was not all. He saw on his wife’s face an expressionof real feeling as she gazed with fixed eyes on the handsome face of Vassenka,who was telling them something with great animation.“It’s exceedingly nice at their place,” Veslovsky was tellingthem about Vronsky and Anna. “I can’t, of course, take it uponmyself to judge, but in their house you feel the real feeling of home.”“What do they intend doing?”“I believe they think of going to Moscow.”“How jolly it would be for us all to go over to them together! When areyou going there?” Stepan Arkadyevitch asked Vassenka.“I’m spending July there.”“Will you go?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his wife.“I’ve been wanting to a long while; I shall certainly go,”said Dolly. “I am sorry for her, and I know her. She’s a splendidwoman. I will go alone, when you go back, and then I shall be in no one’sway. And it will be better indeed without you.”“To be sure,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “And you,Kitty?”“I? Why should I go?” Kitty said, flushing all over, and sheglanced round at her husband.“Do you know Anna Arkadyevna, then?” Veslovsky asked her.“She’s a very fascinating woman.”“Yes,” she answered Veslovsky, crimsoning still more. She got upand walked across to her husband.“Are you going shooting, then, tomorrow?” she said.His jealousy had in these few moments, especially at the flush that hadoverspread her cheeks while she was talking to Veslovsky, gone far indeed. Nowas he heard her words, he construed them in his own fashion. Strange as it wasto him afterwards to recall it, it seemed to him at the moment clear that inasking whether he was going shooting, all she cared to know was whether hewould give that pleasure to Vassenka Veslovsky, with whom, as he fancied, shewas in love.“Yes, I’m going,” he answered her in an unnatural voice,disagreeable to himself.“No, better spend the day here tomorrow, or Dolly won’t seeanything of her husband, and set off the day after,” said Kitty.The motive of Kitty’s words was interpreted by Levin thus:“Don’t separate me from him. I don’t care aboutyour going, but do let me enjoy the society of this delightful youngman.”“Oh, if you wish, we’ll stay here tomorrow,” Levin answered,with peculiar amiability.Vassenka meanwhile, utterly unsuspecting the misery his presence hadoccasioned, got up from the table after Kitty, and watching her with smilingand admiring eyes, he followed her.Levin saw that look. He turned white, and for a minute he could hardly breathe.“How dare he look at my wife like that!” was the feeling thatboiled within him.“Tomorrow, then? Do, please, let us go,” said Vassenka, sittingdown on a chair, and again crossing his leg as his habit was.Levin’s jealousy went further still. Already he saw himself a deceivedhusband, looked upon by his wife and her lover as simply necessary to providethem with the conveniences and pleasures of life.... But in spite of that hemade polite and hospitable inquiries of Vassenka about his shooting, his gun,and his boots, and agreed to go shooting next day.Happily for Levin, the old princess cut short his agonies by getting up herselfand advising Kitty to go to bed. But even at this point Levin could not escapeanother agony. As he said good-night to his hostess, Vassenka would again havekissed her hand, but Kitty, reddening, drew back her hand and said with a naïvebluntness, for which the old princess scolded her afterwards:“We don’t like that fashion.”In Levin’s eyes she was to blame for having allowed such relations toarise, and still more to blame for showing so awkwardly that she did not likethem.“Why, how can one want to go to bed!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,who, after drinking several glasses of wine at supper, was now in his mostcharming and sentimental humor. “Look, Kitty,” he said, pointing tothe moon, which had just risen behind the lime trees—“howexquisite! Veslovsky, this is the time for a serenade. You know, he has asplendid voice; we practiced songs together along the road. He has brought somelovely songs with him, two new ones. Varvara Andreevna and he must sing someduets.”When the party had broken up, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked a long while about theavenue with Veslovsky; their voices could be heard singing one of the newsongs.Levin hearing these voices sat scowling in an easy-chair in his wife’sbedroom, and maintained an obstinate silence when she asked him what was wrong.But when at last with a timid glance she hazarded the question: “Wasthere perhaps something you disliked about Veslovsky?”—it all burstout, and he told her all. He was humiliated himself at what he was saying, andthat exasperated him all the more.He stood facing her with his eyes glittering menacingly under his scowlingbrows, and he squeezed his strong arms across his chest, as though he werestraining every nerve to hold himself in. The expression of his face would havebeen grim, and even cruel, if it had not at the same time had a look ofsuffering which touched her. His jaws were twitching, and his voice keptbreaking.“You must understand that I’m not jealous, that’s a nastyword. I can’t be jealous, and believe that.... I can’t say what Ifeel, but this is awful.... I’m not jealous, but I’m wounded,humiliated that anybody dare think, that anybody dare look at you with eyeslike that.”“Eyes like what?” said Kitty, trying as conscientiously as possibleto recall every word and gesture of that evening and every shade implied inthem.At the very bottom of her heart she did think there had been somethingprecisely at the moment when he had crossed over after her to the other end ofthe table; but she dared not own it even to herself, and would have been evenmore unable to bring herself to say so to him, and so increase his suffering.“And what can there possibly be attractive about me as I amnow?...”“Ah!” he cried, clutching at his head, “you shouldn’tsay that!... If you had been attractive then....”“Oh, no, Kostya, oh, wait a minute, oh, do listen!” she said,looking at him with an expression of pained commiseration. “Why, what canyou be thinking about! When for me there’s no one in the world, no one,no one!... Would you like me never to see anyone?”For the first minute she had been offended at his jealousy; she was angry thatthe slightest amusement, even the most innocent, should be forbidden her; butnow she would readily have sacrificed, not merely such trifles, but everything,for his peace of mind, to save him from the agony he was suffering.“You must understand the horror and comedy of my position,” he wenton in a desperate whisper; “that he’s in my house, that he’sdone nothing improper positively except his free and easy airs and the way hesits on his legs. He thinks it’s the best possible form, and so I’mobliged to be civil to him.”“But, Kostya, you’re exaggerating,” said Kitty, at the bottomof her heart rejoicing at the depth of his love for her, shown now in hisjealousy.“The most awful part of it all is that you’re just as you alwaysare, and especially now when to me you’re something sacred, andwe’re so happy, so particularly happy—and all of a sudden a littlewretch.... He’s not a little wretch; why should I abuse him? I havenothing to do with him. But why should my, and your, happiness....”“Do you know, I understand now what it’s all come from,”Kitty was beginning.“Well, what? what?”“I saw how you looked while we were talking at supper.”“Well, well!” Levin said in dismay.She told him what they had been talking about. And as she told him, she wasbreathless with emotion. Levin was silent for a space, then he scanned her paleand distressed face, and suddenly he clutched at his head.“Katya, I’ve been worrying you! Darling, forgive me! It’smadness! Katya, I’m a criminal. And how could you be so distressed atsuch idiocy?”“Oh, I was sorry for you.”“For me? for me? How mad I am!... But why make you miserable? It’sawful to think that any outsider can shatter our happiness.”“It’s humiliating too, of course.”“Oh, then I’ll keep him here all the summer, and will overwhelm himwith civility,” said Levin, kissing her hands. “You shall see.Tomorrow.... Oh, yes, we are going tomorrow.”Chapter 8Next day, before the ladies were up, the wagonette and a trap for the shootingparty were at the door, and Laska, aware since early morning that they weregoing shooting, after much whining and darting to and fro, had sat herself downin the wagonette beside the coachman, and, disapproving of the delay, wasexcitedly watching the door from which the sportsmen still did not come out.The first to come out was Vassenka Veslovsky, in new high boots that reachedhalf-way up his thick thighs, in a green blouse, with a new Russian leathercartridge-belt, and in his Scotch cap with ribbons, with a brand-new Englishgun without a sling. Laska flew up to him, welcomed him, and jumping up, askedhim in her own way whether the others were coming soon, but getting no answerfrom him, she returned to her post of observation and sank into repose again,her head on one side, and one ear pricked up to listen. At last the door openedwith a creak, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s spot-and-tan pointer Krak flewout, running round and round and turning over in the air. Stepan Arkadyevitchhimself followed with a gun in his hand and a cigar in his mouth.“Good dog, good dog, Krak!” he cried encouragingly to the dog, whoput his paws up on his chest, catching at his game bag. Stepan Arkadyevitch wasdressed in rough leggings and spats, in torn trousers and a short coat. On hishead there was a wreck of a hat of indefinite form, but his gun of a new patentwas a perfect gem, and his game bag and cartridge belt, though worn, were ofthe very best quality.Vassenka Veslovsky had had no notion before that it was truly chic for asportsman to be in tatters, but to have his shooting outfit of the bestquality. He saw it now as he looked at Stepan Arkadyevitch, radiant in hisrags, graceful, well-fed, and joyous, a typical Russian nobleman. And he madeup his mind that next time he went shooting he would certainly adopt the sameget-up.“Well, and what about our host?” he asked.“A young wife,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, smiling.“Yes, and such a charming one!”“He came down dressed. No doubt he’s run up to her again.”Stepan Arkadyevitch guessed right. Levin had run up again to his wife to askher once more if she forgave him for his idiocy yesterday, and, moreover, tobeg her for Christ’s sake to be more careful. The great thing was for herto keep away from the children—they might any minute push against her.Then he had once more to hear her declare that she was not angry with him forgoing away for two days, and to beg her to be sure to send him a note nextmorning by a servant on horseback, to write him, if it were but two words only,to let him know that all was well with her.Kitty was distressed, as she always was, at parting for a couple of days fromher husband, but when she saw his eager figure, looking big and strong in hisshooting-boots and his white blouse, and a sort of sportsman elation andexcitement incomprehensible to her, she forgot her own chagrin for the sake ofhis pleasure, and said good-bye to him cheerfully.“Pardon, gentlemen!” he said, running out onto the steps.“Have you put the lunch in? Why is the chestnut on the right? Well, itdoesn’t matter. Laska, down; go and lie down!”“Put it with the herd of oxen,” he said to the herdsman, who waswaiting for him at the steps with some question. “Excuse me, here comesanother villain.”Levin jumped out of the wagonette, in which he had already taken his seat, tomeet the carpenter, who came towards the steps with a rule in his hand.“You didn’t come to the counting house yesterday, and nowyou’re detaining me. Well, what is it?”“Would your honor let me make another turning? It’s only threesteps to add. And we make it just fit at the same time. It will be much moreconvenient.”“You should have listened to me,” Levin answered with annoyance.“I said: Put the lines and then fit in the steps. Now there’s nosetting it right. Do as I told you, and make a new staircase.”The point was that in the lodge that was being built the carpenter had spoiledthe staircase, fitting it together without calculating the space it was tofill, so that the steps were all sloping when it was put in place. Now thecarpenter wanted, keeping the same staircase, to add three steps.“It will be much better.”“But where’s your staircase coming out with its three steps?”“Why, upon my word, sir,” the carpenter said with a contemptuoussmile. “It comes out right at the very spot. It starts, so tospeak,” he said, with a persuasive gesture; “it comes down, andcomes down, and comes out.”“But three steps will add to the length too ... where is it to comeout?”“Why, to be sure, it’ll start from the bottom and go up and go up,and come out so,” the carpenter said obstinately and convincingly.“It’ll reach the ceiling and the wall.”“Upon my word! Why, it’ll go up, and up, and come out likethis.”Levin took out a ramrod and began sketching him the staircase in the dust.“There, do you see?”“As your honor likes,” said the carpenter, with a sudden gleam inhis eyes, obviously understanding the thing at last. “It seemsit’ll be best to make a new one.”“Well, then, do it as you’re told,” Levin shouted, seatinghimself in the wagonette. “Down! Hold the dogs, Philip!”Levin felt now at leaving behind all his family and household cares such aneager sense of joy in life and expectation that he was not disposed to talk.Besides that, he had that feeling of concentrated excitement that everysportsman experiences as he approaches the scene of action. If he had anythingon his mind at that moment, it was only the doubt whether they would startanything in the Kolpensky marsh, whether Laska would show to advantage incomparison with Krak, and whether he would shoot well that day himself. Not todisgrace himself before a new spectator—not to be outdone byOblonsky—that too was a thought that crossed his brain.Oblonsky was feeling the same, and he too was not talkative. Vassenka Veslovskykept up alone a ceaseless flow of cheerful chatter. As he listened to him now,Levin felt ashamed to think how unfair he had been to him the day before.Vassenka was really a nice fellow, simple, good-hearted, and very good-humored.If Levin had met him before he was married, he would have made friends withhim. Levin rather disliked his holiday attitude to life and a sort of free andeasy assumption of elegance. It was as though he assumed a high degree ofimportance in himself that could not be disputed, because he had long nails anda stylish cap, and everything else to correspond; but this could be forgivenfor the sake of his good nature and good breeding. Levin liked him for his goodeducation, for speaking French and English with such an excellent accent, andfor being a man of his world.Vassenka was extremely delighted with the left horse, a horse of the DonSteppes. He kept praising him enthusiastically. “How fine it must begalloping over the steppes on a steppe horse! Eh? isn’t it?” hesaid. He had imagined riding on a steppe horse as something wild and romantic,and it turned out nothing of the sort. But his simplicity, particularly inconjunction with his good looks, his amiable smile, and the grace of hismovements, was very attractive. Either because his nature was sympathetic toLevin, or because Levin was trying to atone for his sins of the previousevening by seeing nothing but what was good in him, anyway he liked hissociety.After they had driven over two miles from home, Veslovsky all at once felt fora cigar and his pocketbook, and did not know whether he had lost them or leftthem on the table. In the pocketbook there were thirty-seven pounds, and so thematter could not be left in uncertainty.“Do you know what, Levin, I’ll gallop home on that lefttrace-horse. That will be splendid. Eh?” he said, preparing to get out.“No, why should you?” answered Levin, calculating that Vassenkacould hardly weigh less than seventeen stone. “I’ll send thecoachman.”The coachman rode back on the trace-horse, and Levin himself drove theremaining pair.Chapter 9“Well, now what’s our plan of campaign? Tell us all aboutit,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Our plan is this. Now we’re driving to Gvozdyov. In Gvozdyovthere’s a grouse marsh on this side, and beyond Gvozdyov come somemagnificent snipe marshes where there are grouse too. It’s hot now, andwe’ll get there—it’s fifteen miles or so—towardsevening and have some evening shooting; we’ll spend the night there andgo on tomorrow to the bigger moors.”“And is there nothing on the way?”“Yes; but we’ll reserve ourselves; besides it’s hot. Thereare two nice little places, but I doubt there being anything to shoot.”Levin would himself have liked to go into these little places, but they werenear home; he could shoot them over any time, and they were only littleplaces—there would hardly be room for three to shoot. And so, with someinsincerity, he said that he doubted there being anything to shoot. When theyreached a little marsh Levin would have driven by, but Stepan Arkadyevitch,with the experienced eye of a sportsman, at once detected reeds visible fromthe road.“Shan’t we try that?” he said, pointing to the little marsh.“Levin, do, please! how delightful!” Vassenka Veslovsky beganbegging, and Levin could but consent.Before they had time to stop, the dogs had flown one before the other into themarsh.“Krak! Laska!...”The dogs came back.“There won’t be room for three. I’ll stay here,” saidLevin, hoping they would find nothing but peewits, who had been startled by thedogs, and turning over in their flight, were plaintively wailing over themarsh.“No! Come along, Levin, let’s go together!” Veslovsky called.“Really, there’s not room. Laska, back, Laska! You won’t wantanother dog, will you?”Levin remained with the wagonette, and looked enviously at the sportsmen. Theywalked right across the marsh. Except little birds and peewits, of whichVassenka killed one, there was nothing in the marsh.“Come, you see now that it was not that I grudged the marsh,” saidLevin, “only it’s wasting time.”“Oh, no, it was jolly all the same. Did you see us?” said VassenkaVeslovsky, clambering awkwardly into the wagonette with his gun and his peewitin his hands. “How splendidly I shot this bird! Didn’t I? Well,shall we soon be getting to the real place?”The horses started off suddenly, Levin knocked his head against the stock ofsomeone’s gun, and there was the report of a shot. The gun did actuallygo off first, but that was how it seemed to Levin. It appeared that VassenkaVeslovsky had pulled only one trigger, and had left the other hammer stillcocked. The charge flew into the ground without doing harm to anyone. StepanArkadyevitch shook his head and laughed reprovingly at Veslovsky. But Levin hadnot the heart to reprove him. In the first place, any reproach would haveseemed to be called forth by the danger he had incurred and the bump that hadcome up on Levin’s forehead. And besides, Veslovsky was at first sonaïvely distressed, and then laughed so good-humoredly and infectiously attheir general dismay, that one could not but laugh with him.When they reached the second marsh, which was fairly large, and wouldinevitably take some time to shoot over, Levin tried to persuade them to passit by. But Veslovsky again overpersuaded him. Again, as the marsh was narrow,Levin, like a good host, remained with the carriage.Krak made straight for some clumps of sedge. Vassenka Veslovsky was the firstto run after the dog. Before Stepan Arkadyevitch had time to come up, a grouseflew out. Veslovsky missed it and it flew into an unmown meadow. This grousewas left for Veslovsky to follow up. Krak found it again and pointed, andVeslovsky shot it and went back to the carriage. “Now you go andI’ll stay with the horses,” he said.Levin had begun to feel the pangs of a sportsman’s envy. He handed thereins to Veslovsky and walked into the marsh.Laska, who had been plaintively whining and fretting against the injustice ofher treatment, flew straight ahead to a hopeful place that Levin knew well, andthat Krak had not yet come upon.“Why don’t you stop her?” shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch.“She won’t scare them,” answered Levin, sympathizing with hisbitch’s pleasure and hurrying after her.As she came nearer and nearer to the familiar breeding places there was moreand more earnestness in Laska’s exploration. A little marsh bird did notdivert her attention for more than an instant. She made one circuit round theclump of reeds, was beginning a second, and suddenly quivered with excitementand became motionless.“Come, come, Stiva!” shouted Levin, feeling his heart beginning tobeat more violently; and all of a sudden, as though some sort of shutter hadbeen drawn back from his straining ears, all sounds, confused but loud, beganto beat on his hearing, losing all sense of distance. He heard the steps ofStepan Arkadyevitch, mistaking them for the tramp of the horses in thedistance; he heard the brittle sound of the twigs on which he had trodden,taking this sound for the flying of a grouse. He heard too, not far behind him,a splashing in the water, which he could not explain to himself.Picking his steps, he moved up to the dog.“Fetch it!”Not a grouse but a snipe flew up from beside the dog. Levin had lifted his gun,but at the very instant when he was taking aim, the sound of splashing grewlouder, came closer, and was joined with the sound of Veslovsky’s voice,shouting something with strange loudness. Levin saw he had his gun pointedbehind the snipe, but still he fired.When he had made sure he had missed, Levin looked round and saw the horses andthe wagonette not on the road but in the marsh.Veslovsky, eager to see the shooting, had driven into the marsh, and got thehorses stuck in the mud.“Damn the fellow!” Levin said to himself, as he went back to thecarriage that had sunk in the mire. “What did you drive in for?” hesaid to him dryly, and calling the coachman, he began pulling the horses out.Levin was vexed both at being hindered from shooting and at his horses gettingstuck in the mud, and still more at the fact that neither Stepan Arkadyevitchnor Veslovsky helped him and the coachman to unharness the horses and get themout, since neither of them had the slightest notion of harnessing. Withoutvouchsafing a syllable in reply to Vassenka’s protestations that it hadbeen quite dry there, Levin worked in silence with the coachman at extricatingthe horses. But then, as he got warm at the work and saw how assiduouslyVeslovsky was tugging at the wagonette by one of the mud-guards, so that hebroke it indeed, Levin blamed himself for having under the influence ofyesterday’s feelings been too cold to Veslovsky, and tried to beparticularly genial so as to smooth over his chilliness. When everything hadbeen put right, and the carriage had been brought back to the road, Levin hadthe lunch served.“Bon appétit—bonne conscience! Ce poulet va tomberjusqu’au fond de mes bottes,” Vassenka, who had recovered hisspirits, quoted the French saying as he finished his second chicken.“Well, now our troubles are over, now everything’s going to gowell. Only, to atone for my sins, I’m bound to sit on the box.That’s so? eh? No, no! I’ll be your Automedon. You shall see howI’ll get you along,” he answered, not letting go the rein, whenLevin begged him to let the coachman drive. “No, I must atone for mysins, and I’m very comfortable on the box.” And he drove.Levin was a little afraid he would exhaust the horses, especially the chestnut,whom he did not know how to hold in; but unconsciously he fell under theinfluence of his gaiety and listened to the songs he sang all the way on thebox, or the descriptions and representations he gave of driving in the Englishfashion, four-in-hand; and it was in the very best of spirits that after lunchthey drove to the Gvozdyov marsh.Chapter 10Vassenka drove the horses so smartly that they reached the marsh too early,while it was still hot.As they drew near this more important marsh, the chief aim of their expedition,Levin could not help considering how he could get rid of Vassenka and be freein his movements. Stepan Arkadyevitch evidently had the same desire, and on hisface Levin saw the look of anxiety always present in a true sportsman whenbeginning shooting, together with a certain good-humored slyness peculiar tohim.“How shall we go? It’s a splendid marsh, I see, and there arehawks,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, pointing to two great birds hoveringover the reeds. “Where there are hawks, there is sure to be game.”“Now, gentlemen,” said Levin, pulling up his boots and examiningthe lock of his gun with rather a gloomy expression, “do you see thosereeds?” He pointed to an oasis of blackish green in the huge half-mownwet meadow that stretched along the right bank of the river. “The marshbegins here, straight in front of us, do you see—where it is greener?From here it runs to the right where the horses are; there are breeding placesthere, and grouse, and all round those reeds as far as that alder, and right upto the mill. Over there, do you see, where the pools are? That’s the bestplace. There I once shot seventeen snipe. We’ll separate with the dogsand go in different directions, and then meet over there at the mill.”“Well, which shall go to left and which to right?” asked StepanArkadyevitch. “It’s wider to the right; you two go that way andI’ll take the left,” he said with apparent carelessness.“Capital! we’ll make the bigger bag! Yes, come along, comealong!” Vassenka exclaimed.Levin could do nothing but agree, and they divided.As soon as they entered the marsh, the two dogs began hunting about togetherand made towards the green, slime-covered pool. Levin knew Laska’smethod, wary and indefinite; he knew the place too and expected a whole coveyof snipe.“Veslovsky, beside me, walk beside me!” he said in a faint voice tohis companion splashing in the water behind him. Levin could not help feelingan interest in the direction his gun was pointed, after that casual shot nearthe Kolpensky marsh.“Oh, I won’t get in your way, don’t trouble about me.”But Levin could not help troubling, and recalled Kitty’s words atparting: “Mind you don’t shoot one another.” The dogs camenearer and nearer, passed each other, each pursuing its own scent. Theexpectation of snipe was so intense that to Levin the squelching sound of hisown heel, as he drew it up out of the mire, seemed to be the call of a snipe,and he clutched and pressed the lock of his gun.“Bang! bang!” sounded almost in his ear. Vassenka had fired at aflock of ducks which was hovering over the marsh and flying at that momenttowards the sportsmen, far out of range. Before Levin had time to look round,there was the whir of one snipe, another, a third, and some eight more rose oneafter another.Stepan Arkadyevitch hit one at the very moment when it was beginning its zigzagmovements, and the snipe fell in a heap into the mud. Oblonsky aimeddeliberately at another, still flying low in the reeds, and together with thereport of the shot, that snipe too fell, and it could be seen fluttering outwhere the sedge had been cut, its unhurt wing showing white beneath.Levin was not so lucky: he aimed at his first bird too low, and missed; heaimed at it again, just as it was rising, but at that instant another snipeflew up at his very feet, distracting him so that he missed again.While they were loading their guns, another snipe rose, and Veslovsky, who hadhad time to load again, sent two charges of small-shot into the water. StepanArkadyevitch picked up his snipe, and with sparkling eyes looked at Levin.“Well, now let us separate,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and limpingon his left foot, holding his gun in readiness and whistling to his dog, hewalked off in one direction. Levin and Veslovsky walked in the other.It always happened with Levin that when his first shots were a failure he gothot and out of temper, and shot badly the whole day. So it was that day. Thesnipe showed themselves in numbers. They kept flying up from just under thedogs, from under the sportsmen’s legs, and Levin might have retrieved hisill luck. But the more he shot, the more he felt disgraced in the eyes ofVeslovsky, who kept popping away merrily and indiscriminately, killing nothing,and not in the slightest abashed by his ill success. Levin, in feverish haste,could not restrain himself, got more and more out of temper, and ended byshooting almost without a hope of hitting. Laska, indeed, seemed to understandthis. She began looking more languidly, and gazed back at the sportsmen, as itwere, with perplexity or reproach in her eyes. Shots followed shots in rapidsuccession. The smoke of the powder hung about the sportsmen, while in thegreat roomy net of the game bag there were only three light little snipe. Andof these one had been killed by Veslovsky alone, and one by both of themtogether. Meanwhile from the other side of the marsh came the sound of StepanArkadyevitch’s shots, not frequent, but, as Levin fancied, well-directed,for almost after each they heard “Krak, Krak, apporte!”This excited Levin still more. The snipe were floating continually in the airover the reeds. Their whirring wings close to the earth, and their harsh crieshigh in the air, could be heard on all sides; the snipe that had risen firstand flown up into the air, settled again before the sportsmen. Instead of twohawks there were now dozens of them hovering with shrill cries over the marsh.After walking through the larger half of the marsh, Levin and Veslovsky reachedthe place where the peasants’ mowing-grass was divided into long stripsreaching to the reeds, marked off in one place by the trampled grass, inanother by a path mown through it. Half of these strips had already been mown.Though there was not so much hope of finding birds in the uncut part as the cutpart, Levin had promised Stepan Arkadyevitch to meet him, and so he walked onwith his companion through the cut and uncut patches.“Hi, sportsmen!” shouted one of a group of peasants, sitting on anunharnessed cart; “come and have some lunch with us! Have a drop ofwine!”Levin looked round.“Come along, it’s all right!” shouted a good-humored-lookingbearded peasant with a red face, showing his white teeth in a grin, and holdingup a greenish bottle that flashed in the sunlight.“Qu’est-ce qu’ils disent?” asked Veslovsky.“They invite you to have some vodka. Most likely they’ve beendividing the meadow into lots. I should have some,” said Levin, notwithout some guile, hoping Veslovsky would be tempted by the vodka, and wouldgo away to them.“Why do they offer it?”“Oh, they’re merry-making. Really, you should join them. You wouldbe interested.”“Allons, c’est curieux.”“You go, you go, you’ll find the way to the mill!” criedLevin, and looking round he perceived with satisfaction that Veslovsky, bentand stumbling with weariness, holding his gun out at arm’s length, wasmaking his way out of the marsh towards the peasants.“You come too!” the peasants shouted to Levin. “Never fear!You taste our cake!”Levin felt a strong inclination to drink a little vodka and to eat some bread.He was exhausted, and felt it a great effort to drag his staggering legs out ofthe mire, and for a minute he hesitated. But Laska was setting. And immediatelyall his weariness vanished, and he walked lightly through the swamp towards thedog. A snipe flew up at his feet; he fired and killed it. Laska stillpointed.—“Fetch it!” Another bird flew up close to the dog.Levin fired. But it was an unlucky day for him; he missed it, and when he wentto look for the one he had shot, he could not find that either. He wandered allabout the reeds, but Laska did not believe he had shot it, and when he sent herto find it, she pretended to hunt for it, but did not really. And in theabsence of Vassenka, on whom Levin threw the blame of his failure, things wentno better. There were plenty of snipe still, but Levin made one miss afteranother.The slanting rays of the sun were still hot; his clothes, soaked through withperspiration, stuck to his body; his left boot full of water weighed heavily onhis leg and squeaked at every step; the sweat ran in drops down hispowder-grimed face, his mouth was full of the bitter taste, his nose of thesmell of powder and stagnant water, his ears were ringing with the incessantwhir of the snipe; he could not touch the stock of his gun, it was so hot; hisheart beat with short, rapid throbs; his hands shook with excitement, and hisweary legs stumbled and staggered over the hillocks and in the swamp, but stillhe walked on and still he shot. At last, after a disgraceful miss, he flung hisgun and his hat on the ground.“No, I must control myself,” he said to himself. Picking up his gunand his hat, he called Laska, and went out of the swamp. When he got on to dryground he sat down, pulled off his boot and emptied it, then walked to themarsh, drank some stagnant-tasting water, moistened his burning hot gun, andwashed his face and hands. Feeling refreshed, he went back to the spot where asnipe had settled, firmly resolved to keep cool.He tried to be calm, but it was the same again. His finger pressed the cockbefore he had taken a good aim at the bird. It got worse and worse.He had only five birds in his game-bag when he walked out of the marsh towardsthe alders where he was to rejoin Stepan Arkadyevitch.Before he caught sight of Stepan Arkadyevitch he saw his dog. Krak darted outfrom behind the twisted root of an alder, black all over with the stinking mireof the marsh, and with the air of a conqueror sniffed at Laska. Behind Krakthere came into view in the shade of the alder tree the shapely figure ofStepan Arkadyevitch. He came to meet him, red and perspiring, with unbuttonedneckband, still limping in the same way.“Well? You have been popping away!” he said, smilinggood-humoredly.“How have you got on?” queried Levin. But there was no need to ask,for he had already seen the full game bag.“Oh, pretty fair.”He had fourteen birds.“A splendid marsh! I’ve no doubt Veslovsky got in your way.It’s awkward too, shooting with one dog,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,to soften his triumph.Chapter 11When Levin and Stepan Arkadyevitch reached the peasant’s hut where Levinalways used to stay, Veslovsky was already there. He was sitting in the middleof the hut, clinging with both hands to the bench from which he was beingpulled by a soldier, the brother of the peasant’s wife, who was helpinghim off with his miry boots. Veslovsky was laughing his infectious,good-humored laugh.“I’ve only just come. Ils ont été charmants. Just fancy,they gave me drink, fed me! Such bread, it was exquisite! Délicieux! Andthe vodka, I never tasted any better. And they would not take a penny foranything. And they kept saying: ‘Excuse our homely ways.’”“What should they take anything for? They were entertaining you, to besure. Do you suppose they keep vodka for sale?” said the soldier,succeeding at last in pulling the soaked boot off the blackened stocking.In spite of the dirtiness of the hut, which was all muddied by their boots andthe filthy dogs licking themselves clean, and the smell of marsh mud and powderthat filled the room, and the absence of knives and forks, the party dranktheir tea and ate their supper with a relish only known to sportsmen. Washedand clean, they went into a hay-barn swept ready for them, where the coachmanhad been making up beds for the gentlemen.Though it was dusk, not one of them wanted to go to sleep.After wavering among reminiscences and anecdotes of guns, of dogs, and offormer shooting parties, the conversation rested on a topic that interested allof them. After Vassenka had several times over expressed his appreciation ofthis delightful sleeping place among the fragrant hay, this delightful brokencart (he supposed it to be broken because the shafts had been taken out), ofthe good nature of the peasants that had treated him to vodka, of the dogs wholay at the feet of their respective masters, Oblonsky began telling them of adelightful shooting party at Malthus’s, where he had stayed the previoussummer.Malthus was a well-known capitalist, who had made his money by speculation inrailway shares. Stepan Arkadyevitch described what grouse moors this Malthushad bought in the Tver province, and how they were preserved, and of thecarriages and dogcarts in which the shooting party had been driven, and theluncheon pavilion that had been rigged up at the marsh.“I don’t understand you,” said Levin, sitting up in the hay;“how is it such people don’t disgust you? I can understand a lunchwith Lafitte is all very pleasant, but don’t you dislike just that verysumptuousness? All these people, just like our spirit monopolists in old days,get their money in a way that gains them the contempt of everyone. Theydon’t care for their contempt, and then they use their dishonest gains tobuy off the contempt they have deserved.”“Perfectly true!” chimed in Vassenka Veslovsky. “Perfectly!Oblonsky, of course, goes out of bonhomie, but other people say:‘Well, Oblonsky stays with them.’...”“Not a bit of it.” Levin could hear that Oblonsky was smiling as hespoke. “I simply don’t consider him more dishonest than any otherwealthy merchant or nobleman. They’ve all made their money alike—bytheir work and their intelligence.”“Oh, by what work? Do you call it work to get hold of concessions andspeculate with them?”“Of course it’s work. Work in this sense, that if it were not forhim and others like him, there would have been no railways.”“But that’s not work, like the work of a peasant or a learnedprofession.”“Granted, but it’s work in the sense that his activity produces aresult—the railways. But of course you think the railways useless.”“No, that’s another question; I am prepared to admit thatthey’re useful. But all profit that is out of proportion to the laborexpended is dishonest.”“But who is to define what is proportionate?”“Making profit by dishonest means, by trickery,” said Levin,conscious that he could not draw a distinct line between honesty anddishonesty. “Such as banking, for instance,” he went on.“It’s an evil—the amassing of huge fortunes without labor,just the same thing as with the spirit monopolies, it’s only the formthat’s changed. Le roi est mort, vive le roi. No sooner were thespirit monopolies abolished than the railways came up, and banking companies;that, too, is profit without work.”“Yes, that may all be very true and clever.... Lie down, Krak!”Stepan Arkadyevitch called to his dog, who was scratching and turning over allthe hay. He was obviously convinced of the correctness of his position, and sotalked serenely and without haste. “But you have not drawn the linebetween honest and dishonest work. That I receive a bigger salary than my chiefclerk, though he knows more about the work than I do—that’sdishonest, I suppose?”“I can’t say.”“Well, but I can tell you: your receiving some five thousand, let’ssay, for your work on the land, while our host, the peasant here, however hardhe works, can never get more than fifty roubles, is just as dishonest as myearning more than my chief clerk, and Malthus getting more than astation-master. No, quite the contrary; I see that society takes up a sort ofantagonistic attitude to these people, which is utterly baseless, and I fancythere’s envy at the bottom of it....”“No, that’s unfair,” said Veslovsky; “how could envycome in? There is something not nice about that sort of business.”“You say,” Levin went on, “that it’s unjust for me toreceive five thousand, while the peasant has fifty; that’s true. It isunfair, and I feel it, but....”“It really is. Why is it we spend our time riding, drinking, shooting,doing nothing, while they are forever at work?” said Vassenka Veslovsky,obviously for the first time in his life reflecting on the question, andconsequently considering it with perfect sincerity.“Yes, you feel it, but you don’t give him your property,”said Stepan Arkadyevitch, intentionally, as it seemed, provoking Levin.There had arisen of late something like a secret antagonism between the twobrothers-in-law; as though, since they had married sisters, a kind of rivalryhad sprung up between them as to which was ordering his life best, and now thishostility showed itself in the conversation, as it began to take a personalnote.“I don’t give it away, because no one demands that from me, and ifI wanted to, I could not give it away,” answered Levin, “and haveno one to give it to.”“Give it to this peasant, he would not refuse it.”“Yes, but how am I to give it up? Am I to go to him and make a deed ofconveyance?”“I don’t know; but if you are convinced that you have noright....”“I’m not at all convinced. On the contrary, I feel I have no rightto give it up, that I have duties both to the land and to my family.”“No, excuse me, but if you consider this inequality is unjust, why is ityou don’t act accordingly?...”“Well, I do act negatively on that idea, so far as not trying to increasethe difference of position existing between him and me.”“No, excuse me, that’s a paradox.”“Yes, there’s something of a sophistry about that,” Veslovskyagreed. “Ah! our host; so you’re not asleep yet?” he said tothe peasant who came into the barn, opening the creaking door. “How is ityou’re not asleep?”“No, how’s one to sleep! I thought our gentlemen would be asleep,but I heard them chattering. I want to get a hook from here. She won’tbite?” he added, stepping cautiously with his bare feet.“And where are you going to sleep?”“We are going out for the night with the beasts.”“Ah, what a night!” said Veslovsky, looking out at the edge of thehut and the unharnessed wagonette that could be seen in the faint light of theevening glow in the great frame of the open doors. “But listen, there arewomen’s voices singing, and, on my word, not badly too. Who’s thatsinging, my friend?”“That’s the maids from hard by here.”“Let’s go, let’s have a walk! We shan’t go to sleep,you know. Oblonsky, come along!”“If one could only do both, lie here and go,” answered Oblonsky,stretching. “It’s capital lying here.”“Well, I shall go by myself,” said Veslovsky, getting up eagerly,and putting on his shoes and stockings. “Good-bye, gentlemen. Ifit’s fun, I’ll fetch you. You’ve treated me to some goodsport, and I won’t forget you.”“He really is a capital fellow, isn’t he?” said StepanArkadyevitch, when Veslovsky had gone out and the peasant had closed the doorafter him.“Yes, capital,” answered Levin, still thinking of the subject oftheir conversation just before. It seemed to him that he had clearly expressedhis thoughts and feelings to the best of his capacity, and yet both of them,straightforward men and not fools, had said with one voice that he wascomforting himself with sophistries. This disconcerted him.“It’s just this, my dear boy. One must do one of two things: eitheradmit that the existing order of society is just, and then stick up forone’s rights in it; or acknowledge that you are enjoying unjustprivileges, as I do, and then enjoy them and be satisfied.”“No, if it were unjust, you could not enjoy these advantages and besatisfied—at least I could not. The great thing for me is to feel thatI’m not to blame.”“What do you say, why not go after all?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,evidently weary of the strain of thought. “We shan’t go to sleep,you know. Come, let’s go!”Levin did not answer. What they had said in the conversation, that he actedjustly only in a negative sense, absorbed his thoughts. “Can it be thatit’s only possible to be just negatively?” he was asking himself.“How strong the smell of the fresh hay is, though,” said StepanArkadyevitch, getting up. “There’s not a chance of sleeping.Vassenka has been getting up some fun there. Do you hear the laughing and hisvoice? Hadn’t we better go? Come along!”“No, I’m not coming,” answered Levin.“Surely that’s not a matter of principle too,” said StepanArkadyevitch, smiling, as he felt about in the dark for his cap.“It’s not a matter of principle, but why should I go?”“But do you know you are preparing trouble for yourself,” saidStepan Arkadyevitch, finding his cap and getting up.“How so?”“Do you suppose I don’t see the line you’ve taken up withyour wife? I heard how it’s a question of the greatest consequence,whether or not you’re to be away for a couple of days’ shooting.That’s all very well as an idyllic episode, but for your whole life thatwon’t answer. A man must be independent; he has his masculine interests.A man has to be manly,” said Oblonsky, opening the door.“In what way? To go running after servant girls?” said Levin.“Why not, if it amuses him? Ça ne tire pas à conséquence. Itwon’t do my wife any harm, and it’ll amuse me. The great thing isto respect the sanctity of the home. There should be nothing in the home. Butdon’t tie your own hands.”“Perhaps so,” said Levin dryly, and he turned on his side.“Tomorrow, early, I want to go shooting, and I won’t wake anyone,and shall set off at daybreak.”“Messieurs, venez vite!” they heard the voice of Veslovskycoming back. “Charmante! I’ve made such a discovery.Charmante! a perfect Gretchen, and I’ve already made friends withher. Really, exceedingly pretty,” he declared in a tone of approval, asthough she had been made pretty entirely on his account, and he was expressinghis satisfaction with the entertainment that had been provided for him.Levin pretended to be asleep, while Oblonsky, putting on his slippers, andlighting a cigar, walked out of the barn, and soon their voices were lost.For a long while Levin could not get to sleep. He heard the horses munchinghay, then he heard the peasant and his elder boy getting ready for the night,and going off for the night watch with the beasts, then he heard the soldierarranging his bed on the other side of the barn, with his nephew, the youngerson of their peasant host. He heard the boy in his shrill little voice tellinghis uncle what he thought about the dogs, who seemed to him huge and terriblecreatures, and asking what the dogs were going to hunt next day, and thesoldier in a husky, sleepy voice, telling him the sportsmen were going in themorning to the marsh, and would shoot with their guns; and then, to check theboy’s questions, he said, “Go to sleep, Vaska; go to sleep, oryou’ll catch it,” and soon after he began snoring himself, andeverything was still. He could only hear the snort of the horses, and theguttural cry of a snipe.“Is it really only negative?” he repeated to himself. “Well,what of it? It’s not my fault.” And he began thinking about thenext day.“Tomorrow I’ll go out early, and I’ll make a point of keepingcool. There are lots of snipe; and there are grouse too. When I come backthere’ll be the note from Kitty. Yes, Stiva may be right, I’m notmanly with her, I’m tied to her apron-strings.... Well, it can’t behelped! Negative again....”Half asleep, he heard the laughter and mirthful talk of Veslovsky and StepanArkadyevitch. For an instant he opened his eyes: the moon was up, and in theopen doorway, brightly lighted up by the moonlight, they were standing talking.Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying something of the freshness of one girl,comparing her to a freshly peeled nut, and Veslovsky with his infectious laughwas repeating some words, probably said to him by a peasant: “Ah, you doyour best to get round her!” Levin, half asleep, said:“Gentlemen, tomorrow before daylight!” and fell asleep.Chapter 12Waking up at earliest dawn, Levin tried to wake his companions. Vassenka, lyingon his stomach, with one leg in a stocking thrust out, was sleeping so soundlythat he could elicit no response. Oblonsky, half asleep, declined to get up soearly. Even Laska, who was asleep, curled up in the hay, got up unwillingly,and lazily stretched out and straightened her hind legs one after the other.Getting on his boots and stockings, taking his gun, and carefully opening thecreaking door of the barn, Levin went out into the road. The coachmen weresleeping in their carriages, the horses were dozing. Only one was lazily eatingoats, dipping its nose into the manger. It was still gray out-of-doors.“Why are you up so early, my dear?” the old woman, their hostess,said, coming out of the hut and addressing him affectionately as an old friend.“Going shooting, granny. Do I go this way to the marsh?”“Straight out at the back; by our threshing floor, my dear, and hemppatches; there’s a little footpath.” Stepping carefully with hersunburnt, bare feet, the old woman conducted Levin, and moved back the fencefor him by the threshing floor.“Straight on and you’ll come to the marsh. Our lads drove thecattle there yesterday evening.”Laska ran eagerly forward along the little path. Levin followed her with alight, rapid step, continually looking at the sky. He hoped the sun would notbe up before he reached the marsh. But the sun did not delay. The moon, whichhad been bright when he went out, by now shone only like a crescent ofquicksilver. The pink flush of dawn, which one could not help seeing before,now had to be sought to be discerned at all. What were before undefined, vagueblurs in the distant countryside could now be distinctly seen. They weresheaves of rye. The dew, not visible till the sun was up, wetted Levin’slegs and his blouse above his belt in the high growing, fragrant hemp patch,from which the pollen had already fallen out. In the transparent stillness ofmorning the smallest sounds were audible. A bee flew by Levin’s ear withthe whizzing sound of a bullet. He looked carefully, and saw a second and athird. They were all flying from the beehives behind the hedge, and theydisappeared over the hemp patch in the direction of the marsh. The path ledstraight to the marsh. The marsh could be recognized by the mist which rosefrom it, thicker in one place and thinner in another, so that the reeds andwillow bushes swayed like islands in this mist. At the edge of the marsh andthe road, peasant boys and men, who had been herding for the night, were lying,and in the dawn all were asleep under their coats. Not far from them were threehobbled horses. One of them clanked a chain. Laska walked beside her master,pressing a little forward and looking round. Passing the sleeping peasants andreaching the first reeds, Levin examined his pistols and let his dog off. Oneof the horses, a sleek, dark-brown three-year-old, seeing the dog, startedaway, switched its tail and snorted. The other horses too were frightened, andsplashing through the water with their hobbled legs, and drawing their hoofsout of the thick mud with a squelching sound, they bounded out of the marsh.Laska stopped, looking ironically at the horses and inquiringly at Levin. Levinpatted Laska, and whistled as a sign that she might begin.Laska ran joyfully and anxiously through the slush that swayed under her.Running into the marsh among the familiar scents of roots, marsh plants, andslime, and the extraneous smell of horse dung, Laska detected at once a smellthat pervaded the whole marsh, the scent of that strong-smelling bird thatalways excited her more than any other. Here and there among the moss and marshplants this scent was very strong, but it was impossible to determine in whichdirection it grew stronger or fainter. To find the direction, she had to gofarther away from the wind. Not feeling the motion of her legs, Laska boundedwith a stiff gallop, so that at each bound she could stop short, to the right,away from the wind that blew from the east before sunrise, and turned facingthe wind. Sniffing in the air with dilated nostrils, she felt at once that nottheir tracks only but they themselves were here before her, and not one, butmany. Laska slackened her speed. They were here, but where precisely she couldnot yet determine. To find the very spot, she began to make a circle, whensuddenly her master’s voice drew her off. “Laska! here?” heasked, pointing her to a different direction. She stopped, asking him if shehad better not go on doing as she had begun. But he repeated his command in anangry voice, pointing to a spot covered with water, where there could not beanything. She obeyed him, pretending she was looking, so as to please him, wentround it, and went back to her former position, and was at once aware of thescent again. Now when he was not hindering her, she knew what to do, andwithout looking at what was under her feet, and to her vexation stumbling overa high stump into the water, but righting herself with her strong, supple legs,she began making the circle which was to make all clear to her. The scent ofthem reached her, stronger and stronger, and more and more defined, and all atonce it became perfectly clear to her that one of them was here, behind thistuft of reeds, five paces in front of her; she stopped, and her whole body wasstill and rigid. On her short legs she could see nothing in front of her, butby the scent she knew it was sitting not more than five paces off. She stoodstill, feeling more and more conscious of it, and enjoying it in anticipation.Her tail was stretched straight and tense, and only wagging at the extreme end.Her mouth was slightly open, her ears raised. One ear had been turned wrongside out as she ran up, and she breathed heavily but warily, and still morewarily looked round, but more with her eyes than her head, to her master. Hewas coming along with the face she knew so well, though the eyes were alwaysterrible to her. He stumbled over the stump as he came, and moved, as shethought, extraordinarily slowly. She thought he came slowly, but he wasrunning.Noticing Laska’s special attitude as she crouched on the ground, as itwere, scratching big prints with her hind paws, and with her mouth slightlyopen, Levin knew she was pointing at grouse, and with an inward prayer forluck, especially with the first bird, he ran up to her. Coming quite close upto her, he could from his height look beyond her, and he saw with his eyes whatshe was seeing with her nose. In a space between two little thickets, at acouple of yards’ distance, he could see a grouse. Turning its head, itwas listening. Then lightly preening and folding its wings, it disappearedround a corner with a clumsy wag of its tail.“Fetch it, fetch it!” shouted Levin, giving Laska a shove frombehind.“But I can’t go,” thought Laska. “Where am I to go?From here I feel them, but if I move forward I shall know nothing of where theyare or who they are.” But then he shoved her with his knee, and in anexcited whisper said, “Fetch it, Laska.”“Well, if that’s what he wishes, I’ll do it, but Ican’t answer for myself now,” she thought, and darted forward asfast as her legs would carry her between the thick bushes. She scented nothingnow; she could only see and hear, without understanding anything.Ten paces from her former place a grouse rose with a guttural cry and thepeculiar round sound of its wings. And immediately after the shot it splashedheavily with its white breast on the wet mire. Another bird did not linger, butrose behind Levin without the dog. When Levin turned towards it, it was alreadysome way off. But his shot caught it. Flying twenty paces further, the secondgrouse rose upwards, and whirling round like a ball, dropped heavily on a dryplace.“Come, this is going to be some good!” thought Levin, packing thewarm and fat grouse into his game bag. “Eh, Laska, will it begood?”When Levin, after loading his gun, moved on, the sun had fully risen, thoughunseen behind the storm-clouds. The moon had lost all of its luster, and waslike a white cloud in the sky. Not a single star could be seen. The sedge,silvery with dew before, now shone like gold. The stagnant pools were all likeamber. The blue of the grass had changed to yellow-green. The marsh birdstwittered and swarmed about the brook and upon the bushes that glittered withdew and cast long shadows. A hawk woke up and settled on a haycock, turning itshead from side to side and looking discontentedly at the marsh. Crows wereflying about the field, and a bare-legged boy was driving the horses to an oldman, who had got up from under his long coat and was combing his hair. Thesmoke from the gun was white as milk over the green of the grass.One of the boys ran up to Levin.“Uncle, there were ducks here yesterday!” he shouted to him, and hewalked a little way off behind him.And Levin was doubly pleased, in sight of the boy, who expressed his approval,at killing three snipe, one after another, straight off.Chapter 13The sportsman’s saying, that if the first beast or the first bird is notmissed, the day will be lucky, turned out correct.At ten o’clock Levin, weary, hungry, and happy after a tramp of twentymiles, returned to his night’s lodging with nineteen head of fine gameand one duck, which he tied to his belt, as it would not go into the game bag.His companions had long been awake, and had had time to get hungry and havebreakfast.“Wait a bit, wait a bit, I know there are nineteen,” said Levin,counting a second time over the grouse and snipe, that looked so much lessimportant now, bent and dry and bloodstained, with heads crooked aside, thanthey did when they were flying.The number was verified, and Stepan Arkadyevitch’s envy pleased Levin. Hewas pleased too on returning to find the man sent by Kitty with a note wasalready there.“I am perfectly well and happy. If you were uneasy about me, you can feeleasier than ever. I’ve a new bodyguard, MaryaVlasyevna,”—this was the midwife, a new and important personage inLevin’s domestic life. “She has come to have a look at me. Shefound me perfectly well, and we have kept her till you are back. All are happyand well, and please, don’t be in a hurry to come back, but, if the sportis good, stay another day.”These two pleasures, his lucky shooting and the letter from his wife, were sogreat that two slightly disagreeable incidents passed lightly over Levin. Onewas that the chestnut trace horse, who had been unmistakably overworked on theprevious day, was off his feed and out of sorts. The coachman said he was“Overdriven yesterday, Konstantin Dmitrievitch. Yes, indeed! driven tenmiles with no sense!”The other unpleasant incident, which for the first minute destroyed his goodhumor, though later he laughed at it a great deal, was to find that of all theprovisions Kitty had provided in such abundance that one would have thoughtthere was enough for a week, nothing was left. On his way back, tired andhungry from shooting, Levin had so distinct a vision of meat-pies that as heapproached the hut he seemed to smell and taste them, as Laska had smelt thegame, and he immediately told Philip to give him some. It appeared that therewere no pies left, nor even any chicken.“Well, this fellow’s appetite!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,laughing and pointing at Vassenka Veslovsky. “I never suffer from loss ofappetite, but he’s really marvelous!...”“Well, it can’t be helped,” said Levin, looking gloomily atVeslovsky. “Well, Philip, give me some beef, then.”“The beef’s been eaten, and the bones given to the dogs,”answered Philip.Levin was so hurt that he said, in a tone of vexation, “You might haveleft me something!” and he felt ready to cry.“Then put away the game,” he said in a shaking voice to Philip,trying not to look at Vassenka, “and cover them with some nettles. Andyou might at least ask for some milk for me.”But when he had drunk some milk, he felt ashamed immediately at having shownhis annoyance to a stranger, and he began to laugh at his hungry mortification.In the evening they went shooting again, and Veslovsky had several successfulshots, and in the night they drove home.Their homeward journey was as lively as their drive out had been. Veslovskysang songs and related with enjoyment his adventures with the peasants, who hadregaled him with vodka, and said to him, “Excuse our homely ways,”and his night’s adventures with kiss-in-the-ring and the servant-girl andthe peasant, who had asked him was he married, and on learning that he was not,said to him, “Well, mind you don’t run after other men’swives—you’d better get one of your own.” These words hadparticularly amused Veslovsky.“Altogether, I’ve enjoyed our outing awfully. And you,Levin?”“I have, very much,” Levin said quite sincerely. It wasparticularly delightful to him to have got rid of the hostility he had beenfeeling towards Vassenka Veslovsky at home, and to feel instead the mostfriendly disposition to him.Chapter 14Next day at ten o’clock Levin, who had already gone his rounds, knockedat the room where Vassenka had been put for the night.“Entrez!” Veslovsky called to him. “Excuse me,I’ve only just finished my ablutions,” he said, smiling, standingbefore him in his underclothes only.“Don’t mind me, please.” Levin sat down in the window.“Have you slept well?”“Like the dead. What sort of day is it for shooting?”“What will you take, tea or coffee?”“Neither. I’ll wait till lunch. I’m really ashamed. I supposethe ladies are down? A walk now would be capital. You show me yourhorses.”After walking about the garden, visiting the stable, and even doing somegymnastic exercises together on the parallel bars, Levin returned to the housewith his guest, and went with him into the drawing-room.“We had splendid shooting, and so many delightful experiences!”said Veslovsky, going up to Kitty, who was sitting at the samovar. “Whata pity ladies are cut off from these delights!”“Well, I suppose he must say something to the lady of the house,”Levin said to himself. Again he fancied something in the smile, in theall-conquering air with which their guest addressed Kitty....The princess, sitting on the other side of the table with Marya Vlasyevna andStepan Arkadyevitch, called Levin to her side, and began to talk to him aboutmoving to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement, and getting ready rooms forthem. Just as Levin had disliked all the trivial preparations for his wedding,as derogatory to the grandeur of the event, now he felt still more offensivethe preparations for the approaching birth, the date of which they reckoned, itseemed, on their fingers. He tried to turn a deaf ear to these discussions ofthe best patterns of long clothes for the coming baby; tried to turn away andavoid seeing the mysterious, endless strips of knitting, the triangles oflinen, and so on, to which Dolly attached special importance. The birth of ason (he was certain it would be a son) which was promised him, but which hestill could not believe in—so marvelous it seemed—presented itselfto his mind, on one hand, as a happiness so immense, and therefore soincredible; on the other, as an event so mysterious, that this assumption of adefinite knowledge of what would be, and consequent preparation for it, as forsomething ordinary that did happen to people, jarred on him as confusing andhumiliating.But the princess did not understand his feelings, and put down his reluctanceto think and talk about it to carelessness and indifference, and so she gavehim no peace. She had commissioned Stepan Arkadyevitch to look at a flat, andnow she called Levin up.“I know nothing about it, princess. Do as you think fit,” he said.“You must decide when you will move.”“I really don’t know. I know millions of children are born awayfrom Moscow, and doctors ... why....”“But if so....”“Oh, no, as Kitty wishes.”“We can’t talk to Kitty about it! Do you want me to frighten her?Why, this spring Natalia Golitzina died from having an ignorant doctor.”“I will do just what you say,” he said gloomily.The princess began talking to him, but he did not hear her. Though theconversation with the princess had indeed jarred upon him, he was gloomy, noton account of that conversation, but from what he saw at the samovar.“No, it’s impossible,” he thought, glancing now and then atVassenka bending over Kitty, telling her something with his charming smile, andat her, flushed and disturbed.There was something not nice in Vassenka’s attitude, in his eyes, in hissmile. Levin even saw something not nice in Kitty’s attitude and look.And again the light died away in his eyes. Again, as before, all of a sudden,without the slightest transition, he felt cast down from a pinnacle ofhappiness, peace, and dignity, into an abyss of despair, rage, and humiliation.Again everything and everyone had become hateful to him.“You do just as you think best, princess,” he said again, lookinground.“Heavy is the cap of Monomach,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said playfully,hinting, evidently, not simply at the princess’s conversation, but at thecause of Levin’s agitation, which he had noticed.“How late you are today, Dolly!”Everyone got up to greet Darya Alexandrovna. Vassenka only rose for an instant,and with the lack of courtesy to ladies characteristic of the modern young man,he scarcely bowed, and resumed his conversation again, laughing at something.“I’ve been worried about Masha. She did not sleep well, and isdreadfully tiresome today,” said Dolly.The conversation Vassenka had started with Kitty was running on the same linesas on the previous evening, discussing Anna, and whether love is to be puthigher than worldly considerations. Kitty disliked the conversation, and shewas disturbed both by the subject and the tone in which it was conducted, andalso by the knowledge of the effect it would have on her husband. But she wastoo simple and innocent to know how to cut short this conversation, or even toconceal the superficial pleasure afforded her by the young man’s veryobvious admiration. She wanted to stop it, but she did not know what to do.Whatever she did she knew would be observed by her husband, and the worstinterpretation put on it. And, in fact, when she asked Dolly what was wrongwith Masha, and Vassenka, waiting till this uninteresting conversation wasover, began to gaze indifferently at Dolly, the question struck Levin as anunnatural and disgusting piece of hypocrisy.“What do you say, shall we go and look for mushrooms today?” saidDolly.“By all means, please, and I shall come too,” said Kitty, and sheblushed. She wanted from politeness to ask Vassenka whether he would come, andshe did not ask him. “Where are you going, Kostya?” she asked herhusband with a guilty face, as he passed by her with a resolute step. Thisguilty air confirmed all his suspicions.“The mechanician came when I was away; I haven’t seen himyet,” he said, not looking at her.He went downstairs, but before he had time to leave his study he heard hiswife’s familiar footsteps running with reckless speed to him.“What do you want?” he said to her shortly. “We arebusy.”“I beg your pardon,” she said to the German mechanician; “Iwant a few words with my husband.”The German would have left the room, but Levin said to him:“Don’t disturb yourself.”“The train is at three?” queried the German. “I mustn’tbe late.”Levin did not answer him, but walked out himself with his wife.“Well, what have you to say to me?” he said to her in French.He did not look her in the face, and did not care to see that she in hercondition was trembling all over, and had a piteous, crushed look.“I ... I want to say that we can’t go on like this; that this ismisery....” she said.“The servants are here at the sideboard,” he said angrily;“don’t make a scene.”“Well, let’s go in here!”They were standing in the passage. Kitty would have gone into the next room,but there the English governess was giving Tanya a lesson.“Well, come into the garden.”In the garden they came upon a peasant weeding the path. And no longerconsidering that the peasant could see her tear-stained and his agitated face,that they looked like people fleeing from some disaster, they went on withrapid steps, feeling that they must speak out and clear up misunderstandings,must be alone together, and so get rid of the misery they were both feeling.“We can’t go on like this! It’s misery! I am wretched; youare wretched. What for?” she said, when they had at last reached asolitary garden seat at a turn in the lime tree avenue.“But tell me one thing: was there in his tone anything unseemly, notnice, humiliatingly horrible?” he said, standing before her again in thesame position with his clenched fists on his chest, as he had stood before herthat night.“Yes,” she said in a shaking voice; “but, Kostya, surely yousee I’m not to blame? All the morning I’ve been trying to take atone ... but such people.... Why did he come? How happy we were!” shesaid, breathless with the sobs that shook her.Although nothing had been pursuing them, and there was nothing to run awayfrom, and they could not possibly have found anything very delightful on thatgarden seat, the gardener saw with astonishment that they passed him on theirway home with comforted and radiant faces.Chapter 15After escorting his wife upstairs, Levin went to Dolly’s part of thehouse. Darya Alexandrovna, for her part, was in great distress too that day.She was walking about the room, talking angrily to a little girl, who stood inthe corner roaring.“And you shall stand all day in the corner, and have your dinner allalone, and not see one of your dolls, and I won’t make you a newfrock,” she said, not knowing how to punish her.“Oh, she is a disgusting child!” she turned to Levin. “Wheredoes she get such wicked propensities?”“Why, what has she done?” Levin said without much interest, for hehad wanted to ask her advice, and so was annoyed that he had come at an unluckymoment.“Grisha and she went into the raspberries, and there ... I can’ttell you really what she did. It’s a thousand pities Miss Elliot’snot with us. This one sees to nothing—she’s a machine....Figurez-vous que la petite?...”And Darya Alexandrovna described Masha’s crime.“That proves nothing; it’s not a question of evil propensities atall, it’s simply mischief,” Levin assured her.“But you are upset about something? What have you come for?” askedDolly. “What’s going on there?”And in the tone of her question Levin heard that it would be easy for him tosay what he had meant to say.“I’ve not been in there, I’ve been alone in the garden withKitty. We’ve had a quarrel for the second time since ... Stivacame.”Dolly looked at him with her shrewd, comprehending eyes.“Come, tell me, honor bright, has there been ... not in Kitty, but inthat gentleman’s behavior, a tone which might be unpleasant—notunpleasant, but horrible, offensive to a husband?”“You mean, how shall I say.... Stay, stay in the corner!” she saidto Masha, who, detecting a faint smile in her mother’s face, had beenturning round. “The opinion of the world would be that he is behaving asyoung men do behave. Il fait la cour à une jeune et jolie femme, and ahusband who’s a man of the world should only be flattered by it.”“Yes, yes,” said Levin gloomily; “but you noticed it?”“Not only I, but Stiva noticed it. Just after breakfast he said to me inso many words, Je crois que Veslovsky fait un petit brin de cour àKitty.”“Well, that’s all right then; now I’m satisfied. I’llsend him away,” said Levin.“What do you mean! Are you crazy?” Dolly cried in horror;“nonsense, Kostya, only think!” she said, laughing. “You cango now to Fanny,” she said to Masha. “No, if you wish it,I’ll speak to Stiva. He’ll take him away. He can say you’reexpecting visitors. Altogether he doesn’t fit into the house.”“No, no, I’ll do it myself.”“But you’ll quarrel with him?”“Not a bit. I shall so enjoy it,” Levin said, his eyes flashingwith real enjoyment. “Come, forgive her, Dolly, she won’t do itagain,” he said of the little sinner, who had not gone to Fanny, but wasstanding irresolutely before her mother, waiting and looking up from under herbrows to catch her mother’s eye.The mother glanced at her. The child broke into sobs, hid her face on hermother’s lap, and Dolly laid her thin, tender hand on her head.“And what is there in common between us and him?” thought Levin,and he went off to look for Veslovsky.As he passed through the passage he gave orders for the carriage to be gotready to drive to the station.“The spring was broken yesterday,” said the footman.“Well, the covered trap, then, and make haste. Where’s thevisitor?”“The gentleman’s gone to his room.”Levin came upon Veslovsky at the moment when the latter, having unpacked histhings from his trunk, and laid out some new songs, was putting on his gaitersto go out riding.Whether there was something exceptional in Levin’s face, or that Vassenkawas himself conscious that ce petit brin de cour he was making was outof place in this family, but he was somewhat (as much as a young man in societycan be) disconcerted at Levin’s entrance.“You ride in gaiters?”“Yes, it’s much cleaner,” said Vassenka, putting his fat legon a chair, fastening the bottom hook, and smiling with simple-hearted goodhumor.He was undoubtedly a good-natured fellow, and Levin felt sorry for him andashamed of himself, as his host, when he saw the shy look on Vassenka’sface.On the table lay a piece of stick which they had broken together that morning,trying their strength. Levin took the fragment in his hands and began smashingit up, breaking bits off the stick, not knowing how to begin.“I wanted....” He paused, but suddenly, remembering Kitty andeverything that had happened, he said, looking him resolutely in the face:“I have ordered the horses to be put-to for you.”“How so?” Vassenka began in surprise. “To drive where?”“For you to drive to the station,” Levin said gloomily.“Are you going away, or has something happened?”“It happens that I expect visitors,” said Levin, his strong fingersmore and more rapidly breaking off the ends of the split stick. “AndI’m not expecting visitors, and nothing has happened, but I beg you to goaway. You can explain my rudeness as you like.”Vassenka drew himself up.“I beg you to explain....” he said with dignity, understanding atlast.“I can’t explain,” Levin said softly and deliberately, tryingto control the trembling of his jaw; “and you’d better notask.”And as the split ends were all broken off, Levin clutched the thick ends in hisfinger, broke the stick in two, and carefully caught the end as it fell.Probably the sight of those nervous fingers, of the muscles he had proved thatmorning at gymnastics, of the glittering eyes, the soft voice, and quiveringjaws, convinced Vassenka better than any words. He bowed, shrugging hisshoulders, and smiling contemptuously.“Can I not see Oblonsky?”The shrug and the smile did not irritate Levin.“What else was there for him to do?” he thought.“I’ll send him to you at once.”“What madness is this?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said when, afterhearing from his friend that he was being turned out of the house, he foundLevin in the garden, where he was walking about waiting for his guest’sdeparture. “Mais c’est ridicule! What fly has stung you?Mais c’est du dernier ridicule! What did you think, if a youngman....”But the place where Levin had been stung was evidently still sore, for heturned pale again, when Stepan Arkadyevitch would have enlarged on the reason,and he himself cut him short.“Please don’t go into it! I can’t help it. I feel ashamed ofhow I’m treating you and him. But it won’t be, I imagine, a greatgrief to him to go, and his presence was distasteful to me and to mywife.”“But it’s insulting to him! Et puis c’estridicule.”“And to me it’s both insulting and distressing! And I’m notat fault in any way, and there’s no need for me to suffer.”“Well, this I didn’t expect of you! On peut être jaloux, mais àce point, c’est du dernier ridicule!”Levin turned quickly, and walked away from him into the depths of the avenue,and he went on walking up and down alone. Soon he heard the rumble of the trap,and saw from behind the trees how Vassenka, sitting in the hay (unluckily therewas no seat in the trap) in his Scotch cap, was driven along the avenue,jolting up and down over the ruts.“What’s this?” Levin thought, when a footman ran out of thehouse and stopped the trap. It was the mechanician, whom Levin had totallyforgotten. The mechanician, bowing low, said something to Veslovsky, thenclambered into the trap, and they drove off together.Stepan Arkadyevitch and the princess were much upset by Levin’s action.And he himself felt not only in the highest degree ridicule, but alsoutterly guilty and disgraced. But remembering what sufferings he and his wifehad been through, when he asked himself how he should act another time, heanswered that he should do just the same again.In spite of all this, towards the end of that day, everyone except theprincess, who could not pardon Levin’s action, became extraordinarilylively and good-humored, like children after a punishment or grown-up peopleafter a dreary, ceremonious reception, so that by the evening Vassenka’sdismissal was spoken of, in the absence of the princess, as though it were someremote event. And Dolly, who had inherited her father’s gift of humorousstorytelling, made Varenka helpless with laughter as she related for the thirdand fourth time, always with fresh humorous additions, how she had only justput on her new shoes for the benefit of the visitor, and on going into thedrawing-room, heard suddenly the rumble of the trap. And who should be in thetrap but Vassenka himself, with his Scotch cap, and his songs and his gaiters,and all, sitting in the hay.“If only you’d ordered out the carriage! But no! and then I hear:‘Stop!’ Oh, I thought they’ve relented. I look out, andbehold a fat German being sat down by him and driving away.... And my new shoesall for nothing!...”Chapter 16Darya Alexandrovna carried out her intention and went to see Anna. She wassorry to annoy her sister and to do anything Levin disliked. She quiteunderstood how right the Levins were in not wishing to have anything to do withVronsky. But she felt she must go and see Anna, and show her that her feelingscould not be changed, in spite of the change in her position. That she might beindependent of the Levins in this expedition, Darya Alexandrovna sent to thevillage to hire horses for the drive; but Levin learning of it went to her toprotest.“What makes you suppose that I dislike your going? But, even if I diddislike it, I should still more dislike your not taking my horses,” hesaid. “You never told me that you were going for certain. Hiring horsesin the village is disagreeable to me, and, what’s of more importance,they’ll undertake the job and never get you there. I have horses. And ifyou don’t want to wound me, you’ll take mine.”Darya Alexandrovna had to consent, and on the day fixed Levin had ready for hissister-in-law a set of four horses and relays, getting them together from thefarm and saddle-horses—not at all a smart-looking set, but capable oftaking Darya Alexandrovna the whole distance in a single day. At that moment,when horses were wanted for the princess, who was going, and for the midwife,it was a difficult matter for Levin to make up the number, but the duties ofhospitality would not let him allow Darya Alexandrovna to hire horses whenstaying in his house. Moreover, he was well aware that the twenty roubles thatwould be asked for the journey were a serious matter for her; DaryaAlexandrovna’s pecuniary affairs, which were in a very unsatisfactorystate, were taken to heart by the Levins as if they were their own.Darya Alexandrovna, by Levin’s advice, started before daybreak. The roadwas good, the carriage comfortable, the horses trotted along merrily, and onthe box, besides the coachman, sat the counting-house clerk, whom Levin wassending instead of a groom for greater security. Darya Alexandrovna dozed andwaked up only on reaching the inn where the horses were to be changed.After drinking tea at the same well-to-do peasant’s with whom Levin hadstayed on the way to Sviazhsky’s, and chatting with the women about theirchildren, and with the old man about Count Vronsky, whom the latter praisedvery highly, Darya Alexandrovna, at ten o’clock, went on again. At home,looking after her children, she had no time to think. So now, after thisjourney of four hours, all the thoughts she had suppressed before rushedswarming into her brain, and she thought over all her life as she never hadbefore, and from the most different points of view. Her thoughts seemed strangeeven to herself. At first she thought about the children, about whom she wasuneasy, although the princess and Kitty (she reckoned more upon her) hadpromised to look after them. “If only Masha does not begin her naughtytricks, if Grisha isn’t kicked by a horse, and Lily’s stomachisn’t upset again!” she thought. But these questions of the presentwere succeeded by questions of the immediate future. She began thinking how shehad to get a new flat in Moscow for the coming winter, to renew thedrawing-room furniture, and to make her elder girl a cloak. Then questions ofthe more remote future occurred to her: how she was to place her children inthe world. “The girls are all right,” she thought; “but theboys?”“It’s very well that I’m teaching Grisha, but of coursethat’s only because I am free myself now, I’m not with child.Stiva, of course, there’s no counting on. And with the help ofgood-natured friends I can bring them up; but if there’s another babycoming?...” And the thought struck her how untruly it was said that thecurse laid on woman was that in sorrow she should bring forth children.“The birth itself, that’s nothing; but the months of carrying thechild—that’s what’s so intolerable,” she thought,picturing to herself her last pregnancy, and the death of the last baby. Andshe recalled the conversation she had just had with the young woman at the inn.On being asked whether she had any children, the handsome young woman hadanswered cheerfully:“I had a girl baby, but God set me free; I buried her last Lent.”“Well, did you grieve very much for her?” asked Darya Alexandrovna.“Why grieve? The old man has grandchildren enough as it is. It was only atrouble. No working, nor nothing. Only a tie.”This answer had struck Darya Alexandrovna as revolting in spite of thegood-natured and pleasing face of the young woman; but now she could not helprecalling these words. In those cynical words there was indeed a grain oftruth.“Yes, altogether,” thought Darya Alexandrovna, looking back overher whole existence during those fifteen years of her married life,“pregnancy, sickness, mental incapacity, indifference to everything, andmost of all—hideousness. Kitty, young and pretty as she is, even Kittyhas lost her looks; and I when I’m with child become hideous, I know it.The birth, the agony, the hideous agonies, that last moment ... then thenursing, the sleepless nights, the fearful pains....”Darya Alexandrovna shuddered at the mere recollection of the pain from sorebreasts which she had suffered with almost every child. “Then thechildren’s illnesses, that everlasting apprehension; then bringing themup; evil propensities” (she thought of little Masha’s crime amongthe raspberries), “education, Latin—it’s all soincomprehensible and difficult. And on the top of it all, the death of thesechildren.” And there rose again before her imagination the cruel memory,that always tore her mother’s heart, of the death of her last littlebaby, who had died of croup; his funeral, the callous indifference of all atthe little pink coffin, and her own torn heart, and her lonely anguish at thesight of the pale little brow with its projecting temples, and the open,wondering little mouth seen in the coffin at the moment when it was beingcovered with the little pink lid with a cross braided on it.“And all this, what’s it for? What is to come of it all? ThatI’m wasting my life, never having a moment’s peace, either withchild, or nursing a child, forever irritable, peevish, wretched myself andworrying others, repulsive to my husband, while the children are growing upunhappy, badly educated, and penniless. Even now, if it weren’t forspending the summer at the Levins’, I don’t know how we should bemanaging to live. Of course Kostya and Kitty have so much tact that wedon’t feel it; but it can’t go on. They’ll have children,they won’t be able to keep us; it’s a drag on them as it is. How ispapa, who has hardly anything left for himself, to help us? So that Ican’t even bring the children up by myself, and may find it hard with thehelp of other people, at the cost of humiliation. Why, even if we suppose thegreatest good luck, that the children don’t die, and I bring them upsomehow. At the very best they’ll simply be decent people. That’sall I can hope for. And to gain simply that—what agonies, what toil!...One’s whole life ruined!” Again she recalled what the young peasantwoman had said, and again she was revolted at the thought; but she could nothelp admitting that there was a grain of brutal truth in the words.“Is it far now, Mihail?” Darya Alexandrovna asked thecounting-house clerk, to turn her mind from thoughts that were frightening her.“From this village, they say, it’s five miles.” The carriagedrove along the village street and onto a bridge. On the bridge was a crowd ofpeasant women with coils of ties for the sheaves on their shoulders, gaily andnoisily chattering. They stood still on the bridge, staring inquisitively atthe carriage. All the faces turned to Darya Alexandrovna looked to her healthyand happy, making her envious of their enjoyment of life. “They’reall living, they’re all enjoying life,” Darya Alexandrovna stillmused when she had passed the peasant women and was driving uphill again at atrot, seated comfortably on the soft springs of the old carriage, “whileI, let out, as it were from prison, from the world of worries that fret me todeath, am only looking about me now for an instant. They all live; thosepeasant women and my sister Natalia and Varenka and Anna, whom I am going tosee—all, but not I.“And they attack Anna. What for? am I any better? I have, anyway, ahusband I love—not as I should like to love him, still I do love him,while Anna never loved hers. How is she to blame? She wants to live. God hasput that in our hearts. Very likely I should have done the same. Even to thisday I don’t feel sure I did right in listening to her at that terribletime when she came to me in Moscow. I ought then to have cast off my husbandand have begun my life fresh. I might have loved and have been loved inreality. And is it any better as it is? I don’t respect him. He’snecessary to me,” she thought about her husband, “and I put up withhim. Is that any better? At that time I could still have been admired, I hadbeauty left me still,” Darya Alexandrovna pursued her thoughts, and shewould have liked to look at herself in the looking-glass. She had a travelinglooking-glass in her handbag, and she wanted to take it out; but looking at thebacks of the coachman and the swaying counting-house clerk, she felt that shewould be ashamed if either of them were to look round, and she did not take outthe glass.But without looking in the glass, she thought that even now it was not toolate; and she thought of Sergey Ivanovitch, who was always particularlyattentive to her, of Stiva’s good-hearted friend, Turovtsin, who hadhelped her nurse her children through the scarlatina, and was in love with her.And there was someone else, a quite young man, who—her husband had toldher it as a joke—thought her more beautiful than either of her sisters.And the most passionate and impossible romances rose before DaryaAlexandrovna’s imagination. “Anna did quite right, and certainly Ishall never reproach her for it. She is happy, she makes another person happy,and she’s not broken down as I am, but most likely just as she alwayswas, bright, clever, open to every impression,” thought DaryaAlexandrovna,—and a sly smile curved her lips, for, as she pondered onAnna’s love affair, Darya Alexandrovna constructed on parallel lines analmost identical love affair for herself, with an imaginary composite figure,the ideal man who was in love with her. She, like Anna, confessed the wholeaffair to her husband. And the amazement and perplexity of Stepan Arkadyevitchat this avowal made her smile.In such daydreams she reached the turning of the highroad that led toVozdvizhenskoe.Chapter 17The coachman pulled up his four horses and looked round to the right, to afield of rye, where some peasants were sitting on a cart. The counting-houseclerk was just going to jump down, but on second thoughts he shoutedperemptorily to the peasants instead, and beckoned to them to come up. Thewind, that seemed to blow as they drove, dropped when the carriage stood still;gadflies settled on the steaming horses that angrily shook them off. Themetallic clank of a whetstone against a scythe, that came to them from thecart, ceased. One of the peasants got up and came towards the carriage.“Well, you are slow!” the counting-house clerk shouted angrily tothe peasant who was stepping slowly with his bare feet over the ruts of therough dry road. “Come along, do!”A curly-headed old man with a bit of bast tied round his hair, and his bentback dark with perspiration, came towards the carriage, quickening his steps,and took hold of the mud-guard with his sunburnt hand.“Vozdvizhenskoe, the manor house? the count’s?” he repeated;“go on to the end of this track. Then turn to the left. Straight alongthe avenue and you’ll come right upon it. But whom do you want? The counthimself?”“Well, are they at home, my good man?” Darya Alexandrovna saidvaguely, not knowing how to ask about Anna, even of this peasant.“At home for sure,” said the peasant, shifting from one bare footto the other, and leaving a distinct print of five toes and a heel in the dust.“Sure to be at home,” he repeated, evidently eager to talk.“Only yesterday visitors arrived. There’s a sight of visitors come.What do you want?” He turned round and called to a lad, who was shoutingsomething to him from the cart. “Oh! They all rode by here not longsince, to look at a reaping machine. They’ll be home by now. And who willyou be belonging to?...”“We’ve come a long way,” said the coachman, climbing onto thebox. “So it’s not far?”“I tell you, it’s just here. As soon as you get out....” hesaid, keeping hold all the while of the carriage.A healthy-looking, broad-shouldered young fellow came up too.“What, is it laborers they want for the harvest?” he asked.“I don’t know, my boy.”“So you keep to the left, and you’ll come right on it,” saidthe peasant, unmistakably loth to let the travelers go, and eager to converse.The coachman started the horses, but they were only just turning off when thepeasant shouted: “Stop! Hi, friend! Stop!” called the two voices.The coachman stopped.“They’re coming! They’re yonder!” shouted the peasant.“See what a turn-out!” he said, pointing to four persons onhorseback, and two in a char-à-banc, coming along the road.They were Vronsky with a jockey, Veslovsky and Anna on horseback, and PrincessVarvara and Sviazhsky in the char-à-banc. They had gone out to look atthe working of a new reaping machine.When the carriage stopped, the party on horseback were coming at a walkingpace. Anna was in front beside Veslovsky. Anna, quietly walking her horse, asturdy English cob with cropped mane and short tail, her beautiful head withher black hair straying loose under her high hat, her full shoulders, herslender waist in her black riding habit, and all the ease and grace of herdeportment, impressed Dolly.For the first minute it seemed to her unsuitable for Anna to be on horseback.The conception of riding on horseback for a lady was, in DaryaAlexandrovna’s mind, associated with ideas of youthful flirtation andfrivolity, which, in her opinion, was unbecoming in Anna’s position. Butwhen she had scrutinized her, seeing her closer, she was at once reconciled toher riding. In spite of her elegance, everything was so simple, quiet, anddignified in the attitude, the dress and the movements of Anna, that nothingcould have been more natural.Beside Anna, on a hot-looking gray cavalry horse, was Vassenka Veslovsky in hisScotch cap with floating ribbons, his stout legs stretched out in front,obviously pleased with his own appearance. Darya Alexandrovna could notsuppress a good-humored smile as she recognized him. Behind rode Vronsky on adark bay mare, obviously heated from galloping. He was holding her in, pullingat the reins.After him rode a little man in the dress of a jockey. Sviazhsky and PrincessVarvara in a new char-à-banc with a big, raven-black trotting horse,overtook the party on horseback.Anna’s face suddenly beamed with a joyful smile at the instant when, inthe little figure huddled in a corner of the old carriage, she recognizedDolly. She uttered a cry, started in the saddle, and set her horse into agallop. On reaching the carriage she jumped off without assistance, and holdingup her riding habit, she ran up to greet Dolly.“I thought it was you and dared not think it. How delightful! Youcan’t fancy how glad I am!” she said, at one moment pressing herface against Dolly and kissing her, and at the next holding her off andexamining her with a smile.“Here’s a delightful surprise, Alexey!” she said, lookinground at Vronsky, who had dismounted, and was walking towards them.Vronsky, taking off his tall gray hat, went up to Dolly.“You wouldn’t believe how glad we are to see you,” he said,giving peculiar significance to the words, and showing his strong white teethin a smile.Vassenka Veslovsky, without getting off his horse, took off his cap and greetedthe visitor by gleefully waving the ribbons over his head.“That’s Princess Varvara,” Anna said in reply to a glance ofinquiry from Dolly as the char-à-banc drove up.“Ah!” said Darya Alexandrovna, and unconsciously her face betrayedher dissatisfaction.Princess Varvara was her husband’s aunt, and she had long known her, anddid not respect her. She knew that Princess Varvara had passed her whole lifetoadying on her rich relations, but that she should now be sponging on Vronsky,a man who was nothing to her, mortified Dolly on account of her kinship withher husband. Anna noticed Dolly’s expression, and was disconcerted by it.She blushed, dropped her riding habit, and stumbled over it.Darya Alexandrovna went up to the char-à-banc and coldly greetedPrincess Varvara. Sviazhsky too she knew. He inquired how his queer friend withthe young wife was, and running his eyes over the ill-matched horses and thecarriage with its patched mud-guards, proposed to the ladies that they shouldget into the char-à-banc.“And I’ll get into this vehicle,” he said. “The horseis quiet, and the princess drives capitally.”“No, stay as you were,” said Anna, coming up, “andwe’ll go in the carriage,” and taking Dolly’s arm, she drewher away.Darya Alexandrovna’s eyes were fairly dazzled by the elegant carriage ofa pattern she had never seen before, the splendid horses, and the elegant andgorgeous people surrounding her. But what struck her most of all was the changethat had taken place in Anna, whom she knew so well and loved. Any other woman,a less close observer, not knowing Anna before, or not having thought as DaryaAlexandrovna had been thinking on the road, would not have noticed anythingspecial in Anna. But now Dolly was struck by that temporary beauty, which isonly found in women during the moments of love, and which she saw now inAnna’s face. Everything in her face, the clearly marked dimples in hercheeks and chin, the line of her lips, the smile which, as it were, flutteredabout her face, the brilliance of her eyes, the grace and rapidity of hermovements, the fulness of the notes of her voice, even the manner in which,with a sort of angry friendliness, she answered Veslovsky when he askedpermission to get on her cob, so as to teach it to gallop with the right legforemost—it was all peculiarly fascinating, and it seemed as if she wereherself aware of it, and rejoicing in it.When both the women were seated in the carriage, a sudden embarrassment cameover both of them. Anna was disconcerted by the intent look of inquiry Dollyfixed upon her. Dolly was embarrassed because after Sviazhsky’s phraseabout “this vehicle,” she could not help feeling ashamed of thedirty old carriage in which Anna was sitting with her. The coachman Philip andthe counting-house clerk were experiencing the same sensation. Thecounting-house clerk, to conceal his confusion, busied himself settling theladies, but Philip the coachman became sullen, and was bracing himself not tobe overawed in future by this external superiority. He smiled ironically,looking at the raven horse, and was already deciding in his own mind that thissmart trotter in the char-à-banc was only good for promenage, andwouldn’t do thirty miles straight off in the heat.The peasants had all got up from the cart and were inquisitively and mirthfullystaring at the meeting of the friends, making their comments on it.“They’re pleased, too; haven’t seen each other for a longwhile,” said the curly-headed old man with the bast round his hair.“I say, Uncle Gerasim, if we could take that raven horse now, to cart thecorn, that ’ud be quick work!”“Look-ee! Is that a woman in breeches?” said one of them, pointingto Vassenka Veslovsky sitting in a side saddle.“Nay, a man! See how smartly he’s going it!”“Eh, lads! seems we’re not going to sleep, then?”“What chance of sleep today!” said the old man, with a sidelonglook at the sun. “Midday’s past, look-ee! Get your hooks, and comealong!”Chapter 18Anna looked at Dolly’s thin, care-worn face, with its wrinkles filledwith dust from the road, and she was on the point of saying what she wasthinking, that is, that Dolly had got thinner. But, conscious that she herselfhad grown handsomer, and that Dolly’s eyes were telling her so, shesighed and began to speak about herself.“You are looking at me,” she said, “and wondering how I canbe happy in my position? Well! it’s shameful to confess, but I ...I’m inexcusably happy. Something magical has happened to me, like adream, when you’re frightened, panic-stricken, and all of a sudden youwake up and all the horrors are no more. I have waked up. I have lived throughthe misery, the dread, and now for a long while past, especially sincewe’ve been here, I’ve been so happy!...” she said, with atimid smile of inquiry looking at Dolly.“How glad I am!” said Dolly smiling, involuntarily speaking morecoldly than she wanted to. “I’m very glad for you. Whyhaven’t you written to me?”“Why?... Because I hadn’t the courage.... You forget myposition....”“To me? Hadn’t the courage? If you knew how I ... I lookat....”Darya Alexandrovna wanted to express her thoughts of the morning, but for somereason it seemed to her now out of place to do so.“But of that we’ll talk later. What’s this, what are allthese buildings?” she asked, wanting to change the conversation andpointing to the red and green roofs that came into view behind the green hedgesof acacia and lilac. “Quite a little town.”But Anna did not answer.“No, no! How do you look at my position, what do you think of it?”she asked.“I consider....” Darya Alexandrovna was beginning, but at thatinstant Vassenka Veslovsky, having brought the cob to gallop with the right legforemost, galloped past them, bumping heavily up and down in his short jacketon the chamois leather of the side saddle. “He’s doing it, AnnaArkadyevna!” he shouted.Anna did not even glance at him; but again it seemed to Darya Alexandrovna outof place to enter upon such a long conversation in the carriage, and so she cutshort her thought.“I don’t think anything,” she said, “but I always lovedyou, and if one loves anyone, one loves the whole person, just as they are andnot as one would like them to be....”Anna, taking her eyes off her friend’s face and dropping her eyelids(this was a new habit Dolly had not seen in her before), pondered, trying topenetrate the full significance of the words. And obviously interpreting themas she would have wished, she glanced at Dolly.“If you had any sins,” she said, “they would all be forgivenyou for your coming to see me and these words.”And Dolly saw that tears stood in her eyes. She pressed Anna’s hand insilence.“Well, what are these buildings? How many there are of them!” Aftera moment’s silence she repeated her question.“These are the servants’ houses, barns, and stables,”answered Anna. “And there the park begins. It had all gone to ruin, butAlexey had everything renewed. He is very fond of this place, and, what I neverexpected, he has become intensely interested in looking after it. But his issuch a rich nature! Whatever he takes up, he does splendidly. So far from beingbored by it, he works with passionate interest. He—with his temperamentas I know it—he has become careful and businesslike, a first-ratemanager, he positively reckons every penny in his management of the land. Butonly in that. When it’s a question of tens of thousands, he doesn’tthink of money.” She spoke with that gleefully sly smile with which womenoften talk of the secret characteristics only known to them—of those theylove. “Do you see that big building? that’s the new hospital. Ibelieve it will cost over a hundred thousand; that’s his hobby just now.And do you know how it all came about? The peasants asked him for somemeadowland, I think it was, at a cheaper rate, and he refused, and I accusedhim of being miserly. Of course it was not really because of that, buteverything together, he began this hospital to prove, do you see, that he wasnot miserly about money. C’est une petitesse, if you like, but Ilove him all the more for it. And now you’ll see the house in a moment.It was his grandfather’s house, and he has had nothing changedoutside.”“How beautiful!” said Dolly, looking with involuntary admiration atthe handsome house with columns, standing out among the different-coloredgreens of the old trees in the garden.“Isn’t it fine? And from the house, from the top, the view iswonderful.”They drove into a courtyard strewn with gravel and bright with flowers, inwhich two laborers were at work putting an edging of stones round the lightmould of a flower bed, and drew up in a covered entry.“Ah, they’re here already!” said Anna, looking at the saddlehorses, which were just being led away from the steps. “It is a nicehorse, isn’t it? It’s my cob; my favorite. Lead him here and bringme some sugar. Where is the count?” she inquired of two smart footmen whodarted out. “Ah, there he is!” she said, seeing Vronsky coming tomeet her with Veslovsky.“Where are you going to put the princess?” said Vronsky in French,addressing Anna, and without waiting for a reply, he once more greeted DaryaAlexandrovna, and this time he kissed her hand. “I think the big balconyroom.”“Oh, no, that’s too far off! Better in the corner room, we shallsee each other more. Come, let’s go up,” said Anna, as she gave herfavorite horse the sugar the footman had brought her.“Et vous oubliez votre devoir,” she said to Veslovsky, whocame out too on the steps.“Pardon, j’en ai tout plein les poches,” he answered,smiling, putting his fingers in his waistcoat pocket.“Mais vous venez trop tard,” she said, rubbing herhandkerchief on her hand, which the horse had made wet in taking the sugar.Anna turned to Dolly. “You can stay some time? For one day only?That’s impossible!”“I promised to be back, and the children....” said Dolly, feelingembarrassed both because she had to get her bag out of the carriage, andbecause she knew her face must be covered with dust.“No, Dolly, darling!... Well, we’ll see. Come along, comealong!” and Anna led Dolly to her room.That room was not the smart guest chamber Vronsky had suggested, but the one ofwhich Anna had said that Dolly would excuse it. And this room, for which excusewas needed, was more full of luxury than any in which Dolly had ever stayed, aluxury that reminded her of the best hotels abroad.“Well, darling, how happy I am!” Anna said, sitting down in herriding habit for a moment beside Dolly. “Tell me about all of you. StivaI had only a glimpse of, and he cannot tell one about the children. How is myfavorite, Tanya? Quite a big girl, I expect?”“Yes, she’s very tall,” Darya Alexandrovna answered shortly,surprised herself that she should respond so coolly about her children.“We are having a delightful stay at the Levins’,” she added.“Oh, if I had known,” said Anna, “that you do not despiseme!... You might have all come to us. Stiva’s an old friend and a greatfriend of Alexey’s, you know,” she added, and suddenly she blushed.“Yes, but we are all....” Dolly answered in confusion.“But in my delight I’m talking nonsense. The one thing, darling, isthat I am so glad to have you!” said Anna, kissing her again. “Youhaven’t told me yet how and what you think about me, and I keep wantingto know. But I’m glad you will see me as I am. The chief thing Ishouldn’t like would be for people to imagine I want to prove anything. Idon’t want to prove anything; I merely want to live, to do no one harmbut myself. I have the right to do that, haven’t I? But it is a bigsubject, and we’ll talk over everything properly later. Now I’ll goand dress and send a maid to you.”Chapter 19Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna, with a good housewife’s eye, scanned herroom. All she had seen in entering the house and walking through it, and allshe saw now in her room, gave her an impression of wealth and sumptuousness andof that modern European luxury of which she had only read in English novels,but had never seen in Russia and in the country. Everything was new from thenew French hangings on the walls to the carpet which covered the whole floor.The bed had a spring mattress, and a special sort of bolster and silkpillowcases on the little pillows. The marble washstand, the dressing table,the little sofa, the tables, the bronze clock on the chimney piece, the windowcurtains, and the portières were all new and expensive.The smart maid, who came in to offer her services, with her hair done up high,and a gown more fashionable than Dolly’s, was as new and expensive as thewhole room. Darya Alexandrovna liked her neatness, her deferential and obligingmanners, but she felt ill at ease with her. She felt ashamed of her seeing thepatched dressing jacket that had unluckily been packed by mistake for her. Shewas ashamed of the very patches and darned places of which she had been soproud at home. At home it had been so clear that for six dressing jackets therewould be needed twenty-four yards of nainsook at sixteen pence the yard, whichwas a matter of thirty shillings besides the cutting-out and making, and thesethirty shillings had been saved. But before the maid she felt, if not exactlyashamed, at least uncomfortable.Darya Alexandrovna had a great sense of relief when Annushka, whom she hadknown for years, walked in. The smart maid was sent for to go to her mistress,and Annushka remained with Darya Alexandrovna.Annushka was obviously much pleased at that lady’s arrival, and began tochatter away without a pause. Dolly observed that she was longing to expressher opinion in regard to her mistress’s position, especially as to thelove and devotion of the count to Anna Arkadyevna, but Dolly carefullyinterrupted her whenever she began to speak about this.“I grew up with Anna Arkadyevna; my lady’s dearer to me thananything. Well, it’s not for us to judge. And, to be sure, there seems somuch love....”“Kindly pour out the water for me to wash now, please,” DaryaAlexandrovna cut her short.“Certainly. We’ve two women kept specially for washing smallthings, but most of the linen’s done by machinery. The count goes intoeverything himself. Ah, what a husband!...”Dolly was glad when Anna came in, and by her entrance put a stop toAnnushka’s gossip.Anna had put on a very simple batiste gown. Dolly scrutinized that simple gownattentively. She knew what it meant, and the price at which such simplicity wasobtained.“An old friend,” said Anna of Annushka.Anna was not embarrassed now. She was perfectly composed and at ease. Dolly sawthat she had now completely recovered from the impression her arrival had madeon her, and had assumed that superficial, careless tone which, as it were,closed the door on that compartment in which her deeper feelings and ideas werekept.“Well, Anna, and how is your little girl?” asked Dolly.“Annie?” (This was what she called her little daughter Anna.)“Very well. She has got on wonderfully. Would you like to see her? Come,I’ll show her to you. We had a terrible bother,” she began tellingher, “over nurses. We had an Italian wet-nurse. A good creature, but sostupid! We wanted to get rid of her, but the baby is so used to her thatwe’ve gone on keeping her still.”“But how have you managed?...” Dolly was beginning a question as towhat name the little girl would have; but noticing a sudden frown onAnna’s face, she changed the drift of her question.“How did you manage? have you weaned her yet?”But Anna had understood.“You didn’t mean to ask that? You meant to ask about her surname.Yes? That worries Alexey. She has no name—that is, she’s aKarenina,” said Anna, dropping her eyelids till nothing could be seen butthe eyelashes meeting. “But we’ll talk about all that later,”her face suddenly brightening. “Come, I’ll show you her. Elleest très gentille. She crawls now.”In the nursery the luxury which had impressed Dolly in the whole house struckher still more. There were little go-carts ordered from England, and appliancesfor learning to walk, and a sofa after the fashion of a billiard table,purposely constructed for crawling, and swings and baths, all of specialpattern, and modern. They were all English, solid, and of good make, andobviously very expensive. The room was large, and very light and lofty.When they went in, the baby, with nothing on but her little smock, was sittingin a little elbow chair at the table, having her dinner of broth, which she wasspilling all over her little chest. The baby was being fed, and the Russiannursery maid was evidently sharing her meal. Neither the wet-nurse nor thehead-nurse were there; they were in the next room, from which came the sound oftheir conversation in the queer French which was their only means ofcommunication.Hearing Anna’s voice, a smart, tall, English nurse with a disagreeableface and a dissolute expression walked in at the door, hurriedly shaking herfair curls, and immediately began to defend herself though Anna had not foundfault with her. At every word Anna said, the English nurse said hurriedlyseveral times, “Yes, my lady.”The rosy baby with her black eyebrows and hair, her sturdy red little body withtight goose-flesh skin, delighted Darya Alexandrovna in spite of the crossexpression with which she stared at the stranger. She positively envied thebaby’s healthy appearance. She was delighted, too, at the baby’scrawling. Not one of her own children had crawled like that. When the baby wasput on the carpet and its little dress tucked up behind, it was wonderfullycharming. Looking round like some little wild animal at the grown-up big peoplewith her bright black eyes, she smiled, unmistakably pleased at their admiringher, and holding her legs sideways, she pressed vigorously on her arms, andrapidly drew her whole back up after, and then made another step forward withher little arms.But the whole atmosphere of the nursery, and especially the English nurse,Darya Alexandrovna did not like at all. It was only on the supposition that nogood nurse would have entered so irregular a household as Anna’s thatDarya Alexandrovna could explain to herself how Anna with her insight intopeople could take such an unprepossessing, disreputable-looking woman as nurseto her child.Besides, from a few words that were dropped, Darya Alexandrovna saw at oncethat Anna, the two nurses, and the child had no common existence, and that themother’s visit was something exceptional. Anna wanted to get the baby herplaything, and could not find it.Most amazing of all was the fact that on being asked how many teeth the babyhad, Anna answered wrong, and knew nothing about the two last teeth.“I sometimes feel sorry I’m so superfluous here,” said Anna,going out of the nursery and holding up her skirt so as to escape the playthingstanding in the doorway. “It was very different with my firstchild.”“I expected it to be the other way,” said Darya Alexandrovna shyly.“Oh, no! By the way, do you know I saw Seryozha?” said Anna,screwing up her eyes, as though looking at something far away. “Butwe’ll talk about that later. You wouldn’t believe it, I’mlike a hungry beggar woman when a full dinner is set before her, and she doesnot know what to begin on first. The dinner is you, and the talks I have beforeme with you, which I could never have with anyone else; and I don’t knowwhich subject to begin upon first. Mais je ne vous ferai grâce de rien.I must have everything out with you.”“Oh, I ought to give you a sketch of the company you will meet withus,” she went on. “I’ll begin with the ladies. PrincessVarvara—you know her, and I know your opinion and Stiva’s abouther. Stiva says the whole aim of her existence is to prove her superiority overAuntie Katerina Pavlovna: that’s all true; but she’s a good-naturedwoman, and I am so grateful to her. In Petersburg there was a moment when achaperon was absolutely essential for me. Then she turned up. But really she isgood-natured. She did a great deal to alleviate my position. I see youdon’t understand all the difficulty of my position ... there inPetersburg,” she added. “Here I’m perfectly at ease andhappy. Well, of that later on, though. Then Sviazhsky—he’s themarshal of the district, and he’s a very good sort of a man, but he wantsto get something out of Alexey. You understand, with his property, now that weare settled in the country, Alexey can exercise great influence. Thenthere’s Tushkevitch—you have seen him, you know—Betsy’sadmirer. Now he’s been thrown over and he’s come to see us. AsAlexey says, he’s one of those people who are very pleasant if oneaccepts them for what they try to appear to be, et puis il est comme ilfaut, as Princess Varvara says. Then Veslovsky ... you know him. A verynice boy,” she said, and a sly smile curved her lips. “What’sthis wild story about him and the Levins? Veslovsky told Alexey about it, andwe don’t believe it. Il est très gentil et naïf,” she saidagain with the same smile. “Men need occupation, and Alexey needs acircle, so I value all these people. We have to have the house lively and gay,so that Alexey may not long for any novelty. Then you’ll see thesteward—a German, a very good fellow, and he understands his work. Alexeyhas a very high opinion of him. Then the doctor, a young man, not quite aNihilist perhaps, but you know, eats with his knife ... but a very good doctor.Then the architect.... Une petite cour!”Chapter 20“Here’s Dolly for you, princess, you were so anxious to seeher,” said Anna, coming out with Darya Alexandrovna onto the stoneterrace where Princess Varvara was sitting in the shade at an embroidery frame,working at a cover for Count Alexey Kirillovitch’s easy chair. “Shesays she doesn’t want anything before dinner, but please order some lunchfor her, and I’ll go and look for Alexey and bring them all in.”Princess Varvara gave Dolly a cordial and rather patronizing reception, andbegan at once explaining to her that she was living with Anna because she hadalways cared more for her than her sister Katerina Pavlovna, the aunt that hadbrought Anna up, and that now, when everyone had abandoned Anna, she thought ither duty to help her in this most difficult period of transition.“Her husband will give her a divorce, and then I shall go back to mysolitude; but now I can be of use, and I am doing my duty, however difficult itmay be for me—not like some other people. And how sweet it is of you, howright of you to have come! They live like the best of married couples;it’s for God to judge them, not for us. And didn’t Biryuzovsky andMadame Avenieva ... and Sam Nikandrov, and Vassiliev and Madame Mamonova, andLiza Neptunova.... Did no one say anything about them? And it has ended by theirbeing received by everyone. And then, c’est un intérieur si joli, sicomme il faut. Tout-à-fait à l’anglaise. On se réunit le matin aubreakfast, et puis on se sépare. Everyone does as he pleases tilldinner time. Dinner at seven o’clock. Stiva did very rightly to send you.He needs their support. You know that through his mother and brother he can doanything. And then they do so much good. He didn’t tell you about hishospital? Ce sera admirable—everything from Paris.”Their conversation was interrupted by Anna, who had found the men of the partyin the billiard room, and returned with them to the terrace. There was still along time before the dinner-hour, it was exquisite weather, and so severaldifferent methods of spending the next two hours were proposed. There were verymany methods of passing the time at Vozdvizhenskoe, and these were all unlikethose in use at Pokrovskoe.“Une partie de lawn-tennis,” Veslovsky proposed, with hishandsome smile. “We’ll be partners again, Anna Arkadyevna.”“No, it’s too hot; better stroll about the garden and have a row inthe boat, show Darya Alexandrovna the river banks.” Vronsky proposed.“I agree to anything,” said Sviazhsky.“I imagine that what Dolly would like best would be astroll—wouldn’t you? And then the boat, perhaps,” said Anna.So it was decided. Veslovsky and Tushkevitch went off to the bathing place,promising to get the boat ready and to wait there for them.They walked along the path in two couples, Anna with Sviazhsky, and Dolly withVronsky. Dolly was a little embarrassed and anxious in the new surroundings inwhich she found herself. Abstractly, theoretically, she did not merely justify,she positively approved of Anna’s conduct. As is indeed not unfrequentwith women of unimpeachable virtue, weary of the monotony of respectableexistence, at a distance she not only excused illicit love, she positivelyenvied it. Besides, she loved Anna with all her heart. But seeing Anna inactual life among these strangers, with this fashionable tone that was so newto Darya Alexandrovna, she felt ill at ease. What she disliked particularly wasseeing Princess Varvara ready to overlook everything for the sake of thecomforts she enjoyed.As a general principle, abstractly, Dolly approved of Anna’s action; butto see the man for whose sake her action had been taken was disagreeable toher. Moreover, she had never liked Vronsky. She thought him very proud, and sawnothing in him of which he could be proud except his wealth. But against herown will, here in his own house, he overawed her more than ever, and she couldnot be at ease with him. She felt with him the same feeling she had had withthe maid about her dressing jacket. Just as with the maid she had felt notexactly ashamed, but embarrassed at her darns, so she felt with him not exactlyashamed, but embarrassed at herself.Dolly was ill at ease, and tried to find a subject of conversation. Even thoughshe supposed that, through his pride, praise of his house and garden would besure to be disagreeable to him, she did all the same tell him how much sheliked his house.“Yes, it’s a very fine building, and in the good old-fashionedstyle,” he said.“I like so much the court in front of the steps. Was that alwaysso?”“Oh, no!” he said, and his face beamed with pleasure. “If youcould only have seen that court last spring!”And he began, at first rather diffidently, but more and more carried away bythe subject as he went on, to draw her attention to the various details of thedecoration of his house and garden. It was evident that, having devoted a greatdeal of trouble to improve and beautify his home, Vronsky felt a need to showoff the improvements to a new person, and was genuinely delighted at DaryaAlexandrovna’s praise.“If you would care to look at the hospital, and are not tired, indeed,it’s not far. Shall we go?” he said, glancing into her face toconvince himself that she was not bored. “Are you coming, Anna?” heturned to her.“We will come, won’t we?” she said, addressing Sviazhsky.“Mais il ne faut pas laisser le pauvre Veslovsky et Tushkevitch semorfondre là dans le bateau. We must send and tell them.”“Yes, this is a monument he is setting up here,” said Anna, turningto Dolly with that sly smile of comprehension with which she had previouslytalked about the hospital.“Oh, it’s a work of real importance!” said Sviazhsky. But toshow he was not trying to ingratiate himself with Vronsky, he promptly addedsome slightly critical remarks.“I wonder, though, count,” he said, “that while you do somuch for the health of the peasants, you take so little interest in theschools.”“C’est devenu tellement commun les écoles,” saidVronsky. “You understand it’s not on that account, but it justhappens so, my interest has been diverted elsewhere. This way then to thehospital,” he said to Darya Alexandrovna, pointing to a turning out ofthe avenue.The ladies put up their parasols and turned into the side path. After goingdown several turnings, and going through a little gate, Darya Alexandrovna sawstanding on rising ground before her a large pretentious-looking red building,almost finished. The iron roof, which was not yet painted, shone with dazzlingbrightness in the sunshine. Beside the finished building another had beenbegun, surrounded by scaffolding. Workmen in aprons, standing on scaffolds,were laying bricks, pouring mortar out of vats, and smoothing it with trowels.“How quickly work gets done with you!” said Sviazhsky. “WhenI was here last time the roof was not on.”“By the autumn it will all be ready. Inside almost everything isdone,” said Anna.“And what’s this new building?”“That’s the house for the doctor and the dispensary,”answered Vronsky, seeing the architect in a short jacket coming towards him;and excusing himself to the ladies, he went to meet him.Going round a hole where the workmen were slaking lime, he stood still with thearchitect and began talking rather warmly.“The front is still too low,” he said to Anna, who had asked whatwas the matter.“I said the foundation ought to be raised,” said Anna.“Yes, of course it would have been much better, Anna Arkadyevna,”said the architect, “but now it’s too late.”“Yes, I take a great interest in it,” Anna answered Sviazhsky, whowas expressing his surprise at her knowledge of architecture. “This newbuilding ought to have been in harmony with the hospital. It was anafterthought, and was begun without a plan.”Vronsky, having finished his talk with the architect, joined the ladies, andled them inside the hospital.Although they were still at work on the cornices outside and were painting onthe ground floor, upstairs almost all the rooms were finished. Going up thebroad cast-iron staircase to the landing, they walked into the first largeroom. The walls were stuccoed to look like marble, the huge plate-glass windowswere already in, only the parquet floor was not yet finished, and thecarpenters, who were planing a block of it, left their work, taking off thebands that fastened their hair, to greet the gentry.“This is the reception room,” said Vronsky. “Here there willbe a desk, tables, and benches, and nothing more.”“This way; let us go in here. Don’t go near the window,” saidAnna, trying the paint to see if it were dry. “Alexey, the paint’sdry already,” she added.From the reception room they went into the corridor. Here Vronsky showed themthe mechanism for ventilation on a novel system. Then he showed them marblebaths, and beds with extraordinary springs. Then he showed them the wards oneafter another, the storeroom, the linen room, then the heating stove of a newpattern, then the trolleys, which would make no noise as they carriedeverything needed along the corridors, and many other things. Sviazhsky, as aconnoisseur in the latest mechanical improvements, appreciated everythingfully. Dolly simply wondered at all she had not seen before, and, anxious tounderstand it all, made minute inquiries about everything, which gave Vronskygreat satisfaction.“Yes, I imagine that this will be the solitary example of a properlyfitted hospital in Russia,” said Sviazhsky.“And won’t you have a lying-in ward?” asked Dolly.“That’s so much needed in the country. I have often....”In spite of his usual courtesy, Vronsky interrupted her.“This is not a lying-in home, but a hospital for the sick, and isintended for all diseases, except infectious complaints,” he said.“Ah! look at this,” and he rolled up to Darya Alexandrovna aninvalid chair that had just been ordered for the convalescents.“Look.” He sat down in the chair and began moving it. “Thepatient can’t walk—still too weak, perhaps, or something wrong withhis legs, but he must have air, and he moves, rolls himself along....”Darya Alexandrovna was interested by everything. She liked everything verymuch, but most of all she liked Vronsky himself with his natural,simple-hearted eagerness. “Yes, he’s a very nice, good man,”she thought several times, not hearing what he said, but looking at him andpenetrating into his expression, while she mentally put herself in Anna’splace. She liked him so much just now with his eager interest that she saw howAnna could be in love with him.Chapter 21“No, I think the princess is tired, and horses don’t interesther,” Vronsky said to Anna, who wanted to go on to the stables, whereSviazhsky wished to see the new stallion. “You go on, while I escort theprincess home, and we’ll have a little talk,” he said, “ifyou would like that?” he added, turning to her.“I know nothing about horses, and I shall be delighted,” answeredDarya Alexandrovna, rather astonished.She saw by Vronsky’s face that he wanted something from her. She was notmistaken. As soon as they had passed through the little gate back into thegarden, he looked in the direction Anna had taken, and having made sure thatshe could neither hear nor see them, he began:“You guess that I have something I want to say to you,” he said,looking at her with laughing eyes. “I am not wrong in believing you to bea friend of Anna’s.” He took off his hat, and taking out hishandkerchief, wiped his head, which was growing bald.Darya Alexandrovna made no answer, and merely stared at him with dismay. Whenshe was left alone with him, she suddenly felt afraid; his laughing eyes andstern expression scared her.The most diverse suppositions as to what he was about to speak of to herflashed into her brain. “He is going to beg me to come to stay with themwith the children, and I shall have to refuse; or to create a set that willreceive Anna in Moscow.... Or isn’t it Vassenka Veslovsky and hisrelations with Anna? Or perhaps about Kitty, that he feels he was toblame?” All her conjectures were unpleasant, but she did not guess whathe really wanted to talk about to her.“You have so much influence with Anna, she is so fond of you,” hesaid; “do help me.”Darya Alexandrovna looked with timid inquiry into his energetic face, whichunder the lime-trees was continually being lighted up in patches by thesunshine, and then passing into complete shadow again. She waited for him tosay more, but he walked in silence beside her, scratching with his cane in thegravel.“You have come to see us, you, the only woman of Anna’s formerfriends—I don’t count Princess Varvara—but I know that youhave done this not because you regard our position as normal, but because,understanding all the difficulty of the position, you still love her and wantto be a help to her. Have I understood you rightly?” he asked, lookinground at her.“Oh, yes,” answered Darya Alexandrovna, putting down her sunshade,“but....”“No,” he broke in, and unconsciously, oblivious of the awkwardposition into which he was putting his companion, he stopped abruptly, so thatshe had to stop short too. “No one feels more deeply and intensely than Ido all the difficulty of Anna’s position; and that you may wellunderstand, if you do me the honor of supposing I have any heart. I am to blamefor that position, and that is why I feel it.”“I understand,” said Darya Alexandrovna, involuntarily admiring thesincerity and firmness with which he said this. “But just because youfeel yourself responsible, you exaggerate it, I am afraid,” she said.“Her position in the world is difficult, I can well understand.”“In the world it is hell!” he brought out quickly, frowning darkly.“You can’t imagine moral sufferings greater than what she wentthrough in Petersburg in that fortnight ... and I beg you to believe it.”“Yes, but here, so long as neither Anna ... nor you misssociety....”“Society!” he said contemptuously, “how could I misssociety?”“So far—and it may be so always—you are happy and at peace. Isee in Anna that she is happy, perfectly happy, she has had time to tell me somuch already,” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling; and involuntarily, asshe said this, at the same moment a doubt entered her mind whether Anna reallywere happy.But Vronsky, it appeared, had no doubts on that score.“Yes, yes,” he said, “I know that she has revived after allher sufferings; she is happy. She is happy in the present. But I?... I amafraid of what is before us ... I beg your pardon, you would like to walkon?”“No, I don’t mind.”“Well, then, let us sit here.”Darya Alexandrovna sat down on a garden seat in a corner of the avenue. Hestood up facing her.“I see that she is happy,” he repeated, and the doubt whether shewere happy sank more deeply into Darya Alexandrovna’s mind. “Butcan it last? Whether we have acted rightly or wrongly is another question, butthe die is cast,” he said, passing from Russian to French, “and weare bound together for life. We are united by all the ties of love that we holdmost sacred. We have a child, we may have other children. But the law and allthe conditions of our position are such that thousands of complications arisewhich she does not see and does not want to see. And that one can wellunderstand. But I can’t help seeing them. My daughter is by law not mydaughter, but Karenin’s. I cannot bear this falsity!” he said, witha vigorous gesture of refusal, and he looked with gloomy inquiry towards DaryaAlexandrovna.She made no answer, but simply gazed at him. He went on:“One day a son may be born, my son, and he will be legally a Karenin; hewill not be the heir of my name nor of my property, and however happy we may bein our home life and however many children we may have, there will be no realtie between us. They will be Karenins. You can understand the bitterness andhorror of this position! I have tried to speak of this to Anna. It irritatesher. She does not understand, and to her I cannot speak plainly of all this.Now look at another side. I am happy, happy in her love, but I must haveoccupation. I have found occupation, and am proud of what I am doing andconsider it nobler than the pursuits of my former companions at court and inthe army. And most certainly I would not change the work I am doing for theirs.I am working here, settled in my own place, and I am happy and contented, andwe need nothing more to make us happy. I love my work here. Ce n’estpas un pis-aller, on the contrary....”Darya Alexandrovna noticed that at this point in his explanation he grewconfused, and she did not quite understand this digression, but she felt thathaving once begun to speak of matters near his heart, of which he could notspeak to Anna, he was now making a clean breast of everything, and that thequestion of his pursuits in the country fell into the same category of mattersnear his heart, as the question of his relations with Anna.“Well, I will go on,” he said, collecting himself. “The greatthing is that as I work I want to have a conviction that what I am doing willnot die with me, that I shall have heirs to come after me,—and this Ihave not. Conceive the position of a man who knows that his children, thechildren of the woman he loves, will not be his, but will belong to someone whohates them and cares nothing about them! It is awful!”He paused, evidently much moved.“Yes, indeed, I see that. But what can Anna do?” queried DaryaAlexandrovna.“Yes, that brings me to the object of my conversation,” he said,calming himself with an effort. “Anna can, it depends on her.... Even topetition the Tsar for legitimization, a divorce is essential. And that dependson Anna. Her husband agreed to a divorce—at that time your husband hadarranged it completely. And now, I know, he would not refuse it. It is only amatter of writing to him. He said plainly at that time that if she expressedthe desire, he would not refuse. Of course,” he said gloomily, “itis one of those Pharisaical cruelties of which only such heartless men arecapable. He knows what agony any recollection of him must give her, and knowingher, he must have a letter from her. I can understand that it is agony to her.But the matter is of such importance, that one must passer par-dessus toutesces finesses de sentiment. Il y va du bonheur et de l’existenced’Anne et de ses enfants. I won’t speak of myself, thoughit’s hard for me, very hard,” he said, with an expression as thoughhe were threatening someone for its being hard for him. “And so it is,princess, that I am shamelessly clutching at you as an anchor of salvation.Help me to persuade her to write to him and ask for a divorce.”“Yes, of course,” Darya Alexandrovna said dreamily, as she vividlyrecalled her last interview with Alexey Alexandrovitch. “Yes, ofcourse,” she repeated with decision, thinking of Anna.“Use your influence with her, make her write. I don’tlike—I’m almost unable to speak about this to her.”“Very well, I will talk to her. But how is it she does not think of itherself?” said Darya Alexandrovna, and for some reason she suddenly atthat point recalled Anna’s strange new habit of half-closing her eyes.And she remembered that Anna drooped her eyelids just when the deeper questionsof life were touched upon. “Just as though she half-shut her eyes to herown life, so as not to see everything,” thought Dolly. “Yes,indeed, for my own sake and for hers I will talk to her,” Dolly said inreply to his look of gratitude.They got up and walked to the house.Chapter 22When Anna found Dolly at home before her, she looked intently in her eyes, asthough questioning her about the talk she had had with Vronsky, but she made noinquiry in words.“I believe it’s dinner time,” she said. “We’venot seen each other at all yet. I am reckoning on the evening. Now I want to goand dress. I expect you do too; we all got splashed at the buildings.”Dolly went to her room and she felt amused. To change her dress was impossible,for she had already put on her best dress. But in order to signify in some wayher preparation for dinner, she asked the maid to brush her dress, changed hercuffs and tie, and put some lace on her head.“This is all I can do,” she said with a smile to Anna, who came into her in a third dress, again of extreme simplicity.“Yes, we are too formal here,” she said, as it were apologizing forher magnificence. “Alexey is delighted at your visit, as he rarely is atanything. He has completely lost his heart to you,” she added.“You’re not tired?”There was no time for talking about anything before dinner. Going into thedrawing-room they found Princess Varvara already there, and the gentlemen ofthe party in black frock-coats. The architect wore a swallow-tail coat. Vronskypresented the doctor and the steward to his guest. The architect he had alreadyintroduced to her at the hospital.A stout butler, resplendent with a smoothly shaven round chin and a starchedwhite cravat, announced that dinner was ready, and the ladies got up. Vronskyasked Sviazhsky to take in Anna Arkadyevna, and himself offered his arm toDolly. Veslovsky was before Tushkevitch in offering his arm to PrincessVarvara, so that Tushkevitch with the steward and the doctor walked in alone.The dinner, the dining-room, the service, the waiting at table, the wine, andthe food, were not simply in keeping with the general tone of modern luxurythroughout all the house, but seemed even more sumptuous and modern. DaryaAlexandrovna watched this luxury which was novel to her, and as a goodhousekeeper used to managing a household—although she never dreamed ofadapting anything she saw to her own household, as it was all in a style ofluxury far above her own manner of living—she could not help scrutinizingevery detail, and wondering how and by whom it was all done. VassenkaVeslovsky, her husband, and even Sviazhsky, and many other people she knew,would never have considered this question, and would have readily believed whatevery well-bred host tries to make his guests feel, that is, that all that iswell-ordered in his house has cost him, the host, no trouble whatever, butcomes of itself. Darya Alexandrovna was well aware that even porridge for thechildren’s breakfast does not come of itself, and that therefore, whereso complicated and magnificent a style of luxury was maintained, someone mustgive earnest attention to its organization. And from the glance with whichAlexey Kirillovitch scanned the table, from the way he nodded to the butler,and offered Darya Alexandrovna her choice between cold soup and hot soup, shesaw that it was all organized and maintained by the care of the master of thehouse himself. It was evident that it all rested no more upon Anna than uponVeslovsky. She, Sviazhsky, the princess, and Veslovsky, were equally guests,with light hearts enjoying what had been arranged for them.Anna was the hostess only in conducting the conversation. The conversation wasa difficult one for the lady of the house at a small table with personspresent, like the steward and the architect, belonging to a completelydifferent world, struggling not to be overawed by an elegance to which theywere unaccustomed, and unable to sustain a large share in the generalconversation. But this difficult conversation Anna directed with her usual tactand naturalness, and indeed she did so with actual enjoyment, as DaryaAlexandrovna observed. The conversation began about the row Tushkevitch andVeslovsky had taken alone together in the boat, and Tushkevitch begandescribing the last boat races in Petersburg at the Yacht Club. But Anna,seizing the first pause, at once turned to the architect to draw him out of hissilence.“Nikolay Ivanitch was struck,” she said, meaning Sviazhsky,“at the progress the new building had made since he was here last; but Iam there every day, and every day I wonder at the rate at which itgrows.”“It’s first-rate working with his excellency,” said thearchitect with a smile (he was respectful and composed, though with a sense ofhis own dignity). “It’s a very different matter to have to do withthe district authorities. Where one would have to write out sheaves of papers,here I call upon the count, and in three words we settle the business.”“The American way of doing business,” said Sviazhsky, with a smile.“Yes, there they build in a rational fashion....”The conversation passed to the misuse of political power in the United States,but Anna quickly brought it round to another topic, so as to draw the stewardinto talk.“Have you ever seen a reaping machine?” she said, addressing DaryaAlexandrovna. “We had just ridden over to look at one when we met.It’s the first time I ever saw one.”“How do they work?” asked Dolly.“Exactly like little scissors. A plank and a lot of little scissors. Likethis.”Anna took a knife and fork in her beautiful white hands covered with rings, andbegan showing how the machine worked. It was clear that she saw nothing wouldbe understood from her explanation; but aware that her talk was pleasant andher hands beautiful she went on explaining.“More like little penknives,” Veslovsky said playfully, nevertaking his eyes off her.Anna gave a just perceptible smile, but made no answer. “Isn’t ittrue, Karl Fedoritch, that it’s just like little scissors?” shesaid to the steward.“Oh, ja,” answered the German. “Es ist ein ganzeinfaches Ding,” and he began to explain the construction of themachine.“It’s a pity it doesn’t bind too. I saw one at the Viennaexhibition, which binds with a wire,” said Sviazhsky. “They wouldbe more profitable in use.”“Es kommt drauf an.... Der Preis vom Draht muss ausgerechnetwerden.” And the German, roused from his taciturnity, turned toVronsky. “Das lässt sich ausrechnen, Erlaucht.” The Germanwas just feeling in the pocket where were his pencil and the notebook he alwayswrote in, but recollecting that he was at a dinner, and observingVronsky’s chilly glance, he checked himself. “Zu compliziert,macht zu viel Klopot,” he concluded.“Wünscht man Dochots, so hat man auch Klopots,” saidVassenka Veslovsky, mimicking the German. “J’adorel’allemand,” he addressed Anna again with the same smile.“Cessez,” she said with playful severity.“We expected to find you in the fields, Vassily Semyonitch,” shesaid to the doctor, a sickly-looking man; “have you been there?”“I went there, but I had taken flight,” the doctor answered withgloomy jocoseness.“Then you’ve taken a good constitutional?”“Splendid!”“Well, and how was the old woman? I hope it’s not typhus?”“Typhus it is not, but it’s taking a bad turn.”“What a pity!” said Anna, and having thus paid the dues of civilityto her domestic circle, she turned to her own friends.“It would be a hard task, though, to construct a machine from yourdescription, Anna Arkadyevna,” Sviazhsky said jestingly.“Oh, no, why so?” said Anna with a smile that betrayed that sheknew there was something charming in her disquisitions upon the machine thathad been noticed by Sviazhsky. This new trait of girlish coquettishness made anunpleasant impression on Dolly.“But Anna Arkadyevna’s knowledge of architecture ismarvelous,” said Tushkevitch.“To be sure, I heard Anna Arkadyevna talking yesterday about plinths anddamp-courses,” said Veslovsky. “Have I got it right?”“There’s nothing marvelous about it, when one sees and hears somuch of it,” said Anna. “But, I dare say, you don’t even knowwhat houses are made of?”Darya Alexandrovna saw that Anna disliked the tone of raillery that existedbetween her and Veslovsky, but fell in with it against her will.Vronsky acted in this matter quite differently from Levin. He obviouslyattached no significance to Veslovsky’s chattering; on the contrary, heencouraged his jests.“Come now, tell us, Veslovsky, how are the stones held together?”“By cement, of course.”“Bravo! And what is cement?”“Oh, some sort of paste ... no, putty,” said Veslovsky, raising ageneral laugh.The company at dinner, with the exception of the doctor, the architect, and thesteward, who remained plunged in gloomy silence, kept up a conversation thatnever paused, glancing off one subject, fastening on another, and at timesstinging one or the other to the quick. Once Darya Alexandrovna felt wounded tothe quick, and got so hot that she positively flushed and wondered afterwardswhether she had said anything extreme or unpleasant. Sviazhsky began talking ofLevin, describing his strange view that machinery is simply pernicious in itseffects on Russian agriculture.“I have not the pleasure of knowing this M. Levin,” Vronsky said,smiling, “but most likely he has never seen the machines he condemns; orif he has seen and tried any, it must have been after a queer fashion, someRussian imitation, not a machine from abroad. What sort of views can anyonehave on such a subject?”“Turkish views, in general,” Veslovsky said, turning to Anna with asmile.“I can’t defend his opinions,” Darya Alexandrovna said,firing up; “but I can say that he’s a highly cultivated man, and ifhe were here he would know very well how to answer you, though I am not capableof doing so.”“I like him extremely, and we are great friends,” Sviazhsky said,smiling good-naturedly. “Mais pardon, il est un petit peu toqué;he maintains, for instance, that district councils and arbitration boards areall of no use, and he is unwilling to take part in anything.”“It’s our Russian apathy,” said Vronsky, pouring water froman iced decanter into a delicate glass on a high stem; “we’ve nosense of the duties our privileges impose upon us, and so we refuse torecognize these duties.”“I know no man more strict in the performance of his duties,” saidDarya Alexandrovna, irritated by Vronsky’s tone of superiority.“For my part,” pursued Vronsky, who was evidently for some reasonor other keenly affected by this conversation, “such as I am, I am, onthe contrary, extremely grateful for the honor they have done me, thanks toNikolay Ivanitch” (he indicated Sviazhsky), “in electing me ajustice of the peace. I consider that for me the duty of being present at thesession, of judging some peasants’ quarrel about a horse, is as importantas anything I can do. And I shall regard it as an honor if they elect me forthe district council. It’s only in that way I can pay for the advantagesI enjoy as a landowner. Unluckily they don’t understand the weight thatthe big landowners ought to have in the state.”It was strange to Darya Alexandrovna to hear how serenely confident he was ofbeing right at his own table. She thought how Levin, who believed the opposite,was just as positive in his opinions at his own table. But she loved Levin, andso she was on his side.“So we can reckon upon you, count, for the coming elections?” saidSviazhsky. “But you must come a little beforehand, so as to be on thespot by the eighth. If you would do me the honor to stop with me.”“I rather agree with your beau-frère,” said Anna, “though notquite on the same ground as he,” she added with a smile. “I’mafraid that we have too many of these public duties in these latter days. Justas in old days there were so many government functionaries that one had to callin a functionary for every single thing, so now everyone’s doing somesort of public duty. Alexey has been here now six months, and he’s amember, I do believe, of five or six different public bodies. Du train quecela va, the whole time will be wasted on it. And I’m afraid thatwith such a multiplicity of these bodies, they’ll end in being a mereform. How many are you a member of, Nikolay Ivanitch?” she turned toSviazhsky—“over twenty, I fancy.”Anna spoke lightly, but irritation could be discerned in her tone. DaryaAlexandrovna, watching Anna and Vronsky attentively, detected it instantly. Shenoticed, too, that as she spoke Vronsky’s face had immediately taken aserious and obstinate expression. Noticing this, and that Princess Varvara atonce made haste to change the conversation by talking of Petersburgacquaintances, and remembering what Vronsky had without apparent connectionsaid in the garden of his work in the country, Dolly surmised that thisquestion of public activity was connected with some deep private disagreementbetween Anna and Vronsky.The dinner, the wine, the decoration of the table were all very good; but itwas all like what Darya Alexandrovna had seen at formal dinners and balls whichof late years had become quite unfamiliar to her; it all had the sameimpersonal and constrained character, and so on an ordinary day and in a littlecircle of friends it made a disagreeable impression on her.After dinner they sat on the terrace, then they proceeded to play lawn tennis.The players, divided into two parties, stood on opposite sides of a tightlydrawn net with gilt poles on the carefully leveled and rolled croquet-ground.Darya Alexandrovna made an attempt to play, but it was a long time before shecould understand the game, and by the time she did understand it, she was sotired that she sat down with Princess Varvara and simply looked on at theplayers. Her partner, Tushkevitch, gave up playing too, but the others kept thegame up for a long time. Sviazhsky and Vronsky both played very well andseriously. They kept a sharp lookout on the balls served to them, and withouthaste or getting in each other’s way, they ran adroitly up to them,waited for the rebound, and neatly and accurately returned them over the net.Veslovsky played worse than the others. He was too eager, but he kept theplayers lively with his high spirits. His laughter and outcries never paused.Like the other men of the party, with the ladies’ permission, he took offhis coat, and his solid, comely figure in his white shirt-sleeves, with his redperspiring face and his impulsive movements, made a picture that imprinteditself vividly on the memory.When Darya Alexandrovna lay in bed that night, as soon as she closed her eyes,she saw Vassenka Veslovsky flying about the croquet ground.During the game Darya Alexandrovna was not enjoying herself. She did not likethe light tone of raillery that was kept up all the time between VassenkaVeslovsky and Anna, and the unnaturalness altogether of grown-up people, allalone without children, playing at a child’s game. But to avoid breakingup the party and to get through the time somehow, after a rest she joined thegame again, and pretended to be enjoying it. All that day it seemed to her asthough she were acting in a theater with actors cleverer than she, and that herbad acting was spoiling the whole performance. She had come with the intentionof staying two days, if all went well. But in the evening, during the game, shemade up her mind that she would go home next day. The maternal cares andworries, which she had so hated on the way, now, after a day spent withoutthem, struck her in quite another light, and tempted her back to them.When, after evening tea and a row by night in the boat, Darya Alexandrovna wentalone to her room, took off her dress, and began arranging her thin hair forthe night, she had a great sense of relief.It was positively disagreeable to her to think that Anna was coming to see herimmediately. She longed to be alone with her own thoughts.Chapter 23Dolly was wanting to go to bed when Anna came in to see her, attired for thenight. In the course of the day Anna had several times begun to speak ofmatters near her heart, and every time after a few words she had stopped:“Afterwards, by ourselves, we’ll talk about everything. I’vegot so much I want to tell you,” she said.Now they were by themselves, and Anna did not know what to talk about. She satin the window looking at Dolly, and going over in her own mind all the storesof intimate talk which had seemed so inexhaustible beforehand, and she foundnothing. At that moment it seemed to her that everything had been said already.“Well, what of Kitty?” she said with a heavy sigh, lookingpenitently at Dolly. “Tell me the truth, Dolly: isn’t she angrywith me?”“Angry? Oh, no!” said Darya Alexandrovna, smiling.“But she hates me, despises me?”“Oh, no! But you know that sort of thing isn’t forgiven.”“Yes, yes,” said Anna, turning away and looking out of the openwindow. “But I was not to blame. And who is to blame? What’s themeaning of being to blame? Could it have been otherwise? What do you think?Could it possibly have happened that you didn’t become the wife ofStiva?”“Really, I don’t know. But this is what I want you to tellme....”“Yes, yes, but we’ve not finished about Kitty. Is she happy?He’s a very nice man, they say.”“He’s much more than very nice. I don’t know a betterman.”“Ah, how glad I am! I’m so glad! Much more than very nice,”she repeated.Dolly smiled.“But tell me about yourself. We’ve a great deal to talk about. AndI’ve had a talk with....” Dolly did not know what to call him. Shefelt it awkward to call him either the count or Alexey Kirillovitch.“With Alexey,” said Anna, “I know what you talked about. ButI wanted to ask you directly what you think of me, of my life?”“How am I to say like that straight off? I really don’tknow.”“No, tell me all the same.... You see my life. But you mustn’tforget that you’re seeing us in the summer, when you have come to us andwe are not alone.... But we came here early in the spring, lived quite alone,and shall be alone again, and I desire nothing better. But imagine me livingalone without him, alone, and that will be ... I see by everything that it willoften be repeated, that he will be half the time away from home,” shesaid, getting up and sitting down close by Dolly.“Of course,” she interrupted Dolly, who would have answered,“of course I won’t try to keep him by force. I don’t keep himindeed. The races are just coming, his horses are running, he will go.I’m very glad. But think of me, fancy my position.... But what’sthe use of talking about it?” She smiled. “Well, what did he talkabout with you?”“He spoke of what I want to speak about of myself, and it’s easyfor me to be his advocate; of whether there is not a possibility ... whetheryou could not....” (Darya Alexandrovna hesitated) “correct, improveyour position.... You know how I look at it.... But all the same, if possible,you should get married....”“Divorce, you mean?” said Anna. “Do you know, the only womanwho came to see me in Petersburg was Betsy Tverskaya? You know her, of course?Au fond, c’est la femme la plus depravée qui existe. She had anintrigue with Tushkevitch, deceiving her husband in the basest way. And shetold me that she did not care to know me so long as my position was irregular.Don’t imagine I would compare ... I know you, darling. But I could nothelp remembering.... Well, so what did he say to you?” she repeated.“He said that he was unhappy on your account and his own. Perhaps youwill say that it’s egoism, but what a legitimate and noble egoism. Hewants first of all to legitimize his daughter, and to be your husband, to havea legal right to you.”“What wife, what slave can be so utterly a slave as I, in myposition?” she put in gloomily.“The chief thing he desires ... he desires that you should notsuffer.”“That’s impossible. Well?”“Well, and the most legitimate desire—he wishes that your childrenshould have a name.”“What children?” Anna said, not looking at Dolly, and half closingher eyes.“Annie and those to come....”“He need not trouble on that score; I shall have no more children.”“How can you tell that you won’t?”“I shall not, because I don’t wish it.” And, in spite of allher emotion, Anna smiled, as she caught the naïve expression of curiosity,wonder, and horror on Dolly’s face.“The doctor told me after my illness....”“Impossible!” said Dolly, opening her eyes wide.For her this was one of those discoveries the consequences and deductions fromwhich are so immense that all that one feels for the first instant is that itis impossible to take it all in, and that one will have to reflect a great,great deal upon it.This discovery, suddenly throwing light on all those families of one or twochildren, which had hitherto been so incomprehensible to her, aroused so manyideas, reflections, and contradictory emotions, that she had nothing to say,and simply gazed with wide-open eyes of wonder at Anna. This was the very thingshe had been dreaming of, but now learning that it was possible, she washorrified. She felt that it was too simple a solution of too complicated aproblem.“N’est-ce pas immoral?” was all she said, after abrief pause.“Why so? Think, I have a choice between two alternatives: either to bewith child, that is an invalid, or to be the friend and companion of myhusband—practically my husband,” Anna said in a tone intentionallysuperficial and frivolous.“Yes, yes,” said Darya Alexandrovna, hearing the very arguments shehad used to herself, and not finding the same force in them as before.“For you, for other people,” said Anna, as though divining herthoughts, “there may be reason to hesitate; but for me.... You mustconsider, I am not his wife; he loves me as long as he loves me. And how am Ito keep his love? Not like this!”She moved her white hands in a curve before her waist with extraordinaryrapidity, as happens during moments of excitement; ideas and memories rushedinto Darya Alexandrovna’s head. “I,” she thought, “didnot keep my attraction for Stiva; he left me for others, and the first womanfor whom he betrayed me did not keep him by being always pretty and lively. Hedeserted her and took another. And can Anna attract and keep Count Vronsky inthat way? If that is what he looks for, he will find dresses and manners stillmore attractive and charming. And however white and beautiful her bare armsare, however beautiful her full figure and her eager face under her blackcurls, he will find something better still, just as my disgusting, pitiful, andcharming husband does.”Dolly made no answer, she merely sighed. Anna noticed this sigh, indicatingdissent, and she went on. In her armory she had other arguments so strong thatno answer could be made to them.“Do you say that it’s not right? But you must consider,” shewent on; “you forget my position. How can I desire children? I’mnot speaking of the suffering, I’m not afraid of that. Think only, whatare my children to be? Ill-fated children, who will have to bear astranger’s name. For the very fact of their birth they will be forced tobe ashamed of their mother, their father, their birth.”“But that is just why a divorce is necessary.” But Anna did nothear her. She longed to give utterance to all the arguments with which she hadso many times convinced herself.“What is reason given me for, if I am not to use it to avoid bringingunhappy beings into the world!” She looked at Dolly, but without waitingfor a reply she went on:“I should always feel I had wronged these unhappy children,” shesaid. “If they are not, at any rate they are not unhappy; while if theyare unhappy, I alone should be to blame for it.”These were the very arguments Darya Alexandrovna had used in her ownreflections; but she heard them without understanding them. “How can onewrong creatures that don’t exist?” she thought. And all at once theidea struck her: could it possibly, under any circumstances, have been betterfor her favorite Grisha if he had never existed? And this seemed to her sowild, so strange, that she shook her head to drive away this tangle ofwhirling, mad ideas.“No, I don’t know; it’s not right,” was all she said,with an expression of disgust on her face.“Yes, but you mustn’t forget that you and I.... And besidesthat,” added Anna, in spite of the wealth of her arguments and thepoverty of Dolly’s objections, seeming still to admit that it was notright, “don’t forget the chief point, that I am not now in the sameposition as you. For you the question is: do you desire not to have any morechildren; while for me it is: do I desire to have them? And that’s agreat difference. You must see that I can’t desire it in myposition.”Darya Alexandrovna made no reply. She suddenly felt that she had got far awayfrom Anna; that there lay between them a barrier of questions on which theycould never agree, and about which it was better not to speak.Chapter 24“Then there is all the more reason for you to legalize your position, ifpossible,” said Dolly.“Yes, if possible,” said Anna, speaking all at once in an utterlydifferent tone, subdued and mournful.“Surely you don’t mean a divorce is impossible? I was told yourhusband had consented to it.”“Dolly, I don’t want to talk about that.”“Oh, we won’t then,” Darya Alexandrovna hastened to say,noticing the expression of suffering on Anna’s face. “All I see isthat you take too gloomy a view of things.”“I? Not at all! I’m always bright and happy. You see, je faisdes passions. Veslovsky....”“Yes, to tell the truth, I don’t like Veslovsky’stone,” said Darya Alexandrovna, anxious to change the subject.“Oh, that’s nonsense! It amuses Alexey, and that’s all; buthe’s a boy, and quite under my control. You know, I turn him as I please.It’s just as it might be with your Grisha.... Dolly!”—shesuddenly changed the subject—“you say I take too gloomy a view ofthings. You can’t understand. It’s too awful! I try not to take anyview of it at all.”“But I think you ought to. You ought to do all you can.”“But what can I do? Nothing. You tell me to marry Alexey, and say Idon’t think about it. I don’t think about it!” she repeated,and a flush rose into her face. She got up, straightening her chest, and sighedheavily. With her light step she began pacing up and down the room, stoppingnow and then. “I don’t think of it? Not a day, not an hour passesthat I don’t think of it, and blame myself for thinking of it ... becausethinking of that may drive me mad. Drive me mad!” she repeated.“When I think of it, I can’t sleep without morphine. But nevermind. Let us talk quietly. They tell me, divorce. In the first place, hewon’t give me a divorce. He’s under the influence of Countess LidiaIvanovna now.”Darya Alexandrovna, sitting erect on a chair, turned her head, following Annawith a face of sympathetic suffering.“You ought to make the attempt,” she said softly.“Suppose I make the attempt. What does it mean?” she said,evidently giving utterance to a thought, a thousand times thought over andlearned by heart. “It means that I, hating him, but still recognizingthat I have wronged him—and I consider him magnanimous—that Ihumiliate myself to write to him.... Well, suppose I make the effort; I do it.Either I receive a humiliating refusal or consent.... Well, I have received hisconsent, say....” Anna was at that moment at the furthest end of the room,and she stopped there, doing something to the curtain at the window. “Ireceive his consent, but my ... my son? They won’t give him up to me. Hewill grow up despising me, with his father, whom I’ve abandoned. Do yousee, I love ... equally, I think, but both more than myself—twocreatures, Seryozha and Alexey.”She came out into the middle of the room and stood facing Dolly, with her armspressed tightly across her chest. In her white dressing gown her figure seemedmore than usually grand and broad. She bent her head, and with shining, weteyes looked from under her brows at Dolly, a thin little pitiful figure in herpatched dressing jacket and nightcap, shaking all over with emotion.“It is only those two creatures that I love, and one excludes the other.I can’t have them together, and that’s the only thing I want. Andsince I can’t have that, I don’t care about the rest. I don’tcare about anything, anything. And it will end one way or another, and so Ican’t, I don’t like to talk of it. So don’t blame me,don’t judge me for anything. You can’t with your pure heartunderstand all that I’m suffering.” She went up, sat down besideDolly, and with a guilty look, peeped into her face and took her hand.“What are you thinking? What are you thinking about me? Don’tdespise me. I don’t deserve contempt. I’m simply unhappy. If anyoneis unhappy, I am,” she articulated, and turning away, she burst intotears.Left alone, Darya Alexandrovna said her prayers and went to bed. She had feltfor Anna with all her heart while she was speaking to her, but now she couldnot force herself to think of her. The memories of home and of her childrenrose up in her imagination with a peculiar charm quite new to her, with a sortof new brilliance. That world of her own seemed to her now so sweet andprecious that she would not on any account spend an extra day outside it, andshe made up her mind that she would certainly go back next day.Anna meantime went back to her boudoir, took a wine-glass and dropped into itseveral drops of a medicine, of which the principal ingredient was morphine.After drinking it off and sitting still a little while, she went into herbedroom in a soothed and more cheerful frame of mind.When she went into the bedroom, Vronsky looked intently at her. He was lookingfor traces of the conversation which he knew that, staying so long inDolly’s room, she must have had with her. But in her expression ofrestrained excitement, and of a sort of reserve, he could find nothing but thebeauty that always bewitched him afresh though he was used to it, theconsciousness of it, and the desire that it should affect him. He did not wantto ask her what they had been talking of, but he hoped that she would tell himsomething of her own accord. But she only said:“I am so glad you like Dolly. You do, don’t you?”“Oh, I’ve known her a long while, you know. She’s verygood-hearted, I suppose, mais excessivement terre-à-terre. Still,I’m very glad to see her.”He took Anna’s hand and looked inquiringly into her eyes.Misinterpreting the look, she smiled to him. Next morning, in spite of theprotests of her hosts, Darya Alexandrovna prepared for her homeward journey.Levin’s coachman, in his by no means new coat and shabby hat, with hisill-matched horses and his coach with the patched mud-guards, drove with gloomydetermination into the covered gravel approach.Darya Alexandrovna disliked taking leave of Princess Varvara and the gentlemenof the party. After a day spent together, both she and her hosts weredistinctly aware that they did not get on together, and that it was better forthem not to meet. Only Anna was sad. She knew that now, from Dolly’sdeparture, no one again would stir up within her soul the feelings that hadbeen roused by their conversation. It hurt her to stir up these feelings, butyet she knew that that was the best part of her soul, and that that part of hersoul would quickly be smothered in the life she was leading.As she drove out into the open country, Darya Alexandrovna had a delightfulsense of relief, and she felt tempted to ask the two men how they had likedbeing at Vronsky’s, when suddenly the coachman, Philip, expressed himselfunasked:“Rolling in wealth they may be, but three pots of oats was all they gaveus. Everything cleared up till there wasn’t a grain left by cockcrow.What are three pots? A mere mouthful! And oats now down to forty-five kopecks.At our place, no fear, all comers may have as much as they can eat.”“The master’s a screw,” put in the counting-house clerk.“Well, did you like their horses?” asked Dolly.“The horses!—there’s no two opinions about them. And the foodwas good. But it seemed to me sort of dreary there, Darya Alexandrovna. Idon’t know what you thought,” he said, turning his handsome,good-natured face to her.“I thought so too. Well, shall we get home by evening?”“Eh, we must!”On reaching home and finding everyone entirely satisfactory and particularlycharming, Darya Alexandrovna began with great liveliness telling them how shehad arrived, how warmly they had received her, of the luxury and good taste inwhich the Vronskys lived, and of their recreations, and she would not allow aword to be said against them.“One has to know Anna and Vronsky—I have got to know him betternow—to see how nice they are, and how touching,” she said, speakingnow with perfect sincerity, and forgetting the vague feeling of dissatisfactionand awkwardness she had experienced there.Chapter 25Vronsky and Anna spent the whole summer and part of the winter in the country,living in just the same condition, and still taking no steps to obtain adivorce. It was an understood thing between them that they should not go awayanywhere; but both felt, the longer they lived alone, especially in the autumn,without guests in the house, that they could not stand this existence, and thatthey would have to alter it.Their life was apparently such that nothing better could be desired. They hadthe fullest abundance of everything; they had a child, and both had occupation.Anna devoted just as much care to her appearance when they had no visitors, andshe did a great deal of reading, both of novels and of what serious literaturewas in fashion. She ordered all the books that were praised in the foreignpapers and reviews she received, and read them with that concentrated attentionwhich is only given to what is read in seclusion. Moreover, every subject thatwas of interest to Vronsky, she studied in books and special journals, so thathe often went straight to her with questions relating to agriculture orarchitecture, sometimes even with questions relating to horse-breeding orsport. He was amazed at her knowledge, her memory, and at first was disposed todoubt it, to ask for confirmation of her facts; and she would find what heasked for in some book, and show it to him.The building of the hospital, too, interested her. She did not merely assist,but planned and suggested a great deal herself. But her chief thought was stillof herself—how far she was dear to Vronsky, how far she could make up tohim for all he had given up. Vronsky appreciated this desire not only toplease, but to serve him, which had become the sole aim of her existence, butat the same time he wearied of the loving snares in which she tried to hold himfast. As time went on, and he saw himself more and more often held fast inthese snares, he had an ever growing desire, not so much to escape from them,as to try whether they hindered his freedom. Had it not been for this growingdesire to be free, not to have scenes every time he wanted to go to the town toa meeting or a race, Vronsky would have been perfectly satisfied with his life.The rôle he had taken up, the rôle of a wealthy landowner, one of that classwhich ought to be the very heart of the Russian aristocracy, was entirely tohis taste; and now, after spending six months in that character, he derivedeven greater satisfaction from it. And his management of his estate, whichoccupied and absorbed him more and more, was most successful. In spite of theimmense sums cost him by the hospital, by machinery, by cows ordered fromSwitzerland, and many other things, he was convinced that he was not wasting,but increasing his substance. In all matters affecting income, the sales oftimber, wheat, and wool, the letting of lands, Vronsky was hard as a rock, andknew well how to keep up prices. In all operations on a large scale on this andhis other estates, he kept to the simplest methods involving no risk, and intrifling details he was careful and exacting to an extreme degree. In spite ofall the cunning and ingenuity of the German steward, who would try to tempt himinto purchases by making his original estimate always far larger than reallyrequired, and then representing to Vronsky that he might get the thing cheaper,and so make a profit, Vronsky did not give in. He listened to his steward,cross-examined him, and only agreed to his suggestions when the implement to beordered or constructed was the very newest, not yet known in Russia, and likelyto excite wonder. Apart from such exceptions, he resolved upon an increasedoutlay only where there was a surplus, and in making such an outlay he wentinto the minutest details, and insisted on getting the very best for his money;so that by the method on which he managed his affairs, it was clear that he wasnot wasting, but increasing his substance.In October there were the provincial elections in the Kashinsky province, wherewere the estates of Vronsky, Sviazhsky, Koznishev, Oblonsky, and a small partof Levin’s land.These elections were attracting public attention from several circumstancesconnected with them, and also from the people taking part in them. There hadbeen a great deal of talk about them, and great preparations were being madefor them. Persons who never attended the elections were coming from Moscow,from Petersburg, and from abroad to attend these. Vronsky had long beforepromised Sviazhsky to go to them. Before the elections Sviazhsky, who oftenvisited Vozdvizhenskoe, drove over to fetch Vronsky. On the day before therehad been almost a quarrel between Vronsky and Anna over this proposedexpedition. It was the very dullest autumn weather, which is so dreary in thecountry, and so, preparing himself for a struggle, Vronsky, with a hard andcold expression, informed Anna of his departure as he had never spoken to herbefore. But, to his surprise, Anna accepted the information with greatcomposure, and merely asked when he would be back. He looked intently at her,at a loss to explain this composure. She smiled at his look. He knew that wayshe had of withdrawing into herself, and knew that it only happened when shehad determined upon something without letting him know her plans. He was afraidof this; but he was so anxious to avoid a scene that he kept up appearances,and half sincerely believed in what he longed to believe in—herreasonableness.“I hope you won’t be dull?”“I hope not,” said Anna. “I got a box of books yesterday fromGautier’s. No, I shan’t be dull.”“She’s trying to take that tone, and so much the better,” hethought, “or else it would be the same thing over and over again.”And he set off for the elections without appealing to her for a candidexplanation. It was the first time since the beginning of their intimacy thathe had parted from her without a full explanation. From one point of view thistroubled him, but on the other side he felt that it was better so. “Atfirst there will be, as this time, something undefined kept back, and then shewill get used to it. In any case I can give up anything for her, but not mymasculine independence,” he thought.Chapter 26In September Levin moved to Moscow for Kitty’s confinement. He had spenta whole month in Moscow with nothing to do, when Sergey Ivanovitch, who hadproperty in the Kashinsky province, and took great interest in the question ofthe approaching elections, made ready to set off to the elections. He invitedhis brother, who had a vote in the Seleznevsky district, to come with him.Levin had, moreover, to transact in Kashin some extremely important businessrelating to the wardship of land and to the receiving of certain redemptionmoney for his sister, who was abroad.Levin still hesitated, but Kitty, who saw that he was bored in Moscow, andurged him to go, on her own authority ordered him the proper nobleman’suniform, costing seven pounds. And that seven pounds paid for the uniform wasthe chief cause that finally decided Levin to go. He went to Kashin....Levin had been six days in Kashin, visiting the assembly each day, and busilyengaged about his sister’s business, which still dragged on. The districtmarshals of nobility were all occupied with the elections, and it wasimpossible to get the simplest thing done that depended upon the court ofwardship. The other matter, the payment of the sums due, was met too bydifficulties. After long negotiations over the legal details, the money was atlast ready to be paid; but the notary, a most obliging person, could not handover the order, because it must have the signature of the president, and thepresident, though he had not given over his duties to a deputy, was at theelections. All these worrying negotiations, this endless going from place toplace, and talking with pleasant and excellent people, who quite saw theunpleasantness of the petitioner’s position, but were powerless to assisthim—all these efforts that yielded no result, led to a feeling of miseryin Levin akin to the mortifying helplessness one experiences in dreams when onetries to use physical force. He felt this frequently as he talked to his mostgood-natured solicitor. This solicitor did, it seemed, everything possible, andstrained every nerve to get him out of his difficulties. “I tell you whatyou might try,” he said more than once; “go to so-and-so andso-and-so,” and the solicitor drew up a regular plan for getting roundthe fatal point that hindered everything. But he would add immediately,“It’ll mean some delay, anyway, but you might try it.” AndLevin did try, and did go. Everyone was kind and civil, but the point evadedseemed to crop up again in the end, and again to bar the way. What wasparticularly trying, was that Levin could not make out with whom he wasstruggling, to whose interest it was that his business should not be done. Thatno one seemed to know; the solicitor certainly did not know. If Levin couldhave understood why, just as he saw why one can only approach the bookingoffice of a railway station in single file, it would not have been so vexatiousand tiresome to him. But with the hindrances that confronted him in hisbusiness, no one could explain why they existed.But Levin had changed a good deal since his marriage; he was patient, and if hecould not see why it was all arranged like this, he told himself that he couldnot judge without knowing all about it, and that most likely it must be so, andhe tried not to fret.In attending the elections, too, and taking part in them, he tried now not tojudge, not to fall foul of them, but to comprehend as fully as he could thequestion which was so earnestly and ardently absorbing honest and excellent menwhom he respected. Since his marriage there had been revealed to Levin so manynew and serious aspects of life that had previously, through his frivolousattitude to them, seemed of no importance, that in the question of theelections too he assumed and tried to find some serious significance.Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him the meaning and object of the proposedrevolution at the elections. The marshal of the province in whose hands the lawhad placed the control of so many important public functions—theguardianship of wards (the very department which was giving Levin so muchtrouble just now), the disposal of large sums subscribed by the nobility of theprovince, the high schools, female, male, and military, and popular instructionon the new model, and finally, the district council—the marshal of theprovince, Snetkov, was a nobleman of the old school,—dissipating animmense fortune, a good-hearted man, honest after his own fashion, but utterlywithout any comprehension of the needs of modern days. He always took, in everyquestion, the side of the nobility; he was positively antagonistic to thespread of popular education, and he succeeded in giving a purely partycharacter to the district council which ought by rights to be of such animmense importance. What was needed was to put in his place a fresh, capable,perfectly modern man, of contemporary ideas, and to frame their policy so asfrom the rights conferred upon the nobles, not as the nobility, but as anelement of the district council, to extract all the powers of self-governmentthat could possibly be derived from them. In the wealthy Kashinsky province,which always took the lead of other provinces in everything, there was now sucha preponderance of forces that this policy, once carried through properlythere, might serve as a model for other provinces for all Russia. And hence thewhole question was of the greatest importance. It was proposed to elect asmarshal in place of Snetkov either Sviazhsky, or, better still, Nevyedovsky, aformer university professor, a man of remarkable intelligence and a greatfriend of Sergey Ivanovitch.The meeting was opened by the governor, who made a speech to the nobles, urgingthem to elect the public functionaries, not from regard for persons, but forthe service and welfare of their fatherland, and hoping that the honorablenobility of the Kashinsky province would, as at all former elections, holdtheir duty as sacred, and vindicate the exalted confidence of the monarch.When he had finished with his speech, the governor walked out of the hall, andthe noblemen noisily and eagerly—some evenenthusiastically—followed him and thronged round him while he put on hisfur coat and conversed amicably with the marshal of the province. Levin,anxious to see into everything and not to miss anything, stood there too in thecrowd, and heard the governor say: “Please tell Marya Ivanovna my wife isvery sorry she couldn’t come to the Home.” And thereupon the noblesin high good-humor sorted out their fur coats and all drove off to thecathedral.In the cathedral Levin, lifting his hand like the rest and repeating the wordsof the archdeacon, swore with most terrible oaths to do all the governor hadhoped they would do. Church services always affected Levin, and as he utteredthe words “I kiss the cross,” and glanced round at the crowd ofyoung and old men repeating the same, he felt touched.On the second and third days there was business relating to the finances of thenobility and the female high school, of no importance whatever, as SergeyIvanovitch explained, and Levin, busy seeing after his own affairs, did notattend the meetings. On the fourth day the auditing of the marshal’saccounts took place at the high table of the marshal of the province. And thenthere occurred the first skirmish between the new party and the old. Thecommittee who had been deputed to verify the accounts reported to the meetingthat all was in order. The marshal of the province got up, thanked the nobilityfor their confidence, and shed tears. The nobles gave him a loud welcome, andshook hands with him. But at that instant a nobleman of SergeyIvanovitch’s party said that he had heard that the committee had notverified the accounts, considering such a verification an insult to the marshalof the province. One of the members of the committee incautiously admittedthis. Then a small gentleman, very young-looking but very malignant, began tosay that it would probably be agreeable to the marshal of the province to givean account of his expenditures of the public moneys, and that the misplaceddelicacy of the members of the committee was depriving him of this moralsatisfaction. Then the members of the committee tried to withdraw theiradmission, and Sergey Ivanovitch began to prove that they must logically admiteither that they had verified the accounts or that they had not, and hedeveloped this dilemma in detail. Sergey Ivanovitch was answered by thespokesman of the opposite party. Then Sviazhsky spoke, and then the malignantgentleman again. The discussion lasted a long time and ended in nothing. Levinwas surprised that they should dispute upon this subject so long, especiallyas, when he asked Sergey Ivanovitch whether he supposed that money had beenmisappropriated, Sergey Ivanovitch answered:“Oh, no! He’s an honest man. But those old-fashioned methods ofpaternal family arrangements in the management of provincial affairs must bebroken down.”On the fifth day came the elections of the district marshals. It was rather astormy day in several districts. In the Seleznevsky district Sviazhsky waselected unanimously without a ballot, and he gave a dinner that evening.Chapter 27The sixth day was fixed for the election of the marshal of the province.The rooms, large and small, were full of noblemen in all sorts of uniforms.Many had come only for that day. Men who had not seen each other for years,some from the Crimea, some from Petersburg, some from abroad, met in the roomsof the Hall of Nobility. There was much discussion around the governor’stable under the portrait of the Tsar.The nobles, both in the larger and the smaller rooms, grouped themselves incamps, and from their hostile and suspicious glances, from the silence thatfell upon them when outsiders approached a group, and from the way that some,whispering together, retreated to the farther corridor, it was evident thateach side had secrets from the other. In appearance the noblemen were sharplydivided into two classes: the old and the new. The old were for the most parteither in old uniforms of the nobility, buttoned up closely, with spurs andhats, or in their own special naval, cavalry, infantry, or official uniforms.The uniforms of the older men were embroidered in the old-fashioned way withepaulets on their shoulders; they were unmistakably tight and short in thewaist, as though their wearers had grown out of them. The younger men wore theuniform of the nobility with long waists and broad shoulders, unbuttoned overwhite waistcoats, or uniforms with black collars and with the embroideredbadges of justices of the peace. To the younger men belonged the court uniformsthat here and there brightened up the crowd.But the division into young and old did not correspond with the division ofparties. Some of the young men, as Levin observed, belonged to the old party;and some of the very oldest noblemen, on the contrary, were whispering withSviazhsky, and were evidently ardent partisans of the new party.Levin stood in the smaller room, where they were smoking and taking lightrefreshments, close to his own friends, and listening to what they were saying,he conscientiously exerted all his intelligence trying to understand what wassaid. Sergey Ivanovitch was the center round which the others groupedthemselves. He was listening at that moment to Sviazhsky and Hliustov, themarshal of another district, who belonged to their party. Hliustov would notagree to go with his district to ask Snetkov to stand, while Sviazhsky waspersuading him to do so, and Sergey Ivanovitch was approving of the plan. Levincould not make out why the opposition was to ask the marshal to stand whom theywanted to supersede.Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had just been drinking and taking some lunch, came upto them in his uniform of a gentleman of the bedchamber, wiping his lips with aperfumed handkerchief of bordered batiste.“We are placing our forces,” he said, pulling out his whiskers,“Sergey Ivanovitch!”And listening to the conversation, he supported Sviazhsky’s contention.“One district’s enough, and Sviazhsky’s obviously of theopposition,” he said, words evidently intelligible to all except Levin.“Why, Kostya, you here too! I suppose you’re converted, eh?”he added, turning to Levin and drawing his arm through his. Levin would havebeen glad indeed to be converted, but could not make out what the point was,and retreating a few steps from the speakers, he explained to StepanArkadyevitch his inability to understand why the marshal of the province shouldbe asked to stand.“O sancta simplicitas!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, andbriefly and clearly he explained it to Levin. If, as at previous elections, allthe districts asked the marshal of the province to stand, then he would beelected without a ballot. That must not be. Now eight districts had agreed tocall upon him: if two refused to do so, Snetkov might decline to stand at all;and then the old party might choose another of their party, which would throwthem completely out in their reckoning. But if only one district,Sviazhsky’s, did not call upon him to stand, Snetkov would let himself beballoted for. They were even, some of them, going to vote for him, andpurposely to let him get a good many votes, so that the enemy might be thrownoff the scent, and when a candidate of the other side was put up, they toomight give him some votes. Levin understood to some extent, but not fully, andwould have put a few more questions, when suddenly everyone began talking andmaking a noise and they moved towards the big room.“What is it? eh? whom?” “No guarantee? whose? what?”“They won’t pass him?” “No guarantee?”“They won’t let Flerov in?” “Eh, because of the chargeagainst him?” “Why, at this rate, they won’t admit anyone.It’s a swindle!” “The law!” Levin heard exclamations onall sides, and he moved into the big room together with the others, allhurrying somewhere and afraid of missing something. Squeezed by the crowdingnoblemen, he drew near the high table where the marshal of the province,Sviazhsky, and the other leaders were hotly disputing about something.Chapter 28Levin was standing rather far off. A nobleman breathing heavily and hoarsely athis side, and another whose thick boots were creaking, prevented him fromhearing distinctly. He could only hear the soft voice of the marshal faintly,then the shrill voice of the malignant gentleman, and then the voice ofSviazhsky. They were disputing, as far as he could make out, as to theinterpretation to be put on the act and the exact meaning of the words:“liable to be called up for trial.”The crowd parted to make way for Sergey Ivanovitch approaching the table.Sergey Ivanovitch, waiting till the malignant gentleman had finished speaking,said that he thought the best solution would be to refer to the act itself, andasked the secretary to find the act. The act said that in case of difference ofopinion, there must be a ballot.Sergey Ivanovitch read the act and began to explain its meaning, but at thatpoint a tall, stout, round-shouldered landowner, with dyed whiskers, in a tightuniform that cut the back of his neck, interrupted him. He went up to thetable, and striking it with his finger ring, he shouted loudly: “Aballot! Put it to the vote! No need for more talking!” Then severalvoices began to talk all at once, and the tall nobleman with the ring, gettingmore and more exasperated, shouted more and more loudly. But it was impossibleto make out what he said.He was shouting for the very course Sergey Ivanovitch had proposed; but it wasevident that he hated him and all his party, and this feeling of hatred spreadthrough the whole party and roused in opposition to it the same vindictiveness,though in a more seemly form, on the other side. Shouts were raised, and for amoment all was confusion, so that the marshal of the province had to call fororder.“A ballot! A ballot! Every nobleman sees it! We shed our blood for ourcountry!... The confidence of the monarch.... No checking the accounts of themarshal; he’s not a cashier.... But that’s not the point.... Votes,please! Beastly!...” shouted furious and violent voices on all sides.Looks and faces were even more violent and furious than their words. Theyexpressed the most implacable hatred. Levin did not in the least understandwhat was the matter, and he marveled at the passion with which it was disputedwhether or not the decision about Flerov should be put to the vote. He forgot,as Sergey Ivanovitch explained to him afterwards, this syllogism: that it wasnecessary for the public good to get rid of the marshal of the province; thatto get rid of the marshal it was necessary to have a majority of votes; that toget a majority of votes it was necessary to secure Flerov’s right tovote; that to secure the recognition of Flerov’s right to vote they mustdecide on the interpretation to be put on the act.“And one vote may decide the whole question, and one must be serious andconsecutive, if one wants to be of use in public life,” concluded SergeyIvanovitch. But Levin forgot all that, and it was painful to him to see allthese excellent persons, for whom he had a respect, in such an unpleasant andvicious state of excitement. To escape from this painful feeling he went awayinto the other room where there was nobody except the waiters at therefreshment bar. Seeing the waiters busy over washing up the crockery andsetting in order their plates and wine-glasses, seeing their calm and cheerfulfaces, Levin felt an unexpected sense of relief as though he had come out of astuffy room into the fresh air. He began walking up and down, looking withpleasure at the waiters. He particularly liked the way one gray-whiskeredwaiter, who showed his scorn for the other younger ones and was jeered at bythem, was teaching them how to fold up napkins properly. Levin was just aboutto enter into conversation with the old waiter, when the secretary of the courtof wardship, a little old man whose specialty it was to know all the noblemenof the province by name and patronymic, drew him away.“Please come, Konstantin Dmitrievitch,” he said, “yourbrother’s looking for you. They are voting on the legal point.”Levin walked into the room, received a white ball, and followed his brother,Sergey Ivanovitch, to the table where Sviazhsky was standing with a significantand ironical face, holding his beard in his fist and sniffing at it. SergeyIvanovitch put his hand into the box, put the ball somewhere, and making roomfor Levin, stopped. Levin advanced, but utterly forgetting what he was to do,and much embarrassed, he turned to Sergey Ivanovitch with the question,“Where am I to put it?” He asked this softly, at a moment whenthere was talking going on near, so that he had hoped his question would not beoverheard. But the persons speaking paused, and his improper question wasoverheard. Sergey Ivanovitch frowned.“That is a matter for each man’s own decision,” he saidseverely.Several people smiled. Levin crimsoned, hurriedly thrust his hand under thecloth, and put the ball to the right as it was in his right hand. Having put itin, he recollected that he ought to have thrust his left hand too, and so hethrust it in though too late, and, still more overcome with confusion, he beata hasty retreat into the background.“A hundred and twenty-six for admission! Ninety-eight against!”sang out the voice of the secretary, who could not pronounce the letterr. Then there was a laugh; a button and two nuts were found in the box.The nobleman was allowed the right to vote, and the new party had conquered.But the old party did not consider themselves conquered. Levin heard that theywere asking Snetkov to stand, and he saw that a crowd of noblemen wassurrounding the marshal, who was saying something. Levin went nearer. In replySnetkov spoke of the trust the noblemen of the province had placed in him, theaffection they had shown him, which he did not deserve, as his only merit hadbeen his attachment to the nobility, to whom he had devoted twelve years ofservice. Several times he repeated the words: “I have served to the bestof my powers with truth and good faith, I value your goodness and thankyou,” and suddenly he stopped short from the tears that choked him, andwent out of the room. Whether these tears came from a sense of the injusticebeing done him, from his love for the nobility, or from the strain of theposition he was placed in, feeling himself surrounded by enemies, his emotioninfected the assembly, the majority were touched, and Levin felt a tendernessfor Snetkov.In the doorway the marshal of the province jostled against Levin.“Beg pardon, excuse me, please,” he said as to a stranger, butrecognizing Levin, he smiled timidly. It seemed to Levin that he would haveliked to say something, but could not speak for emotion. His face and his wholefigure in his uniform with the crosses, and white trousers striped with braid,as he moved hurriedly along, reminded Levin of some hunted beast who sees thathe is in evil case. This expression in the marshal’s face wasparticularly touching to Levin, because, only the day before, he had been athis house about his trustee business and had seen him in all his grandeur, akind-hearted, fatherly man. The big house with the old family furniture; therather dirty, far from stylish, but respectful footmen, unmistakably old houseserfs who had stuck to their master; the stout, good-natured wife in a cap withlace and a Turkish shawl, petting her pretty grandchild, her daughter’sdaughter; the young son, a sixth form high school boy, coming home from school,and greeting his father, kissing his big hand; the genuine, cordial words andgestures of the old man—all this had the day before roused an instinctivefeeling of respect and sympathy in Levin. This old man was a touching andpathetic figure to Levin now, and he longed to say something pleasant to him.“So you’re sure to be our marshal again,” he said.“It’s not likely,” said the marshal, looking round with ascared expression. “I’m worn out, I’m old. If there are menyounger and more deserving than I, let them serve.”And the marshal disappeared through a side door.The most solemn moment was at hand. They were to proceed immediately to theelection. The leaders of both parties were reckoning white and black on theirfingers.The discussion upon Flerov had given the new party not only Flerov’svote, but had also gained time for them, so that they could send to fetch threenoblemen who had been rendered unable to take part in the elections by thewiles of the other party. Two noble gentlemen, who had a weakness for strongdrink, had been made drunk by the partisans of Snetkov, and a third had beenrobbed of his uniform.On learning this, the new party had made haste, during the dispute aboutFlerov, to send some of their men in a sledge to clothe the stripped gentleman,and to bring along one of the intoxicated to the meeting.“I’ve brought one, drenched him with water,” said thelandowner, who had gone on this errand, to Sviazhsky. “He’s allright? he’ll do.”“Not too drunk, he won’t fall down?” said Sviazhsky, shakinghis head.“No, he’s first-rate. If only they don’t give him any morehere.... I’ve told the waiter not to give him anything on anyaccount.”Chapter 29The narrow room, in which they were smoking and taking refreshments, was fullof noblemen. The excitement grew more intense, and every face betrayed someuneasiness. The excitement was specially keen for the leaders of each party,who knew every detail, and had reckoned up every vote. They were the generalsorganizing the approaching battle. The rest, like the rank and file before anengagement, though they were getting ready for the fight, sought for otherdistractions in the interval. Some were lunching, standing at the bar, orsitting at the table; others were walking up and down the long room, smokingcigarettes, and talking with friends whom they had not seen for a long while.Levin did not care to eat, and he was not smoking; he did not want to join hisown friends, that is Sergey Ivanovitch, Stepan Arkadyevitch, Sviazhsky and therest, because Vronsky in his equerry’s uniform was standing with them ineager conversation. Levin had seen him already at the meeting on the previousday, and he had studiously avoided him, not caring to greet him. He went to thewindow and sat down, scanning the groups, and listening to what was being saidaround him. He felt depressed, especially because everyone else was, as he saw,eager, anxious, and interested, and he alone, with an old, toothless little manwith mumbling lips wearing a naval uniform, sitting beside him, had no interestin it and nothing to do.“He’s such a blackguard! I have told him so, but it makes nodifference. Only think of it! He couldn’t collect it in threeyears!” he heard vigorously uttered by a round-shouldered, short, countrygentleman, who had pomaded hair hanging on his embroidered collar, and newboots obviously put on for the occasion, with heels that tapped energeticallyas he spoke. Casting a displeased glance at Levin, this gentleman sharplyturned his back.“Yes, it’s a dirty business, there’s no denying,” asmall gentleman assented in a high voice.Next, a whole crowd of country gentlemen, surrounding a stout general,hurriedly came near Levin. These persons were unmistakably seeking a placewhere they could talk without being overheard.“How dare he say I had his breeches stolen! Pawned them for drink, Iexpect. Damn the fellow, prince indeed! He’d better not say it, thebeast!”“But excuse me! They take their stand on the act,” was being saidin another group; “the wife must be registered as noble.”“Oh, damn your acts! I speak from my heart. We’re all gentlemen,aren’t we? Above suspicion.”“Shall we go on, your excellency, fine champagne?”Another group was following a nobleman, who was shouting something in a loudvoice; it was one of the three intoxicated gentlemen.“I always advised Marya Semyonovna to let for a fair rent, for she cannever save a profit,” he heard a pleasant voice say. The speaker was acountry gentleman with gray whiskers, wearing the regimental uniform of an oldgeneral staff-officer. It was the very landowner Levin had met atSviazhsky’s. He knew him at once. The landowner too stared at Levin, andthey exchanged greetings.“Very glad to see you! To be sure! I remember you very well. Last year atour district marshal, Nikolay Ivanovitch’s.”“Well, and how is your land doing?” asked Levin.“Oh, still just the same, always at a loss,” the landowner answeredwith a resigned smile, but with an expression of serenity and conviction thatso it must be. “And how do you come to be in our province?” heasked. “Come to take part in our coup d’état?” hesaid, confidently pronouncing the French words with a bad accent. “AllRussia’s here—gentlemen of the bedchamber, and everything short ofthe ministry.” He pointed to the imposing figure of Stepan Arkadyevitchin white trousers and his court uniform, walking by with a general.“I ought to own that I don’t very well understand the drift of theprovincial elections,” said Levin.The landowner looked at him.“Why, what is there to understand? There’s no meaning in it at all.It’s a decaying institution that goes on running only by the force ofinertia. Just look, the very uniforms tell you that it’s an assembly ofjustices of the peace, permanent members of the court, and so on, but not ofnoblemen.”“Then why do you come?” asked Levin.“From habit, nothing else. Then, too, one must keep up connections.It’s a moral obligation of a sort. And then, to tell the truth,there’s one’s own interests. My son-in-law wants to stand as apermanent member; they’re not rich people, and he must be broughtforward. These gentlemen, now, what do they come for?” he said, pointingto the malignant gentleman, who was talking at the high table.“That’s the new generation of nobility.”“New it may be, but nobility it isn’t. They’re proprietors ofa sort, but we’re the landowners. As noblemen, they’re cuttingtheir own throats.”“But you say it’s an institution that’s served itstime.”“That it may be, but still it ought to be treated a little morerespectfully. Snetkov, now.... We may be of use, or we may not, but we’rethe growth of a thousand years. If we’re laying out a garden, planningone before the house, you know, and there you’ve a tree that’sstood for centuries in the very spot.... Old and gnarled it may be, and yet youdon’t cut down the old fellow to make room for the flowerbeds, but layout your beds so as to take advantage of the tree. You won’t grow himagain in a year,” he said cautiously, and he immediately changed theconversation. “Well, and how is your land doing?”“Oh, not very well. I make five per cent.”“Yes, but you don’t reckon your own work. Aren’t you worthsomething too? I’ll tell you my own case. Before I took to seeing afterthe land, I had a salary of three hundred pounds from the service. Now I domore work than I did in the service, and like you I get five per cent. on theland, and thank God for that. But one’s work is thrown in fornothing.”“Then why do you do it, if it’s a clear loss?”“Oh, well, one does it! What would you have? It’s habit, and oneknows it’s how it should be. And what’s more,” the landownerwent on, leaning his elbows on the window and chatting on, “my son, Imust tell you, has no taste for it. There’s no doubt he’ll be ascientific man. So there’ll be no one to keep it up. And yet one does it.Here this year I’ve planted an orchard.”“Yes, yes,” said Levin, “that’s perfectly true. Ialways feel there’s no real balance of gain in my work on the land, andyet one does it.... It’s a sort of duty one feels to the land.”“But I tell you what,” the landowner pursued; “a neighbor ofmine, a merchant, was at my place. We walked about the fields and the garden.‘No,’ said he, ‘Stepan Vassilievitch, everything’s welllooked after, but your garden’s neglected.’ But, as a fact,it’s well kept up. ‘To my thinking, I’d cut down thatlime-tree. Here you’ve thousands of limes, and each would make two goodbundles of bark. And nowadays that bark’s worth something. I’d cutdown the lot.’”“And with what he made he’d increase his stock, or buy some landfor a trifle, and let it out in lots to the peasants,” Levin added,smiling. He had evidently more than once come across those commercialcalculations. “And he’d make his fortune. But you and I must thankGod if we keep what we’ve got and leave it to our children.”“You’re married, I’ve heard?” said the landowner.“Yes,” Levin answered, with proud satisfaction. “Yes,it’s rather strange,” he went on. “So we live without makinganything, as though we were ancient vestals set to keep in a fire.”The landowner chuckled under his white mustaches.“There are some among us, too, like our friend Nikolay Ivanovitch, orCount Vronsky, that’s settled here lately, who try to carry on theirhusbandry as though it were a factory; but so far it leads to nothing butmaking away with capital on it.”“But why is it we don’t do like the merchants? Why don’t wecut down our parks for timber?” said Levin, returning to a thought thathad struck him.“Why, as you said, to keep the fire in. Besides that’s not work fora nobleman. And our work as noblemen isn’t done here at the elections,but yonder, each in our corner. There’s a class instinct, too, of whatone ought and oughtn’t to do. There’s the peasants, too, I wonderat them sometimes; any good peasant tries to take all the land he can. Howeverbad the land is, he’ll work it. Without a return too. At a simpleloss.”“Just as we do,” said Levin. “Very, very glad to have metyou,” he added, seeing Sviazhsky approaching him.“And here we’ve met for the first time since we met at yourplace,” said the landowner to Sviazhsky, “and we’ve had agood talk too.”“Well, have you been attacking the new order of things?” saidSviazhsky with a smile.“That we’re bound to do.”“You’ve relieved your feelings?”Chapter 30Sviazhsky took Levin’s arm, and went with him to his own friends.This time there was no avoiding Vronsky. He was standing with StepanArkadyevitch and Sergey Ivanovitch, and looking straight at Levin as he drewnear.“Delighted! I believe I’ve had the pleasure of meeting you ... atPrincess Shtcherbatskaya’s,” he said, giving Levin his hand.“Yes, I quite remember our meeting,” said Levin, and blushingcrimson, he turned away immediately, and began talking to his brother.With a slight smile Vronsky went on talking to Sviazhsky, obviously without theslightest inclination to enter into conversation with Levin. But Levin, as hetalked to his brother, was continually looking round at Vronsky, trying tothink of something to say to him to gloss over his rudeness.“What are we waiting for now?” asked Levin, looking at Sviazhskyand Vronsky.“For Snetkov. He has to refuse or to consent to stand,” answeredSviazhsky.“Well, and what has he done, consented or not?”“That’s the point, that he’s done neither,” saidVronsky.“And if he refuses, who will stand then?” asked Levin, looking atVronsky.“Whoever chooses to,” said Sviazhsky.“Shall you?” asked Levin.“Certainly not I,” said Sviazhsky, looking confused, and turning analarmed glance at the malignant gentleman, who was standing beside SergeyIvanovitch.“Who then? Nevyedovsky?” said Levin, feeling he was putting hisfoot into it.But this was worse still. Nevyedovsky and Sviazhsky were the two candidates.“I certainly shall not, under any circumstances,” answered themalignant gentleman.This was Nevyedovsky himself. Sviazhsky introduced him to Levin.“Well, you find it exciting too?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, winkingat Vronsky. “It’s something like a race. One might bet onit.”“Yes, it is keenly exciting,” said Vronsky. “And once takingthe thing up, one’s eager to see it through. It’s a fight!”he said, scowling and setting his powerful jaws.“What a capable fellow Sviazhsky is! Sees it all so clearly.”“Oh, yes!” Vronsky assented indifferently.A silence followed, during which Vronsky—since he had to look atsomething—looked at Levin, at his feet, at his uniform, then at his face,and noticing his gloomy eyes fixed upon him, he said, in order to saysomething:“How is it that you, living constantly in the country, are not a justiceof the peace? You are not in the uniform of one.”“It’s because I consider that the justice of the peace is a sillyinstitution,” Levin answered gloomily. He had been all the time lookingfor an opportunity to enter into conversation with Vronsky, so as to smoothover his rudeness at their first meeting.“I don’t think so, quite the contrary,” Vronsky said, withquiet surprise.“It’s a plaything,” Levin cut him short. “Wedon’t want justices of the peace. I’ve never had a single thing todo with them during eight years. And what I have had was decided wrongly bythem. The justice of the peace is over thirty miles from me. For some matter oftwo roubles I should have to send a lawyer, who costs me fifteen.”And he related how a peasant had stolen some flour from the miller, and whenthe miller told him of it, had lodged a complaint for slander. All this wasutterly uncalled for and stupid, and Levin felt it himself as he said it.“Oh, this is such an original fellow!” said Stepan Arkadyevitchwith his most soothing, almond-oil smile. “But come along; I thinkthey’re voting....”And they separated.“I can’t understand,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, who hadobserved his brother’s clumsiness, “I can’t understand howanyone can be so absolutely devoid of political tact. That’s where weRussians are so deficient. The marshal of the province is our opponent, andwith him you’re ami cochon, and you beg him to stand. CountVronsky, now ... I’m not making a friend of him; he’s asked me todinner, and I’m not going; but he’s one of our side—why makean enemy of him? Then you ask Nevyedovsky if he’s going to stand.That’s not a thing to do.”“Oh, I don’t understand it at all! And it’s all suchnonsense,” Levin answered gloomily.“You say it’s all such nonsense, but as soon as you have anythingto do with it, you make a muddle.”Levin did not answer, and they walked together into the big room.The marshal of the province, though he was vaguely conscious in the air of sometrap being prepared for him, and though he had not been called upon by all tostand, had still made up his mind to stand. All was silence in the room. Thesecretary announced in a loud voice that the captain of the guards, MihailStepanovitch Snetkov, would now be balloted for as marshal of the province.The district marshals walked carrying plates, on which were balls, from theirtables to the high table, and the election began.“Put it in the right side,” whispered Stepan Arkadyevitch, as withhis brother Levin followed the marshal of his district to the table. But Levinhad forgotten by now the calculations that had been explained to him, and wasafraid Stepan Arkadyevitch might be mistaken in saying “the rightside.” Surely Snetkov was the enemy. As he went up, he held the ball inhis right hand, but thinking he was wrong, just at the box he changed to theleft hand, and undoubtedly put the ball to the left. An adept in the business,standing at the box and seeing by the mere action of the elbow where each puthis ball, scowled with annoyance. It was no good for him to use his insight.Everything was still, and the counting of the balls was heard. Then a singlevoice rose and proclaimed the numbers for and against. The marshal had beenvoted for by a considerable majority. All was noise and eager movement towardsthe doors. Snetkov came in, and the nobles thronged round him, congratulatinghim.“Well, now is it over?” Levin asked Sergey Ivanovitch.“It’s only just beginning,” Sviazhsky said, replying forSergey Ivanovitch with a smile. “Some other candidate may receive morevotes than the marshal.”Levin had quite forgotten about that. Now he could only remember that there wassome sort of trickery in it, but he was too bored to think what it was exactly.He felt depressed, and longed to get out of the crowd.As no one was paying any attention to him, and no one apparently needed him, hequietly slipped away into the little room where the refreshments were, andagain had a great sense of comfort when he saw the waiters. The little oldwaiter pressed him to have something, and Levin agreed. After eating a cutletwith beans and talking to the waiters of their former masters, Levin, notwishing to go back to the hall, where it was all so distasteful to him,proceeded to walk through the galleries. The galleries were full of fashionablydressed ladies, leaning over the balustrade and trying not to lose a singleword of what was being said below. With the ladies were sitting and standingsmart lawyers, high school teachers in spectacles, and officers. Everywherethey were talking of the election, and of how worried the marshal was, and howsplendid the discussions had been. In one group Levin heard his brother’spraises. One lady was telling a lawyer:“How glad I am I heard Koznishev! It’s worth losing one’sdinner. He’s exquisite! So clear and distinct all of it! There’snot one of you in the law courts that speaks like that. The only one is Meidel,and he’s not so eloquent by a long way.”Finding a free place, Levin leaned over the balustrade and began looking andlistening.All the noblemen were sitting railed off behind barriers according to theirdistricts. In the middle of the room stood a man in a uniform, who shouted in aloud, high voice:“As a candidate for the marshalship of the nobility of the province wecall upon staff-captain Yevgeney Ivanovitch Apuhtin!” A dead silencefollowed, and then a weak old voice was heard: “Declined!”“We call upon the privy councilor Pyotr Petrovitch Bol,” the voicebegan again.“Declined!” a high boyish voice replied.Again it began, and again “Declined.” And so it went on for aboutan hour. Levin, with his elbows on the balustrade, looked and listened. Atfirst he wondered and wanted to know what it meant; then feeling sure that hecould not make it out he began to be bored. Then recalling all the excitementand vindictiveness he had seen on all the faces, he felt sad; he made up hismind to go, and went downstairs. As he passed through the entry to thegalleries he met a dejected high school boy walking up and down withtired-looking eyes. On the stairs he met a couple—a lady running quicklyon her high heels and the jaunty deputy prosecutor.“I told you you weren’t late,” the deputy prosecutor wassaying at the moment when Levin moved aside to let the lady pass.Levin was on the stairs to the way out, and was just feeling in his waistcoatpocket for the number of his overcoat, when the secretary overtook him.“This way, please, Konstantin Dmitrievitch; they are voting.”The candidate who was being voted on was Nevyedovsky, who had so stoutly deniedall idea of standing. Levin went up to the door of the room; it was locked. Thesecretary knocked, the door opened, and Levin was met by two red-facedgentlemen, who darted out.“I can’t stand any more of it,” said one red-faced gentleman.After them the face of the marshal of the province was poked out. His face wasdreadful-looking from exhaustion and dismay.“I told you not to let anyone out!” he cried to the doorkeeper.“I let someone in, your excellency!”“Mercy on us!” and with a heavy sigh the marshal of the provincewalked with downcast head to the high table in the middle of the room, his legsstaggering in his white trousers.Nevyedovsky had scored a higher majority, as they had planned, and he was thenew marshal of the province. Many people were amused, many were pleased andhappy, many were in ecstasies, many were disgusted and unhappy. The formermarshal of the province was in a state of despair, which he could not conceal.When Nevyedovsky went out of the room, the crowd thronged round him andfollowed him enthusiastically, just as they had followed the governor who hadopened the meetings, and just as they had followed Snetkov when he was elected.Chapter 31The newly elected marshal and many of the successful party dined that day withVronsky.Vronsky had come to the elections partly because he was bored in the countryand wanted to show Anna his right to independence, and also to repay Sviazhskyby his support at the election for all the trouble he had taken for Vronsky atthe district council election, but chiefly in order strictly to perform allthose duties of a nobleman and landowner which he had taken upon himself. Buthe had not in the least expected that the election would so interest him, sokeenly excite him, and that he would be so good at this kind of thing. He wasquite a new man in the circle of the nobility of the province, but his successwas unmistakable, and he was not wrong in supposing that he had alreadyobtained a certain influence. This influence was due to his wealth andreputation, the capital house in the town lent him by his old friend Shirkov,who had a post in the department of finances and was director of a flourishingbank in Kashin; the excellent cook Vronsky had brought from the country, andhis friendship with the governor, who was a schoolfellow ofVronsky’s—a schoolfellow he had patronized and protected indeed.But what contributed more than all to his success was his direct, equablemanner with everyone, which very quickly made the majority of the noblemenreverse the current opinion of his supposed haughtiness. He was himselfconscious that, except that whimsical gentleman married to KittyShtcherbatskaya, who had à propos de bottes poured out a stream ofirrelevant absurdities with such spiteful fury, every nobleman with whom he hadmade acquaintance had become his adherent. He saw clearly, and other peoplerecognized it, too, that he had done a great deal to secure the success ofNevyedovsky. And now at his own table, celebrating Nevyedovsky’selection, he was experiencing an agreeable sense of triumph over the success ofhis candidate. The election itself had so fascinated him that, if he couldsucceed in getting married during the next three years, he began to think ofstanding himself—much as after winning a race ridden by a jockey, he hadlonged to ride a race himself.Today he was celebrating the success of his jockey. Vronsky sat at the head ofthe table, on his right hand sat the young governor, a general of high rank. Toall the rest he was the chief man in the province, who had solemnly opened theelections with his speech, and aroused a feeling of respect and even of awe inmany people, as Vronsky saw; to Vronsky he was little Katka Maslov—thathad been his nickname in the Pages’ Corps—whom he felt to be shyand tried to mettre à son aise. On the left hand sat Nevyedovsky withhis youthful, stubborn, and malignant face. With him Vronsky was simple anddeferential.Sviazhsky took his failure very light-heartedly. It was indeed no failure inhis eyes, as he said himself, turning, glass in hand, to Nevyedovsky; theycould not have found a better representative of the new movement, which thenobility ought to follow. And so every honest person, as he said, was on theside of today’s success and was rejoicing over it.Stepan Arkadyevitch was glad, too, that he was having a good time, and thateveryone was pleased. The episode of the elections served as a good occasionfor a capital dinner. Sviazhsky comically imitated the tearful discourse of themarshal, and observed, addressing Nevyedovsky, that his excellency would haveto select another more complicated method of auditing the accounts than tears.Another nobleman jocosely described how footmen in stockings had been orderedfor the marshal’s ball, and how now they would have to be sent backunless the new marshal would give a ball with footmen in stockings.Continually during dinner they said of Nevyedovsky: “our marshal,”and “your excellency.”This was said with the same pleasure with which a bride is called“Madame” and her husband’s name. Nevyedovsky affected to benot merely indifferent but scornful of this appellation, but it was obviousthat he was highly delighted, and had to keep a curb on himself not to betraythe triumph which was unsuitable to their new liberal tone.After dinner several telegrams were sent to people interested in the result ofthe election. And Stepan Arkadyevitch, who was in high good humor, sent DaryaAlexandrovna a telegram: “Nevyedovsky elected by twenty votes.Congratulations. Tell people.” He dictated it aloud, saying: “Wemust let them share our rejoicing.” Darya Alexandrovna, getting themessage, simply sighed over the rouble wasted on it, and understood that it wasan after-dinner affair. She knew Stiva had a weakness after dining for fairejouer le télégraphe. Everything, together with the excellent dinner and the wine, not from Russianmerchants, but imported direct from abroad, was extremely dignified, simple,and enjoyable. The party—some twenty—had been selected by Sviazhskyfrom among the more active new liberals, all of the same way of thinking, whowere at the same time clever and well bred. They drank, also half in jest, tothe health of the new marshal of the province, of the governor, of the bankdirector, and of “our amiable host.”Vronsky was satisfied. He had never expected to find so pleasant a tone in theprovinces.Towards the end of dinner it was still more lively. The governor asked Vronskyto come to a concert for the benefit of the Servians which his wife, who wasanxious to make his acquaintance, had been getting up.“There’ll be a ball, and you’ll see the belle of theprovince. Worth seeing, really.”“Not in my line,” Vronsky answered. He liked that English phrase.But he smiled, and promised to come.Before they rose from the table, when all of them were smoking, Vronsky’svalet went up to him with a letter on a tray.“From Vozdvizhenskoe by special messenger,” he said with asignificant expression.“Astonishing! how like he is to the deputy prosecutor Sventitsky,”said one of the guests in French of the valet, while Vronsky, frowning, readthe letter.The letter was from Anna. Before he read the letter, he knew its contents.Expecting the elections to be over in five days, he had promised to be back onFriday. Today was Saturday, and he knew that the letter contained reproachesfor not being back at the time fixed. The letter he had sent the previousevening had probably not reached her yet.The letter was what he had expected, but the form of it was unexpected, andparticularly disagreeable to him. “Annie is very ill, the doctor says itmay be inflammation. I am losing my head all alone. Princess Varvara is nohelp, but a hindrance. I expected you the day before yesterday, and yesterday,and now I am sending to find out where you are and what you are doing. I wantedto come myself, but thought better of it, knowing you would dislike it. Sendsome answer, that I may know what to do.”The child ill, yet she had thought of coming herself. Their daughter ill, andthis hostile tone.The innocent festivities over the election, and this gloomy, burdensome love towhich he had to return struck Vronsky by their contrast. But he had to go, andby the first train that night he set off home.Chapter 32Before Vronsky’s departure for the elections, Anna had reflected that thescenes constantly repeated between them each time he left home, might only makehim cold to her instead of attaching him to her, and resolved to do all shecould to control herself so as to bear the parting with composure. But thecold, severe glance with which he had looked at her when he came to tell her hewas going had wounded her, and before he had started her peace of mind wasdestroyed.In solitude afterwards, thinking over that glance which had expressed his rightto freedom, she came, as she always did, to the same point—the sense ofher own humiliation. “He has the right to go away when and where hechooses. Not simply to go away, but to leave me. He has every right, and I havenone. But knowing that, he ought not to do it. What has he done, though?... Helooked at me with a cold, severe expression. Of course that is somethingindefinable, impalpable, but it has never been so before, and that glance meansa great deal,” she thought. “That glance shows the beginning ofindifference.”And though she felt sure that a coldness was beginning, there was nothing shecould do, she could not in any way alter her relations to him. Just as before,only by love and by charm could she keep him. And so, just as before, only byoccupation in the day, by morphine at night, could she stifle the fearfulthought of what would be if he ceased to love her. It is true there was stillone means; not to keep him—for that she wanted nothing more than hislove—but to be nearer to him, to be in such a position that he would notleave her. That means was divorce and marriage. And she began to long for that,and made up her mind to agree to it the first time he or Stiva approached heron the subject.Absorbed in such thoughts, she passed five days without him, the five days thathe was to be at the elections.Walks, conversation with Princess Varvara, visits to the hospital, and, most ofall, reading—reading of one book after another—filled up her time.But on the sixth day, when the coachman came back without him, she felt thatnow she was utterly incapable of stifling the thought of him and of what he wasdoing there, just at that time her little girl was taken ill. Anna began tolook after her, but even that did not distract her mind, especially as theillness was not serious. However hard she tried, she could not love this littlechild, and to feign love was beyond her powers. Towards the evening of thatday, still alone, Anna was in such a panic about him that she decided to startfor the town, but on second thoughts wrote him the contradictory letter thatVronsky received, and without reading it through, sent it off by a specialmessenger. The next morning she received his letter and regretted her own. Shedreaded a repetition of the severe look he had flung at her at parting,especially when he knew that the baby was not dangerously ill. But still shewas glad she had written to him. At this moment Anna was positively admittingto herself that she was a burden to him, that he would relinquish his freedomregretfully to return to her, and in spite of that she was glad he was coming.Let him weary of her, but he would be here with her, so that she would see him,would know of every action he took.She was sitting in the drawing-room near a lamp, with a new volume of Taine,and as she read, listening to the sound of the wind outside, and every minuteexpecting the carriage to arrive. Several times she had fancied she heard thesound of wheels, but she had been mistaken. At last she heard not the sound ofwheels, but the coachman’s shout and the dull rumble in the coveredentry. Even Princess Varvara, playing patience, confirmed this, and Anna,flushing hotly, got up; but instead of going down, as she had done twicebefore, she stood still. She suddenly felt ashamed of her duplicity, but evenmore she dreaded how he might meet her. All feeling of wounded pride had passednow; she was only afraid of the expression of his displeasure. She rememberedthat her child had been perfectly well again for the last two days. She feltpositively vexed with her for getting better from the very moment her letterwas sent off. Then she thought of him, that he was here, all of him, with hishands, his eyes. She heard his voice. And forgetting everything, she ranjoyfully to meet him.“Well, how is Annie?” he said timidly from below, looking up toAnna as she ran down to him.He was sitting on a chair, and a footman was pulling off his warm over-boot.“Oh, she is better.”“And you?” he said, shaking himself.She took his hand in both of hers, and drew it to her waist, never taking hereyes off him.“Well, I’m glad,” he said, coldly scanning her, her hair, herdress, which he knew she had put on for him. All was charming, but how manytimes it had charmed him! And the stern, stony expression that she so dreadedsettled upon his face.“Well, I’m glad. And are you well?” he said, wiping his dampbeard with his handkerchief and kissing her hand.“Never mind,” she thought, “only let him be here, and so longas he’s here he cannot, he dare not, cease to love me.”The evening was spent happily and gaily in the presence of Princess Varvara,who complained to him that Anna had been taking morphine in his absence.“What am I to do? I couldn’t sleep.... My thoughts prevented me.When he’s here I never take it—hardly ever.”He told her about the election, and Anna knew how by adroit questions to bringhim to what gave him most pleasure—his own success. She told him ofeverything that interested him at home; and all that she told him was of themost cheerful description.But late in the evening, when they were alone, Anna, seeing that she hadregained complete possession of him, wanted to erase the painful impression ofthe glance he had given her for her letter. She said:“Tell me frankly, you were vexed at getting my letter, and youdidn’t believe me?”As soon as she had said it, she felt that however warm his feelings were toher, he had not forgiven her for that.“Yes,” he said, “the letter was so strange. First, Annie ill,and then you thought of coming yourself.”“It was all the truth.”“Oh, I don’t doubt it.”“Yes, you do doubt it. You are vexed, I see.”“Not for one moment. I’m only vexed, that’s true, that youseem somehow unwilling to admit that there are duties....”“The duty of going to a concert....”“But we won’t talk about it,” he said.“Why not talk about it?” she said.“I only meant to say that matters of real importance may turn up. Now,for instance, I shall have to go to Moscow to arrange about the house.... Oh,Anna, why are you so irritable? Don’t you know that I can’t livewithout you?”“If so,” said Anna, her voice suddenly changing, “it meansthat you are sick of this life.... Yes, you will come for a day and go away, asmen do....”“Anna, that’s cruel. I am ready to give up my whole life.”But she did not hear him.“If you go to Moscow, I will go too. I will not stay here. Either we mustseparate or else live together.”“Why, you know, that’s my one desire. But for that....”“We must get a divorce. I will write to him. I see I cannot go on likethis.... But I will come with you to Moscow.”“You talk as if you were threatening me. But I desire nothing so much asnever to be parted from you,” said Vronsky, smiling.But as he said these words there gleamed in his eyes not merely a cold look,but the vindictive look of a man persecuted and made cruel.She saw the look and correctly divined its meaning.“If so, it’s a calamity!” that glance told her. It was amoment’s impression, but she never forgot it.Anna wrote to her husband asking him about a divorce, and towards the end ofNovember, taking leave of Princess Varvara, who wanted to go to Petersburg, shewent with Vronsky to Moscow. Expecting every day an answer from AlexeyAlexandrovitch, and after that the divorce, they now established themselvestogether like married people.PART SEVENChapter 1The Levins had been three months in Moscow. The date had long passed on which,according to the most trustworthy calculations of people learned in suchmatters, Kitty should have been confined. But she was still about, and therewas nothing to show that her time was any nearer than two months ago. Thedoctor, the monthly nurse, and Dolly and her mother, and most of all Levin, whocould not think of the approaching event without terror, began to be impatientand uneasy. Kitty was the only person who felt perfectly calm and happy.She was distinctly conscious now of the birth of a new feeling of love for thefuture child, for her to some extent actually existing already, and she broodedblissfully over this feeling. He was not by now altogether a part of herself,but sometimes lived his own life independently of her. Often this separatebeing gave her pain, but at the same time she wanted to laugh with a strangenew joy.All the people she loved were with her, and all were so good to her, soattentively caring for her, so entirely pleasant was everything presented toher, that if she had not known and felt that it must all soon be over, shecould not have wished for a better and pleasanter life. The only thing thatspoiled the charm of this manner of life was that her husband was not here asshe loved him to be, and as he was in the country.She liked his serene, friendly, and hospitable manner in the country. In thetown he seemed continually uneasy and on his guard, as though he were afraidsomeone would be rude to him, and still more to her. At home in the country,knowing himself distinctly to be in his right place, he was never in haste tobe off elsewhere. He was never unoccupied. Here in town he was in a continualhurry, as though afraid of missing something, and yet he had nothing to do. Andshe felt sorry for him. To others, she knew, he did not appear an object ofpity. On the contrary, when Kitty looked at him in society, as one sometimeslooks at those one loves, trying to see him as if he were a stranger, so as tocatch the impression he must make on others, she saw with a panic even ofjealous fear that he was far indeed from being a pitiable figure, that he wasvery attractive with his fine breeding, his rather old-fashioned, reservedcourtesy with women, his powerful figure, and striking, as she thought, andexpressive face. But she saw him not from without, but from within; she sawthat here he was not himself; that was the only way she could define hiscondition to herself. Sometimes she inwardly reproached him for his inabilityto live in the town; sometimes she recognized that it was really hard for himto order his life here so that he could be satisfied with it.What had he to do, indeed? He did not care for cards; he did not go to a club.Spending the time with jovial gentlemen of Oblonsky’s type—she knewnow what that meant ... it meant drinking and going somewhere after drinking.She could not think without horror of where men went on such occasions. Was heto go into society? But she knew he could only find satisfaction in that if hetook pleasure in the society of young women, and that she could not wish for.Should he stay at home with her, her mother and her sisters? But much as sheliked and enjoyed their conversations forever on the samesubjects—“Aline-Nadine,” as the old prince called thesisters’ talks—she knew it must bore him. What was there left forhim to do? To go on writing at his book he had indeed attempted, and at firsthe used to go to the library and make extracts and look up references for hisbook. But, as he told her, the more he did nothing, the less time he had to doanything. And besides, he complained that he had talked too much about his bookhere, and that consequently all his ideas about it were muddled and had losttheir interest for him.One advantage in this town life was that quarrels hardly ever happened betweenthem here in town. Whether it was that their conditions were different, or thatthey had both become more careful and sensible in that respect, they had noquarrels in Moscow from jealousy, which they had so dreaded when they movedfrom the country.One event, an event of great importance to both from that point of view, didindeed happen—that was Kitty’s meeting with Vronsky.The old Princess Marya Borissovna, Kitty’s godmother, who had always beenvery fond of her, had insisted on seeing her. Kitty, though she did not go intosociety at all on account of her condition, went with her father to see thevenerable old lady, and there met Vronsky.The only thing Kitty could reproach herself for at this meeting was that at theinstant when she recognized in his civilian dress the features once so familiarto her, her breath failed her, the blood rushed to her heart, and a vividblush—she felt it—overspread her face. But this lasted only a fewseconds. Before her father, who purposely began talking in a loud voice toVronsky, had finished, she was perfectly ready to look at Vronsky, to speak tohim, if necessary, exactly as she spoke to Princess Marya Borissovna, and morethan that, to do so in such a way that everything to the faintest intonationand smile would have been approved by her husband, whose unseen presence sheseemed to feel about her at that instant.She said a few words to him, even smiled serenely at his joke about theelections, which he called “our parliament.” (She had to smile toshow she saw the joke.) But she turned away immediately to Princess MaryaBorissovna, and did not once glance at him till he got up to go; then shelooked at him, but evidently only because it would be uncivil not to look at aman when he is saying good-bye.She was grateful to her father for saying nothing to her about their meetingVronsky, but she saw by his special warmth to her after the visit during theirusual walk that he was pleased with her. She was pleased with herself. She hadnot expected she would have had the power, while keeping somewhere in thebottom of her heart all the memories of her old feeling for Vronsky, not onlyto seem but to be perfectly indifferent and composed with him.Levin flushed a great deal more than she when she told him she had met Vronskyat Princess Marya Borissovna’s. It was very hard for her to tell himthis, but still harder to go on speaking of the details of the meeting, as hedid not question her, but simply gazed at her with a frown.“I am very sorry you weren’t there,” she said. “Notthat you weren’t in the room ... I couldn’t have been so natural inyour presence ... I am blushing now much more, much, much more,” shesaid, blushing till the tears came into her eyes. “But that youcouldn’t see through a crack.”The truthful eyes told Levin that she was satisfied with herself, and in spiteof her blushing he was quickly reassured and began questioning her, which wasall she wanted. When he had heard everything, even to the detail that for thefirst second she could not help flushing, but that afterwards she was just asdirect and as much at her ease as with any chance acquaintance, Levin was quitehappy again and said he was glad of it, and would not now behave as stupidly ashe had done at the election, but would try the first time he met Vronsky to beas friendly as possible.“It’s so wretched to feel that there’s a man almost an enemywhom it’s painful to meet,” said Levin. “I’m very, veryglad.”Chapter 2“Go, please, go then and call on the Bols,” Kitty said to herhusband, when he came in to see her at eleven o’clock before going out.“I know you are dining at the club; papa put down your name. But what areyou going to do in the morning?”“I am only going to Katavasov,” answered Levin.“Why so early?”“He promised to introduce me to Metrov. I wanted to talk to him about mywork. He’s a distinguished scientific man from Petersburg,” saidLevin.“Yes; wasn’t it his article you were praising so? Well, and afterthat?” said Kitty.“I shall go to the court, perhaps, about my sister’sbusiness.”“And the concert?” she queried.“I shan’t go there all alone.”“No? do go; there are going to be some new things.... That interested youso. I should certainly go.”“Well, anyway, I shall come home before dinner,” he said, lookingat his watch.“Put on your frock coat, so that you can go straight to call on CountessBola.”“But is it absolutely necessary?”“Oh, absolutely! He has been to see us. Come, what is it? You go in, sitdown, talk for five minutes of the weather, get up and go away.”“Oh, you wouldn’t believe it! I’ve got so out of the way ofall this that it makes me feel positively ashamed. It’s such a horriblething to do! A complete outsider walks in, sits down, stays on with nothing todo, wastes their time and worries himself, and walks away!”Kitty laughed.“Why, I suppose you used to pay calls before you were married,didn’t you?”“Yes, I did, but I always felt ashamed, and now I’m so out of theway of it that, by Jove! I’d sooner go two days running without my dinnerthan pay this call! One’s so ashamed! I feel all the while thatthey’re annoyed, that they’re saying, ‘What has he comefor?’”“No, they won’t. I’ll answer for that,” said Kitty,looking into his face with a laugh. She took his hand. “Well,good-bye.... Do go, please.”He was just going out after kissing his wife’s hand, when she stoppedhim.“Kostya, do you know I’ve only fifty roubles left?”“Oh, all right, I’ll go to the bank and get some. How much?”he said, with the expression of dissatisfaction she knew so well.“No, wait a minute.” She held his hand. “Let’s talkabout it, it worries me. I seem to spend nothing unnecessary, but money seemsto fly away simply. We don’t manage well, somehow.”“Oh, it’s all right,” he said with a little cough, looking ather from under his brows.That cough she knew well. It was a sign of intense dissatisfaction, not withher, but with himself. He certainly was displeased not at so much money beingspent, but at being reminded of what he, knowing something was unsatisfactory,wanted to forget.“I have told Sokolov to sell the wheat, and to borrow an advance on themill. We shall have money enough in any case.”“Yes, but I’m afraid that altogether....”“Oh, it’s all right, all right,” he repeated. “Well,good-bye, darling.”“No, I’m really sorry sometimes that I listened to mamma. How niceit would have been in the country! As it is, I’m worrying you all, andwe’re wasting our money.”“Not at all, not at all. Not once since I’ve been married have Isaid that things could have been better than they are....”“Truly?” she said, looking into his eyes.He had said it without thinking, simply to console her. But when he glanced ather and saw those sweet truthful eyes fastened questioningly on him, herepeated it with his whole heart. “I was positively forgettingher,” he thought. And he remembered what was before them, so soon tocome.“Will it be soon? How do you feel?” he whispered, taking her twohands.“I have so often thought so, that now I don’t think about it orknow anything about it.”“And you’re not frightened?”She smiled contemptuously.“Not the least little bit,” she said.“Well, if anything happens, I shall be at Katavasov’s.”“No, nothing will happen, and don’t think about it. I’m goingfor a walk on the boulevard with papa. We’re going to see Dolly. I shallexpect you before dinner. Oh, yes! Do you know that Dolly’s position isbecoming utterly impossible? She’s in debt all round; she hasn’t apenny. We were talking yesterday with mamma and Arseny” (this was hersister’s husband Lvov), “and we determined to send you with him totalk to Stiva. It’s really unbearable. One can’t speak to papaabout it.... But if you and he....”“Why, what can we do?” said Levin.“You’ll be at Arseny’s, anyway; talk to him, he will tellwhat we decided.”“Oh, I agree to everything Arseny thinks beforehand. I’ll go andsee him. By the way, if I do go to the concert, I’ll go with Natalia.Well, good-bye.”On the steps Levin was stopped by his old servant Kouzma, who had been with himbefore his marriage, and now looked after their household in town.“Beauty” (that was the left shaft-horse brought up from thecountry) “has been badly shod and is quite lame,” he said.“What does your honor wish to be done?”During the first part of their stay in Moscow, Levin had used his own horsesbrought up from the country. He had tried to arrange this part of theirexpenses in the best and cheapest way possible; but it appeared that their ownhorses came dearer than hired horses, and they still hired too.“Send for the veterinary, there may be a bruise.”“And for Katerina Alexandrovna?” asked Kouzma.Levin was not by now struck as he had been at first by the fact that to getfrom one end of Moscow to the other he had to have two powerful horses put intoa heavy carriage, to take the carriage three miles through the snowy slush andto keep it standing there four hours, paying five roubles every time.Now it seemed quite natural.“Hire a pair for our carriage from the jobmaster,” said he.“Yes, sir.”And so, simply and easily, thanks to the facilities of town life, Levin settleda question which, in the country, would have called for so much personaltrouble and exertion, and going out onto the steps, he called a sledge, satdown, and drove to Nikitsky. On the way he thought no more of money, but musedon the introduction that awaited him to the Petersburg savant, a writer onsociology, and what he would say to him about his book.Only during the first days of his stay in Moscow Levin had been struck by theexpenditure, strange to one living in the country, unproductive but inevitable,that was expected of him on every side. But by now he had grown used to it.That had happened to him in this matter which is said to happen todrunkards—the first glass sticks in the throat, the second flies downlike a hawk, but after the third they’re like tiny little birds. WhenLevin had changed his first hundred-rouble note to pay for liveries for hisfootmen and hall-porter he could not help reflecting that these liveries wereof no use to anyone—but they were indubitably necessary, to judge by theamazement of the princess and Kitty when he suggested that they might dowithout liveries,—that these liveries would cost the wages of twolaborers for the summer, that is, would pay for about three hundred workingdays from Easter to Ash Wednesday, and each a day of hard work from earlymorning to late evening—and that hundred-rouble note did stick in histhroat. But the next note, changed to pay for providing a dinner for theirrelations, that cost twenty-eight roubles, though it did excite in Levin thereflection that twenty-eight roubles meant nine measures of oats, which menwould with groans and sweat have reaped and bound and thrashed and winnowed andsifted and sown,—this next one he parted with more easily. And now thenotes he changed no longer aroused such reflections, and they flew off likelittle birds. Whether the labor devoted to obtaining the money corresponded tothe pleasure given by what was bought with it, was a consideration he had longago dismissed. His business calculation that there was a certain price belowwhich he could not sell certain grain was forgotten too. The rye, for the priceof which he had so long held out, had been sold for fifty kopecks a measurecheaper than it had been fetching a month ago. Even the consideration that withsuch an expenditure he could not go on living for a year without debt, thateven had no force. Only one thing was essential: to have money in the bank,without inquiring where it came from, so as to know that one had thewherewithal to buy meat for tomorrow. And this condition had hitherto beenfulfilled; he had always had the money in the bank. But now the money in thebank had gone, and he could not quite tell where to get the next installment.And this it was which, at the moment when Kitty had mentioned money, haddisturbed him; but he had no time to think about it. He drove off, thinking ofKatavasov and the meeting with Metrov that was before him.Chapter 3Levin had on this visit to town seen a great deal of his old friend at theuniversity, Professor Katavasov, whom he had not seen since his marriage. Heliked in Katavasov the clearness and simplicity of his conception of life.Levin thought that the clearness of Katavasov’s conception of life wasdue to the poverty of his nature; Katavasov thought that the disconnectednessof Levin’s ideas was due to his lack of intellectual discipline; butLevin enjoyed Katavasov’s clearness, and Katavasov enjoyed the abundanceof Levin’s untrained ideas, and they liked to meet and to discuss.Levin had read Katavasov some parts of his book, and he had liked them. On theprevious day Katavasov had met Levin at a public lecture and told him that thecelebrated Metrov, whose article Levin had so much liked, was in Moscow, thathe had been much interested by what Katavasov had told him about Levin’swork, and that he was coming to see him tomorrow at eleven, and would be veryglad to make Levin’s acquaintance.“You’re positively a reformed character, I’m glad tosee,” said Katavasov, meeting Levin in the little drawing-room. “Iheard the bell and thought: Impossible that it can be he at the exact time!...Well, what do you say to the Montenegrins now? They’re a race ofwarriors.”“Why, what’s happened?” asked Levin.Katavasov in a few words told him the last piece of news from the war, andgoing into his study, introduced Levin to a short, thick-set man of pleasantappearance. This was Metrov. The conversation touched for a brief space onpolitics and on how recent events were looked at in the higher spheres inPetersburg. Metrov repeated a saying that had reached him through a mosttrustworthy source, reported as having been uttered on this subject by the Tsarand one of the ministers. Katavasov had heard also on excellent authority thatthe Tsar had said something quite different. Levin tried to imaginecircumstances in which both sayings might have been uttered, and theconversation on that topic dropped.“Yes, here he’s written almost a book on the natural conditions ofthe laborer in relation to the land,” said Katavasov; “I’mnot a specialist, but I, as a natural science man, was pleased at his nottaking mankind as something outside biological laws; but, on the contrary,seeing his dependence on his surroundings, and in that dependence seeking thelaws of his development.”“That’s very interesting,” said Metrov.“What I began precisely was to write a book on agriculture; but studyingthe chief instrument of agriculture, the laborer,” said Levin, reddening,“I could not help coming to quite unexpected results.”And Levin began carefully, as it were, feeling his ground, to expound hisviews. He knew Metrov had written an article against the generally acceptedtheory of political economy, but to what extent he could reckon on his sympathywith his own new views he did not know and could not guess from the clever andserene face of the learned man.“But in what do you see the special characteristics of the Russianlaborer?” said Metrov; “in his biological characteristics, so tospeak, or in the condition in which he is placed?”Levin saw that there was an idea underlying this question with which he did notagree. But he went on explaining his own idea that the Russian laborer has aquite special view of the land, different from that of other people; and tosupport this proposition he made haste to add that in his opinion this attitudeof the Russian peasant was due to the consciousness of his vocation to peoplevast unoccupied expanses in the East.“One may easily be led into error in basing any conclusion on the generalvocation of a people,” said Metrov, interrupting Levin. “Thecondition of the laborer will always depend on his relation to the land and tocapital.”And without letting Levin finish explaining his idea, Metrov began expoundingto him the special point of his own theory.In what the point of his theory lay, Levin did not understand, because he didnot take the trouble to understand. He saw that Metrov, like other people, inspite of his own article, in which he had attacked the current theory ofpolitical economy, looked at the position of the Russian peasant simply fromthe point of view of capital, wages, and rent. He would indeed have beenobliged to admit that in the eastern—much the larger—part of Russiarent was as yet nil, that for nine-tenths of the eighty millions of the Russianpeasants wages took the form simply of food provided for themselves, and thatcapital does not so far exist except in the form of the most primitive tools.Yet it was only from that point of view that he considered every laborer,though in many points he differed from the economists and had his own theory ofthe wage-fund, which he expounded to Levin.Levin listened reluctantly, and at first made objections. He would have likedto interrupt Metrov, to explain his own thought, which in his opinion wouldhave rendered further exposition of Metrov’s theories superfluous. Butlater on, feeling convinced that they looked at the matter so differently, thatthey could never understand one another, he did not even oppose his statements,but simply listened. Although what Metrov was saying was by now utterly devoidof interest for him, he yet experienced a certain satisfaction in listening tohim. It flattered his vanity that such a learned man should explain his ideasto him so eagerly, with such intensity and confidence in Levin’sunderstanding of the subject, sometimes with a mere hint referring him to awhole aspect of the subject. He put this down to his own credit, unaware thatMetrov, who had already discussed his theory over and over again with all hisintimate friends, talked of it with special eagerness to every new person, andin general was eager to talk to anyone of any subject that interested him, evenif still obscure to himself.“We are late though,” said Katavasov, looking at his watch directlyMetrov had finished his discourse.“Yes, there’s a meeting of the Society of Amateurs today incommemoration of the jubilee of Svintitch,” said Katavasov in answer toLevin’s inquiry. “Pyotr Ivanovitch and I were going. I’vepromised to deliver an address on his labors in zoology. Come along with us,it’s very interesting.”“Yes, and indeed it’s time to start,” said Metrov.“Come with us, and from there, if you care to, come to my place. I shouldvery much like to hear your work.”“Oh, no! It’s no good yet, it’s unfinished. But I shall bevery glad to go to the meeting.”“I say, friends, have you heard? He has handed in the separatereport,” Katavasov called from the other room, where he was putting onhis frock coat.And a conversation sprang up upon the university question, which was a veryimportant event that winter in Moscow. Three old professors in the council hadnot accepted the opinion of the younger professors. The young ones hadregistered a separate resolution. This, in the judgment of some people, wasmonstrous, in the judgment of others it was the simplest and most just thing todo, and the professors were split up into two parties.One party, to which Katavasov belonged, saw in the opposite party a scoundrellybetrayal and treachery, while the opposite party saw in them childishness andlack of respect for the authorities. Levin, though he did not belong to theuniversity, had several times already during his stay in Moscow heard andtalked about this matter, and had his own opinion on the subject. He took partin the conversation that was continued in the street, as they all three walkedto the buildings of the old university.The meeting had already begun. Round the cloth-covered table, at whichKatavasov and Metrov seated themselves, there were some half-dozen persons, andone of these was bending close over a manuscript, reading something aloud.Levin sat down in one of the empty chairs that were standing round the table,and in a whisper asked a student sitting near what was being read. The student,eyeing Levin with displeasure, said:“Biography.”Though Levin was not interested in the biography, he could not help listening,and learned some new and interesting facts about the life of the distinguishedman of science.When the reader had finished, the chairman thanked him and read some verses ofthe poet Ment sent him on the jubilee, and said a few words by way of thanks tothe poet. Then Katavasov in his loud, ringing voice read his address on thescientific labors of the man whose jubilee was being kept.When Katavasov had finished, Levin looked at his watch, saw it was past one,and thought that there would not be time before the concert to read Metrov hisbook, and indeed, he did not now care to do so. During the reading he hadthought over their conversation. He saw distinctly now that thoughMetrov’s ideas might perhaps have value, his own ideas had a value too,and their ideas could only be made clear and lead to something if each workedseparately in his chosen path, and that nothing would be gained by puttingtheir ideas together. And having made up his mind to refuse Metrov’sinvitation, Levin went up to him at the end of the meeting. Metrov introducedLevin to the chairman, with whom he was talking of the political news. Metrovtold the chairman what he had already told Levin, and Levin made the sameremarks on his news that he had already made that morning, but for the sake ofvariety he expressed also a new opinion which had only just struck him. Afterthat the conversation turned again on the university question. As Levin hadalready heard it all, he made haste to tell Metrov that he was sorry he couldnot take advantage of his invitation, took leave, and drove to Lvov’s.Chapter 4Lvov, the husband of Natalia, Kitty’s sister, had spent all his life inforeign capitals, where he had been educated, and had been in the diplomaticservice.During the previous year he had left the diplomatic service, not owing to any“unpleasantness” (he never had any “unpleasantness”with anyone), and was transferred to the department of the court of the palacein Moscow, in order to give his two boys the best education possible.In spite of the striking contrast in their habits and views and the fact thatLvov was older than Levin, they had seen a great deal of one another thatwinter, and had taken a great liking to each other.Lvov was at home, and Levin went in to him unannounced.Lvov, in a house coat with a belt and in chamois leather shoes, was sitting inan armchair, and with a pince-nez with blue glasses he was reading a book thatstood on a reading desk, while in his beautiful hand he held a half-burnedcigarette daintily away from him.His handsome, delicate, and still youthful-looking face, to which his curly,glistening silvery hair gave a still more aristocratic air, lighted up with asmile when he saw Levin.“Capital! I was meaning to send to you. How’s Kitty? Sit here,it’s more comfortable.” He got up and pushed up a rocking chair.“Have you read the last circular in the Journal de St.Pétersbourg? I think it’s excellent,” he said, with a slightFrench accent.Levin told him what he had heard from Katavasov was being said in Petersburg,and after talking a little about politics, he told him of his interview withMetrov, and the learned society’s meeting. To Lvov it was veryinteresting.“That’s what I envy you, that you are able to mix in theseinteresting scientific circles,” he said. And as he talked, he passed asusual into French, which was easier to him. “It’s true Ihaven’t the time for it. My official work and the children leave me notime; and then I’m not ashamed to own that my education has been toodefective.”“That I don’t believe,” said Levin with a smile, feeling, ashe always did, touched at Lvov’s low opinion of himself, which was not inthe least put on from a desire to seem or to be modest, but was absolutelysincere.“Oh, yes, indeed! I feel now how badly educated I am. To educate mychildren I positively have to look up a great deal, and in fact simply to studymyself. For it’s not enough to have teachers, there must be someone tolook after them, just as on your land you want laborers and an overseer. Seewhat I’m reading”—he pointed to Buslaev’sGrammar on the desk—“it’s expected of Misha, andit’s so difficult.... Come, explain to me.... Here he says....”Levin tried to explain to him that it couldn’t be understood, but that ithad to be taught; but Lvov would not agree with him.“Oh, you’re laughing at it!”“On the contrary, you can’t imagine how, when I look at you,I’m always learning the task that lies before me, that is the educationof one’s children.”“Well, there’s nothing for you to learn,” said Lvov.“All I know,” said Levin, “is that I have never seen betterbrought-up children than yours, and I wouldn’t wish for children betterthan yours.”Lvov visibly tried to restrain the expression of his delight, but he waspositively radiant with smiles.“If only they’re better than I! That’s all I desire. Youdon’t know yet all the work,” he said, “with boyswho’ve been left like mine to run wild abroad.”“You’ll catch all that up. They’re such clever children. Thegreat thing is the education of character. That’s what I learn when Ilook at your children.”“You talk of the education of character. You can’t imagine howdifficult that is! You have hardly succeeded in combating one tendency whenothers crop up, and the struggle begins again. If one had not a support inreligion—you remember we talked about that—no father could bringchildren up relying on his own strength alone without that help.”This subject, which always interested Levin, was cut short by the entrance ofthe beauty Natalia Alexandrovna, dressed to go out.“I didn’t know you were here,” she said, unmistakably feelingno regret, but a positive pleasure, in interrupting this conversation on atopic she had heard so much of that she was by now weary of it. “Well,how is Kitty? I am dining with you today. I tell you what, Arseny,” sheturned to her husband, “you take the carriage.”And the husband and wife began to discuss their arrangements for the day. Asthe husband had to drive to meet someone on official business, while the wifehad to go to the concert and some public meeting of a committee on the EasternQuestion, there was a great deal to consider and settle. Levin had to take partin their plans as one of themselves. It was settled that Levin should go withNatalia to the concert and the meeting, and that from there they should sendthe carriage to the office for Arseny, and he should call for her and take herto Kitty’s; or that, if he had not finished his work, he should send thecarriage back and Levin would go with her.“He’s spoiling me,” Lvov said to his wife; “he assuresme that our children are splendid, when I know how much that’s bad thereis in them.”“Arseny goes to extremes, I always say,” said his wife. “Ifyou look for perfection, you will never be satisfied. And it’s true, aspapa says,—that when we were brought up there was one extreme—wewere kept in the basement, while our parents lived in the best rooms; nowit’s just the other way—the parents are in the wash house, whilethe children are in the best rooms. Parents now are not expected to live atall, but to exist altogether for their children.”“Well, what if they like it better?” Lvov said, with his beautifulsmile, touching her hand. “Anyone who didn’t know you would thinkyou were a stepmother, not a true mother.”“No, extremes are not good in anything,” Natalia said serenely,putting his paper-knife straight in its proper place on the table.“Well, come here, you perfect children,” Lvov said to the twohandsome boys who came in, and after bowing to Levin, went up to their father,obviously wishing to ask him about something.Levin would have liked to talk to them, to hear what they would say to theirfather, but Natalia began talking to him, and then Lvov’s colleague inthe service, Mahotin, walked in, wearing his court uniform, to go with him tomeet someone, and a conversation was kept up without a break upon Herzegovina,Princess Korzinskaya, the town council, and the sudden death of MadameApraksina.Levin even forgot the commission intrusted to him. He recollected it as he wasgoing into the hall.“Oh, Kitty told me to talk to you about Oblonsky,” he said, as Lvovwas standing on the stairs, seeing his wife and Levin off.“Yes, yes, maman wants us, les beaux-frères, to attack him,”he said, blushing. “But why should I?”“Well, then, I will attack him,” said Madame Lvova, with a smile,standing in her white sheepskin cape, waiting till they had finished speaking.“Come, let us go.”Chapter 5At the concert in the afternoon two very interesting things were performed. Onewas a fantasia, King Lear; the other was a quartette dedicated to thememory of Bach. Both were new and in the new style, and Levin was eager to forman opinion of them. After escorting his sister-in-law to her stall, he stoodagainst a column and tried to listen as attentively and conscientiously aspossible. He tried not to let his attention be distracted, and not to spoil hisimpression by looking at the conductor in a white tie, waving his arms, whichalways disturbed his enjoyment of music so much, or the ladies in bonnets, withstrings carefully tied over their ears, and all these people either thinking ofnothing at all or thinking of all sorts of things except the music. He tried toavoid meeting musical connoisseurs or talkative acquaintances, and stoodlooking at the floor straight before him, listening.But the more he listened to the fantasia of King Lear the further hefelt from forming any definite opinion of it. There was, as it were, acontinual beginning, a preparation of the musical expression of some feeling,but it fell to pieces again directly, breaking into new musical motives, orsimply nothing but the whims of the composer, exceedingly complex butdisconnected sounds. And these fragmentary musical expressions, thoughsometimes beautiful, were disagreeable, because they were utterly unexpectedand not led up to by anything. Gaiety and grief and despair and tenderness andtriumph followed one another without any connection, like the emotions of amadman. And those emotions, like a madman’s, sprang up quite unexpectedly.During the whole of the performance Levin felt like a deaf man watching peopledancing, and was in a state of complete bewilderment when the fantasia wasover, and felt a great weariness from the fruitless strain on his attention.Loud applause resounded on all sides. Everyone got up, moved about, and begantalking. Anxious to throw some light on his own perplexity from the impressionsof others, Levin began to walk about, looking for connoisseurs, and was glad tosee a well-known musical amateur in conversation with Pestsov, whom he knew.“Marvelous!” Pestsov was saying in his mellow bass. “How areyou, Konstantin Dmitrievitch? Particularly sculpturesque and plastic, so tosay, and richly colored is that passage where you feel Cordelia’sapproach, where woman, das ewig Weibliche, enters into conflict withfate. Isn’t it?”“You mean ... what has Cordelia to do with it?” Levin askedtimidly, forgetting that the fantasia was supposed to represent King Lear.“Cordelia comes in ... see here!” said Pestsov, tapping his fingeron the satiny surface of the program he held in his hand and passing it toLevin.Only then Levin recollected the title of the fantasia, and made haste to readin the Russian translation the lines from Shakespeare that were printed on theback of the program.“You can’t follow it without that,” said Pestsov, addressingLevin, as the person he had been speaking to had gone away, and he had no oneto talk to.In the entr’acte Levin and Pestsov fell into an argument upon themerits and defects of music of the Wagner school. Levin maintained that themistake of Wagner and all his followers lay in their trying to take music intothe sphere of another art, just as poetry goes wrong when it tries to paint aface as the art of painting ought to do, and as an instance of this mistake hecited the sculptor who carved in marble certain poetic phantasms flitting roundthe figure of the poet on the pedestal. “These phantoms were so far frombeing phantoms that they were positively clinging on the ladder,” saidLevin. The comparison pleased him, but he could not remember whether he had notused the same phrase before, and to Pestsov, too, and as he said it he feltconfused.Pestsov maintained that art is one, and that it can attain its highestmanifestations only by conjunction with all kinds of art.The second piece that was performed Levin could not hear. Pestsov, who wasstanding beside him, was talking to him almost all the time, condemning themusic for its excessive affected assumption of simplicity, and comparing itwith the simplicity of the Pre-Raphaelites in painting. As he went out Levinmet many more acquaintances, with whom he talked of politics, of music, and ofcommon acquaintances. Among others he met Count Bol, whom he had utterlyforgotten to call upon.“Well, go at once then,” Madame Lvova said, when he told her;“perhaps they’ll not be at home, and then you can come to themeeting to fetch me. You’ll find me still there.”Chapter 6“Perhaps they’re not at home?” said Levin, as he went intothe hall of Countess Bola’s house.“At home; please walk in,” said the porter, resolutely removing hisovercoat.“How annoying!” thought Levin with a sigh, taking off one glove andstroking his hat. “What did I come for? What have I to say tothem?”As he passed through the first drawing-room Levin met in the doorway CountessBola, giving some order to a servant with a care-worn and severe face. Onseeing Levin she smiled, and asked him to come into the little drawing-room,where he heard voices. In this room there were sitting in armchairs the twodaughters of the countess, and a Moscow colonel, whom Levin knew. Levin wentup, greeted them, and sat down beside the sofa with his hat on his knees.“How is your wife? Have you been at the concert? We couldn’t go.Mamma had to be at the funeral service.”“Yes, I heard.... What a sudden death!” said Levin.The countess came in, sat down on the sofa, and she too asked after his wifeand inquired about the concert.Levin answered, and repeated an inquiry about Madame Apraksina’s suddendeath.“But she was always in weak health.”“Were you at the opera yesterday?”“Yes, I was.”“Lucca was very good.”“Yes, very good,” he said, and as it was utterly of no consequenceto him what they thought of him, he began repeating what they had heard ahundred times about the characteristics of the singer’s talent. CountessBola pretended to be listening. Then, when he had said enough and paused, thecolonel, who had been silent till then, began to talk. The colonel too talkedof the opera, and about culture. At last, after speaking of the proposedfolle journée at Turin’s, the colonel laughed, got up noisily, andwent away. Levin too rose, but he saw by the face of the countess that it wasnot yet time for him to go. He must stay two minutes longer. He sat down.But as he was thinking all the while how stupid it was, he could not find asubject for conversation, and sat silent.“You are not going to the public meeting? They say it will be veryinteresting,” began the countess.“No, I promised my belle-sœur to fetch her from it,” saidLevin.A silence followed. The mother once more exchanged glances with a daughter.“Well, now I think the time has come,” thought Levin, and he gotup. The ladies shook hands with him, and begged him to say mille chosesto his wife for them.The porter asked him, as he gave him his coat, “Where is your honorstaying?” and immediately wrote down his address in a big handsomelybound book.“Of course I don’t care, but still I feel ashamed and awfullystupid,” thought Levin, consoling himself with the reflection thateveryone does it. He drove to the public meeting, where he was to find hissister-in-law, so as to drive home with her.At the public meeting of the committee there were a great many people, andalmost all the highest society. Levin was in time for the report which, aseveryone said, was very interesting. When the reading of the report was over,people moved about, and Levin met Sviazhsky, who invited him very pressingly tocome that evening to a meeting of the Society of Agriculture, where acelebrated lecture was to be delivered, and Stepan Arkadyevitch, who had onlyjust come from the races, and many other acquaintances; and Levin heard anduttered various criticisms on the meeting, on the new fantasia, and on a publictrial. But, probably from the mental fatigue he was beginning to feel, he madea blunder in speaking of the trial, and this blunder he recalled several timeswith vexation. Speaking of the sentence upon a foreigner who had been condemnedin Russia, and of how unfair it would be to punish him by exile abroad, Levinrepeated what he had heard the day before in conversation from an acquaintance.“I think sending him abroad is much the same as punishing a carp byputting it into the water,” said Levin. Then he recollected that thisidea, which he had heard from an acquaintance and uttered as his own, came froma fable of Krilov’s, and that the acquaintance had picked it up from anewspaper article.After driving home with his sister-in-law, and finding Kitty in good spiritsand quite well, Levin drove to the club.Chapter 7Levin reached the club just at the right time. Members and visitors weredriving up as he arrived. Levin had not been at the club for a very longwhile—not since he lived in Moscow, when he was leaving the universityand going into society. He remembered the club, the external details of itsarrangement, but he had completely forgotten the impression it had made on himin old days. But as soon as, driving into the wide semicircular court andgetting out of the sledge, he mounted the steps, and the hall-porter, adornedwith a crossway scarf, noiselessly opened the door to him with a bow; as soonas he saw in the porter’s room the cloaks and galoshes of members whothought it less trouble to take them off downstairs; as soon as he heard themysterious ringing bell that preceded him as he ascended the easy, carpetedstaircase, and saw the statue on the landing, and the third porter at the topdoors, a familiar figure grown older, in the club livery, opening the doorwithout haste or delay, and scanning the visitors as they passed in—Levinfelt the old impression of the club come back in a rush, an impression ofrepose, comfort, and propriety.“Your hat, please,” the porter said to Levin, who forgot the clubrule to leave his hat in the porter’s room. “Long time sinceyou’ve been. The prince put your name down yesterday. Prince StepanArkadyevitch is not here yet.”The porter did not only know Levin, but also all his ties and relationships,and so immediately mentioned his intimate friends.Passing through the outer hall, divided up by screens, and the room partitionedon the right, where a man sits at the fruit buffet, Levin overtook an old manwalking slowly in, and entered the dining-room full of noise and people.He walked along the tables, almost all full, and looked at the visitors. He sawpeople of all sorts, old and young; some he knew a little, some intimatefriends. There was not a single cross or worried-looking face. All seemed tohave left their cares and anxieties in the porter’s room with their hats,and were all deliberately getting ready to enjoy the material blessings oflife. Sviazhsky was here and Shtcherbatsky, Nevyedovsky and the old prince, andVronsky and Sergey Ivanovitch.“Ah! why are you late?” the prince said smiling, and giving him hishand over his own shoulder. “How’s Kitty?” he added,smoothing out the napkin he had tucked in at his waistcoat buttons.“All right; they are dining at home, all the three of them.”“Ah, ‘Aline-Nadine,’ to be sure! There’s no room withus. Go to that table, and make haste and take a seat,” said the prince,and turning away he carefully took a plate of eel soup.“Levin, this way!” a good-natured voice shouted a little fartheron. It was Turovtsin. He was sitting with a young officer, and beside them weretwo chairs turned upside down. Levin gladly went up to them. He had alwaysliked the good-hearted rake, Turovtsin—he was associated in his mind withmemories of his courtship—and at that moment, after the strain ofintellectual conversation, the sight of Turovtsin’s good-natured face wasparticularly welcome.“For you and Oblonsky. He’ll be here directly.”The young man, holding himself very erect, with eyes forever twinkling withenjoyment, was an officer from Petersburg, Gagin. Turovtsin introduced them.“Oblonsky’s always late.”“Ah, here he is!”“Have you only just come?” said Oblonsky, coming quickly towardsthem. “Good day. Had some vodka? Well, come along then.”Levin got up and went with him to the big table spread with spirits andappetizers of the most various kinds. One would have thought that out of twodozen delicacies one might find something to one’s taste, but StepanArkadyevitch asked for something special, and one of the liveried waitersstanding by immediately brought what was required. They drank a wine-glassfuland returned to their table.At once, while they were still at the soup, Gagin was served with champagne,and told the waiter to fill four glasses. Levin did not refuse the wine, andasked for a second bottle. He was very hungry, and ate and drank with greatenjoyment, and with still greater enjoyment took part in the lively and simpleconversation of his companions. Gagin, dropping his voice, told the last goodstory from Petersburg, and the story, though improper and stupid, was soludicrous that Levin broke into roars of laughter so loud that those nearlooked round.“That’s in the same style as, ‘that’s a thing Ican’t endure!’ You know the story?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Ah, that’s exquisite! Another bottle,” he said to thewaiter, and he began to relate his good story.“Pyotr Illyitch Vinovsky invites you to drink with him,” a littleold waiter interrupted Stepan Arkadyevitch, bringing two delicate glasses ofsparkling champagne, and addressing Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin. StepanArkadyevitch took the glass, and looking towards a bald man with red mustachesat the other end of the table, he nodded to him, smiling.“Who’s that?” asked Levin.“You met him once at my place, don’t you remember? A good-naturedfellow.”Levin did the same as Stepan Arkadyevitch and took the glass.Stepan Arkadyevitch’s anecdote too was very amusing. Levin told hisstory, and that too was successful. Then they talked of horses, of the races,of what they had been doing that day, and of how smartly Vronsky’s Atlashad won the first prize. Levin did not notice how the time passed at dinner.“Ah! and here they are!” Stepan Arkadyevitch said towards the endof dinner, leaning over the back of his chair and holding out his hand toVronsky, who came up with a tall officer of the Guards. Vronsky’s facetoo beamed with the look of good-humored enjoyment that was general in theclub. He propped his elbow playfully on Stepan Arkadyevitch’s shoulder,whispering something to him, and he held out his hand to Levin with the samegood-humored smile.“Very glad to meet you,” he said. “I looked out for you atthe election, but I was told you had gone away.”“Yes, I left the same day. We’ve just been talking of your horse. Icongratulate you,” said Levin. “It was very rapidly run.”“Yes; you’ve race horses too, haven’t you?”“No, my father had; but I remember and know something about it.”“Where have you dined?” asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.“We were at the second table, behind the columns.”“We’ve been celebrating his success,” said the tall colonel.“It’s his second Imperial prize. I wish I might have the luck atcards he has with horses. Well, why waste the precious time? I’m going tothe ‘infernal regions,’” added the colonel, and he walkedaway.“That’s Yashvin,” Vronsky said in answer to Turovtsin, and hesat down in the vacated seat beside them. He drank the glass offered him, andordered a bottle of wine. Under the influence of the club atmosphere or thewine he had drunk, Levin chatted away to Vronsky of the best breeds of cattle,and was very glad not to feel the slightest hostility to this man. He even toldhim, among other things, that he had heard from his wife that she had met himat Princess Marya Borissovna’s.“Ah, Princess Marya Borissovna, she’s exquisite!” said StepanArkadyevitch, and he told an anecdote about her which set them all laughing.Vronsky particularly laughed with such simplehearted amusement that Levin feltquite reconciled to him.“Well, have we finished?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, getting up witha smile. “Let us go.”Chapter 8Getting up from the table, Levin walked with Gagin through the lofty room tothe billiard room, feeling his arms swing as he walked with a peculiarlightness and ease. As he crossed the big room, he came upon his father-in-law.“Well, how do you like our Temple of Indolence?” said the prince,taking his arm. “Come along, come along!”“Yes, I wanted to walk about and look at everything. It’sinteresting.”“Yes, it’s interesting for you. But its interest for me is quitedifferent. You look at those little old men now,” he said, pointing to aclub member with bent back and projecting lip, shuffling towards them in hissoft boots, “and imagine that they were shlupiks like that fromtheir birth up.”“How shlupiks?”“I see you don’t know that name. That’s our club designation.You know the game of rolling eggs: when one’s rolled a long while itbecomes a shlupik. So it is with us; one goes on coming and coming tothe club, and ends by becoming a shlupik. Ah, you laugh! but we lookout, for fear of dropping into it ourselves. You know PrinceTchetchensky?” inquired the prince; and Levin saw by his face that he wasjust going to relate something funny.“No, I don’t know him.”“You don’t say so! Well, Prince Tchetchensky is a well-knownfigure. No matter, though. He’s always playing billiards here. Only threeyears ago he was not a shlupik and kept up his spirits and even used tocall other people shlupiks. But one day he turns up, and our porter ...you know Vassily? Why, that fat one; he’s famous for his bon mots.And so Prince Tchetchensky asks him, ‘Come, Vassily, who’s here?Any shlupiks here yet?’ And he says, ‘You’re thethird.’ Yes, my dear boy, that he did!”Talking and greeting the friends they met, Levin and the prince walked throughall the rooms: the great room where tables had already been set, and the usualpartners were playing for small stakes; the divan room, where they were playingchess, and Sergey Ivanovitch was sitting talking to somebody; the billiardroom, where, about a sofa in a recess, there was a lively party drinkingchampagne—Gagin was one of them. They peeped into the “infernalregions,” where a good many men were crowding round one table, at whichYashvin was sitting. Trying not to make a noise, they walked into the darkreading room, where under the shaded lamps there sat a young man with awrathful countenance, turning over one journal after another, and a baldgeneral buried in a book. They went, too, into what the prince called theintellectual room, where three gentlemen were engaged in a heated discussion ofthe latest political news.“Prince, please come, we’re ready,” said one of his cardparty, who had come to look for him, and the prince went off. Levin sat downand listened, but recalling all the conversation of the morning he felt all ofa sudden fearfully bored. He got up hurriedly, and went to look for Oblonskyand Turovtsin, with whom it had been so pleasant.Turovtsin was one of the circle drinking in the billiard room, and StepanArkadyevitch was talking with Vronsky near the door at the farther corner ofthe room.“It’s not that she’s dull; but this undefined, this unsettledposition,” Levin caught, and he was hurrying away, but StepanArkadyevitch called to him.“Levin,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, and Levin noticed that his eyeswere not full of tears exactly, but moist, which always happened when he hadbeen drinking, or when he was touched. Just now it was due to both causes.“Levin, don’t go,” he said, and he warmly squeezed his armabove the elbow, obviously not at all wishing to let him go.“This is a true friend of mine—almost my greatest friend,” hesaid to Vronsky. “You have become even closer and dearer to me. And Iwant you, and I know you ought, to be friends, and great friends, becauseyou’re both splendid fellows.”“Well, there’s nothing for us now but to kiss and befriends,” Vronsky said, with good-natured playfulness, holding out hishand.Levin quickly took the offered hand, and pressed it warmly.“I’m very, very glad,” said Levin.“Waiter, a bottle of champagne,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“And I’m very glad,” said Vronsky.But in spite of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s desire, and their own desire, theyhad nothing to talk about, and both felt it.“Do you know, he has never met Anna?” Stepan Arkadyevitch said toVronsky. “And I want above everything to take him to see her. Let us go,Levin!”“Really?” said Vronsky. “She will be very glad to see you. Ishould be going home at once,” he added, “but I’m worriedabout Yashvin, and I want to stay on till he finishes.”“Why, is he losing?”“He keeps losing, and I’m the only friend that can restrainhim.”“Well, what do you say to pyramids? Levin, will you play? Capital!”said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Get the table ready,” he said to themarker.“It has been ready a long while,” answered the marker, who hadalready set the balls in a triangle, and was knocking the red one about for hisown diversion.“Well, let us begin.”After the game Vronsky and Levin sat down at Gagin’s table, and at StepanArkadyevitch’s suggestion Levin took a hand in the game.Vronsky sat down at the table, surrounded by friends, who were incessantlycoming up to him. Every now and then he went to the “infernal” tokeep an eye on Yashvin. Levin was enjoying a delightful sense of repose afterthe mental fatigue of the morning. He was glad that all hostility was at an endwith Vronsky, and the sense of peace, decorum, and comfort never left him.When the game was over, Stepan Arkadyevitch took Levin’s arm.“Well, let us go to Anna’s, then. At once? Eh? She is at home. Ipromised her long ago to bring you. Where were you meaning to spend theevening?”“Oh, nowhere specially. I promised Sviazhsky to go to the Society ofAgriculture. By all means, let us go,” said Levin.“Very good; come along. Find out if my carriage is here,” StepanArkadyevitch said to the waiter.Levin went up to the table, paid the forty roubles he had lost; paid his bill,the amount of which was in some mysterious way ascertained by the little oldwaiter who stood at the counter, and swinging his arms he walked through allthe rooms to the way out.Chapter 9“Oblonsky’s carriage!” the porter shouted in an angry bass.The carriage drove up and both got in. It was only for the first few moments,while the carriage was driving out of the clubhouse gates, that Levin was stillunder the influence of the club atmosphere of repose, comfort, andunimpeachable good form. But as soon as the carriage drove out into the street,and he felt it jolting over the uneven road, heard the angry shout of a sledgedriver coming towards them, saw in the uncertain light the red blind of atavern and the shops, this impression was dissipated, and he began to thinkover his actions, and to wonder whether he was doing right in going to seeAnna. What would Kitty say? But Stepan Arkadyevitch gave him no time forreflection, and, as though divining his doubts, he scattered them.“How glad I am,” he said, “that you should know her! You knowDolly has long wished for it. And Lvov’s been to see her, and often goes.Though she is my sister,” Stepan Arkadyevitch pursued, “Idon’t hesitate to say that she’s a remarkable woman. But you willsee. Her position is very painful, especially now.”“Why especially now?”“We are carrying on negotiations with her husband about a divorce. Andhe’s agreed; but there are difficulties in regard to the son, and thebusiness, which ought to have been arranged long ago, has been dragging on forthree months past. As soon as the divorce is over, she will marry Vronsky. Howstupid these old ceremonies are, that no one believes in, and which onlyprevent people being comfortable!” Stepan Arkadyevitch put in.“Well, then their position will be as regular as mine, as yours.”“What is the difficulty?” said Levin.“Oh, it’s a long and tedious story! The whole business is in suchan anomalous position with us. But the point is she has been for three monthsin Moscow, where everyone knows her, waiting for the divorce; she goes outnowhere, sees no woman except Dolly, because, do you understand, shedoesn’t care to have people come as a favor. That fool Princess Varvara,even she has left her, considering this a breach of propriety. Well, you see,in such a position any other woman would not have found resources in herself.But you’ll see how she has arranged her life—how calm, howdignified she is. To the left, in the crescent opposite the church!”shouted Stepan Arkadyevitch, leaning out of the window. “Phew! how hot itis!” he said, in spite of twelve degrees of frost, flinging his openovercoat still wider open.“But she has a daughter: no doubt she’s busy looking afterher?” said Levin.“I believe you picture every woman simply as a female, unecouveuse,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “If she’s occupied,it must be with her children. No, she brings her up capitally, I believe, butone doesn’t hear about her. She’s busy, in the first place, withwhat she writes. I see you’re smiling ironically, but you’re wrong.She’s writing a children’s book, and doesn’t talk about it toanyone, but she read it to me and I gave the manuscript to Vorkuev ... you knowthe publisher ... and he’s an author himself too, I fancy. He understandsthose things, and he says it’s a remarkable piece of work. But are youfancying she’s an authoress?—not a bit of it. She’s a womanwith a heart, before everything, but you’ll see. Now she has a littleEnglish girl with her, and a whole family she’s looking after.”“Oh, something in a philanthropic way?”“Why, you will look at everything in the worst light. It’s not fromphilanthropy, it’s from the heart. They—that is, Vronsky—hada trainer, an Englishman, first-rate in his own line, but a drunkard.He’s completely given up to drink—delirium tremens—and thefamily were cast on the world. She saw them, helped them, got more and moreinterested in them, and now the whole family is on her hands. But not by way ofpatronage, you know, helping with money; she’s herself preparing the boysin Russian for the high school, and she’s taken the little girl to livewith her. But you’ll see her for yourself.”The carriage drove into the courtyard, and Stepan Arkadyevitch rang loudly atthe entrance where sledges were standing.And without asking the servant who opened the door whether the lady were athome, Stepan Arkadyevitch walked into the hall. Levin followed him, more andmore doubtful whether he was doing right or wrong.Looking at himself in the glass, Levin noticed that he was red in the face, buthe felt certain he was not drunk, and he followed Stepan Arkadyevitch up thecarpeted stairs. At the top Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired of the footman, whobowed to him as to an intimate friend, who was with Anna Arkadyevna, andreceived the answer that it was M. Vorkuev.“Where are they?”“In the study.”Passing through the dining-room, a room not very large, with dark, paneledwalls, Stepan Arkadyevitch and Levin walked over the soft carpet to thehalf-dark study, lighted up by a single lamp with a big dark shade. Anotherlamp with a reflector was hanging on the wall, lighting up a big full-lengthportrait of a woman, which Levin could not help looking at. It was the portraitof Anna, painted in Italy by Mihailov. While Stepan Arkadyevitch went behindthe treillage, and the man’s voice which had been speaking paused,Levin gazed at the portrait, which stood out from the frame in the brilliantlight thrown on it, and he could not tear himself away from it. He positivelyforgot where he was, and not even hearing what was said, he could not take hiseyes off the marvelous portrait. It was not a picture, but a living, charmingwoman, with black curling hair, with bare arms and shoulders, with a pensivesmile on the lips, covered with soft down; triumphantly and softly she lookedat him with eyes that baffled him. She was not living only because she was morebeautiful than a living woman can be.“I am delighted!” He heard suddenly near him a voice, unmistakablyaddressing him, the voice of the very woman he had been admiring in theportrait. Anna had come from behind the treillage to meet him, and Levinsaw in the dim light of the study the very woman of the portrait, in a darkblue shot gown, not in the same position nor with the same expression, but withthe same perfection of beauty which the artist had caught in the portrait. Shewas less dazzling in reality, but, on the other hand, there was something freshand seductive in the living woman which was not in the portrait.Chapter 10She had risen to meet him, not concealing her pleasure at seeing him; and inthe quiet ease with which she held out her little vigorous hand, introduced himto Vorkuev and indicated a red-haired, pretty little girl who was sitting atwork, calling her her pupil, Levin recognized and liked the manners of a womanof the great world, always self-possessed and natural.“I am delighted, delighted,” she repeated, and on her lips thesesimple words took for Levin’s ears a special significance. “I haveknown you and liked you for a long while, both from your friendship with Stivaand for your wife’s sake.... I knew her for a very short time, but sheleft on me the impression of an exquisite flower, simply a flower. And to thinkshe will soon be a mother!”She spoke easily and without haste, looking now and then from Levin to herbrother, and Levin felt that the impression he was making was good, and he feltimmediately at home, simple and happy with her, as though he had known her fromchildhood.“Ivan Petrovitch and I settled in Alexey’s study,” she saidin answer to Stepan Arkadyevitch’s question whether he might smoke,“just so as to be able to smoke”—and glancing at Levin,instead of asking whether he would smoke, she pulled closer a tortoise-shellcigar-case and took a cigarette.“How are you feeling today?” her brother asked her.“Oh, nothing. Nerves, as usual.”“Yes, isn’t it extraordinarily fine?” said StepanArkadyevitch, noticing that Levin was scrutinizing the picture.“I have never seen a better portrait.”“And extraordinarily like, isn’t it?” said Vorkuev.Levin looked from the portrait to the original. A peculiar brilliance lightedup Anna’s face when she felt his eyes on her. Levin flushed, and to coverhis confusion would have asked whether she had seen Darya Alexandrovna lately;but at that moment Anna spoke. “We were just talking, Ivan Petrovitch andI, of Vashtchenkov’s last pictures. Have you seen them?”“Yes, I have seen them,” answered Levin.“But, I beg your pardon, I interrupted you ... you were saying?...”Levin asked if she had seen Dolly lately.“She was here yesterday. She was very indignant with the high schoolpeople on Grisha’s account. The Latin teacher, it seems, had been unfairto him.”“Yes, I have seen his pictures. I didn’t care for them verymuch,” Levin went back to the subject she had started.Levin talked now not at all with that purely businesslike attitude to thesubject with which he had been talking all the morning. Every word in hisconversation with her had a special significance. And talking to her waspleasant; still pleasanter it was to listen to her.Anna talked not merely naturally and cleverly, but cleverly and carelessly,attaching no value to her own ideas and giving great weight to the ideas of theperson she was talking to.The conversation turned on the new movement in art, on the new illustrations ofthe Bible by a French artist. Vorkuev attacked the artist for a realism carriedto the point of coarseness.Levin said that the French had carried conventionality further than anyone, andthat consequently they see a great merit in the return to realism. In the factof not lying they see poetry.Never had anything clever said by Levin given him so much pleasure as thisremark. Anna’s face lighted up at once, as at once she appreciated thethought. She laughed.“I laugh,” she said, “as one laughs when one sees a very trueportrait. What you said so perfectly hits off French art now, painting andliterature too, indeed—Zola, Daudet. But perhaps it is always so, thatmen form their conceptions from fictitious, conventional types, andthen—all the combinaisons made—they are tired of thefictitious figures and begin to invent more natural, true figures.”“That’s perfectly true,” said Vorknev.“So you’ve been at the club?” she said to her brother.“Yes, yes, this is a woman!” Levin thought, forgetting himself andstaring persistently at her lovely, mobile face, which at that moment was allat once completely transformed. Levin did not hear what she was talking of asshe leaned over to her brother, but he was struck by the change of herexpression. Her face—so handsome a moment before in itsrepose—suddenly wore a look of strange curiosity, anger, and pride. Butthis lasted only an instant. She dropped her eyelids, as though recollectingsomething.“Oh, well, but that’s of no interest to anyone,” she said,and she turned to the English girl.“Please order the tea in the drawing-room,” she said in English.The girl got up and went out.“Well, how did she get through her examination?” asked StepanArkadyevitch.“Splendidly! She’s a very gifted child and a sweetcharacter.”“It will end in your loving her more than your own.”“There a man speaks. In love there’s no more nor less. I love mydaughter with one love, and her with another.”“I was just telling Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, “that ifshe were to put a hundredth part of the energy she devotes to this English girlto the public question of the education of Russian children, she would be doinga great and useful work.”“Yes, but I can’t help it; I couldn’t do it. Count AlexeyKirillovitch urged me very much” (as she uttered the words CountAlexey Kirillovitch she glanced with appealing timidity at Levin, and heunconsciously responded with a respectful and reassuring look); “he urgedme to take up the school in the village. I visited it several times. Thechildren were very nice, but I could not feel drawn to the work. You speak ofenergy. Energy rests upon love; and come as it will, there’s no forcingit. I took to this child—I could not myself say why.”And she glanced again at Levin. And her smile and her glance—all told himthat it was to him only she was addressing her words, valuing his good opinion,and at the same time sure beforehand that they understood each other.“I quite understand that,” Levin answered. “It’simpossible to give one’s heart to a school or such institutions ingeneral, and I believe that’s just why philanthropic institutions alwaysgive such poor results.”She was silent for a while, then she smiled.“Yes, yes,” she agreed; “I never could. Je n’ai pasle cœur assez large to love a whole asylum of horrid little girls. Celane m’a jamais réussi. There are so many women who have madethemselves une position sociale in that way. And now more thanever,” she said with a mournful, confiding expression, ostensiblyaddressing her brother, but unmistakably intending her words only for Levin,“now when I have such need of some occupation, I cannot.” Andsuddenly frowning (Levin saw that she was frowning at herself for talking aboutherself) she changed the subject. “I know about you,” she said toLevin; “that you’re not a public-spirited citizen, and I havedefended you to the best of my ability.”“How have you defended me?”“Oh, according to the attacks made on you. But won’t you have sometea?” She rose and took up a book bound in morocco.“Give it to me, Anna Arkadyevna,” said Vorkuev, indicating thebook. “It’s well worth taking up.”“Oh, no, it’s all so sketchy.”“I told him about it,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said to his sister,nodding at Levin.“You shouldn’t have. My writing is something after the fashion ofthose little baskets and carving which Liza Mertsalova used to sell me from theprisons. She had the direction of the prison department in that society,”she turned to Levin; “and they were miracles of patience, the work ofthose poor wretches.”And Levin saw a new trait in this woman, who attracted him so extraordinarily.Besides wit, grace, and beauty, she had truth. She had no wish to hide from himall the bitterness of her position. As she said that she sighed, and her facesuddenly taking a hard expression, looked as it were turned to stone. With thatexpression on her face she was more beautiful than ever; but the expression wasnew; it was utterly unlike that expression, radiant with happiness and creatinghappiness, which had been caught by the painter in her portrait. Levin lookedmore than once at the portrait and at her figure, as taking her brother’sarm she walked with him to the high doors and he felt for her a tenderness andpity at which he wondered himself.She asked Levin and Vorkuev to go into the drawing-room, while she stayedbehind to say a few words to her brother. “About her divorce, aboutVronsky, and what he’s doing at the club, about me?” wonderedLevin. And he was so keenly interested by the question of what she was sayingto Stepan Arkadyevitch, that he scarcely heard what Vorkuev was telling him ofthe qualities of the story for children Anna Arkadyevna had written.At tea the same pleasant sort of talk, full of interesting matter, continued.There was not a single instant when a subject for conversation was to seek; onthe contrary, it was felt that one had hardly time to say what one had to say,and eagerly held back to hear what the others were saying. And all that wassaid, not only by her, but by Vorkuev and Stepan Arkadyevitch—all, so itseemed to Levin, gained peculiar significance from her appreciation and hercriticism. While he followed this interesting conversation, Levin was all thetime admiring her—her beauty, her intelligence, her culture, and at thesame time her directness and genuine depth of feeling. He listened and talked,and all the while he was thinking of her inner life, trying to divine herfeelings. And though he had judged her so severely hitherto, now by somestrange chain of reasoning he was justifying her and was also sorry for her,and afraid that Vronsky did not fully understand her. At eleven o’clock,when Stepan Arkadyevitch got up to go (Vorkuev had left earlier), it seemed toLevin that he had only just come. Regretfully Levin too rose.“Good-bye,” she said, holding his hand and glancing into his facewith a winning look. “I am very glad que la glace estrompue.”She dropped his hand, and half closed her eyes.“Tell your wife that I love her as before, and that if she cannot pardonme my position, then my wish for her is that she may never pardon it. To pardonit, one must go through what I have gone through, and may God spare herthat.”“Certainly, yes, I will tell her....” Levin said, blushing.Chapter 11“What a marvelous, sweet and unhappy woman!” he was thinking, as hestepped out into the frosty air with Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Well, didn’t I tell you?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, seeingthat Levin had been completely won over.“Yes,” said Levin dreamily, “an extraordinary woman!It’s not her cleverness, but she has such wonderful depth of feeling.I’m awfully sorry for her!”“Now, please God, everything will soon be settled. Well, well,don’t be hard on people in future,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,opening the carriage door. “Good-bye; we don’t go the sameway.”Still thinking of Anna, of everything, even the simplest phrase in theirconversation with her, and recalling the minutest changes in her expression,entering more and more into her position, and feeling sympathy for her, Levinreached home.At home Kouzma told Levin that Katerina Alexandrovna was quite well, and thather sisters had not long been gone, and he handed him two letters. Levin readthem at once in the hall, that he might not overlook them later. One was fromSokolov, his bailiff. Sokolov wrote that the corn could not be sold, that itwas fetching only five and a half roubles, and that more than that could not begot for it. The other letter was from his sister. She scolded him for herbusiness being still unsettled.“Well, we must sell it at five and a half if we can’t getmore,” Levin decided the first question, which had always before seemedsuch a weighty one, with extraordinary facility on the spot. “It’sextraordinary how all one’s time is taken up here,” he thought,considering the second letter. He felt himself to blame for not having got donewhat his sister had asked him to do for her. “Today, again, I’venot been to the court, but today I’ve certainly not had time.” Andresolving that he would not fail to do it next day, he went up to his wife. Ashe went in, Levin rapidly ran through mentally the day he had spent. All theevents of the day were conversations, conversations he had heard and taken partin. All the conversations were upon subjects which, if he had been alone athome, he would never have taken up, but here they were very interesting. Andall these conversations were right enough, only in two places there wassomething not quite right. One was what he had said about the carp, the otherwas something not “quite the thing” in the tender sympathy he wasfeeling for Anna.Levin found his wife low-spirited and dull. The dinner of the three sisters hadgone off very well, but then they had waited and waited for him, all of themhad felt dull, the sisters had departed, and she had been left alone.“Well, and what have you been doing?” she asked him, lookingstraight into his eyes, which shone with rather a suspicious brightness. Butthat she might not prevent his telling her everything, she concealed her closescrutiny of him, and with an approving smile listened to his account of how hehad spent the evening.“Well, I’m very glad I met Vronsky. I felt quite at ease andnatural with him. You understand, I shall try not to see him, but I’mglad that this awkwardness is all over,” he said, and remembering that byway of trying not to see him, he had immediately gone to call on Anna, heblushed. “We talk about the peasants drinking; I don’t know whichdrinks most, the peasantry or our own class; the peasants do on holidays,but....”But Kitty took not the slightest interest in discussing the drinking habits ofthe peasants. She saw that he blushed, and she wanted to know why.“Well, and then where did you go?”“Stiva urged me awfully to go and see Anna Arkadyevna.”And as he said this, Levin blushed even more, and his doubts as to whether hehad done right in going to see Anna were settled once for all. He knew now thathe ought not to have done so.Kitty’s eyes opened in a curious way and gleamed at Anna’s name,but controlling herself with an effort, she concealed her emotion and deceivedhim.“Oh!” was all she said.“I’m sure you won’t be angry at my going. Stiva begged me to,and Dolly wished it,” Levin went on.“Oh, no!” she said, but he saw in her eyes a constraint that bodedhim no good.“She is a very sweet, very, very unhappy, good woman,” he said,telling her about Anna, her occupations, and what she had told him to say toher.“Yes, of course, she is very much to be pitied,” said Kitty, whenhe had finished. “Whom was your letter from?”He told her, and believing in her calm tone, he went to change his coat.Coming back, he found Kitty in the same easy chair. When he went up to her, sheglanced at him and broke into sobs.“What? what is it?” he asked, knowing beforehand what.“You’re in love with that hateful woman; she has bewitched you! Isaw it in your eyes. Yes, yes! What can it all lead to? You were drinking atthe club, drinking and gambling, and then you went ... to her of all people!No, we must go away.... I shall go away tomorrow.”It was a long while before Levin could soothe his wife. At last he succeeded incalming her, only by confessing that a feeling of pity, in conjunction with thewine he had drunk, had been too much for him, that he had succumbed toAnna’s artful influence, and that he would avoid her. One thing he didwith more sincerity confess to was that living so long in Moscow, a life ofnothing but conversation, eating and drinking, he was degenerating. They talkedtill three o’clock in the morning. Only at three o’clock were theysufficiently reconciled to be able to go to sleep.Chapter 12After taking leave of her guests, Anna did not sit down, but began walking upand down the room. She had unconsciously the whole evening done her utmost toarouse in Levin a feeling of love—as of late she had fallen into doingwith all young men—and she knew she had attained her aim, as far as waspossible in one evening, with a married and conscientious man. She liked himindeed extremely, and, in spite of the striking difference, from the masculinepoint of view, between Vronsky and Levin, as a woman she saw something they hadin common, which had made Kitty able to love both. Yet as soon as he was out ofthe room, she ceased to think of him.One thought, and one only, pursued her in different forms, and refused to beshaken off. “If I have so much effect on others, on this man, who loveshis home and his wife, why is it he is so cold to me?... not coldexactly, he loves me, I know that! But something new is drawing us apart now.Why wasn’t he here all the evening? He told Stiva to say he could notleave Yashvin, and must watch over his play. Is Yashvin a child? But supposingit’s true. He never tells a lie. But there’s something else in itif it’s true. He is glad of an opportunity of showing me that he hasother duties; I know that, I submit to that. But why prove that to me? He wantsto show me that his love for me is not to interfere with his freedom. But Ineed no proofs, I need love. He ought to understand all the bitterness of thislife for me here in Moscow. Is this life? I am not living, but waiting for anevent, which is continually put off and put off. No answer again! And Stivasays he cannot go to Alexey Alexandrovitch. And I can’t write again. Ican do nothing, can begin nothing, can alter nothing; I hold myself in, I wait,inventing amusements for myself—the English family, writing,reading—but it’s all nothing but a sham, it’s all the same asmorphine. He ought to feel for me,” she said, feeling tears of self-pitycoming into her eyes.She heard Vronsky’s abrupt ring and hurriedly dried her tears—notonly dried her tears, but sat down by a lamp and opened a book, affectingcomposure. She wanted to show him that she was displeased that he had not comehome as he had promised—displeased only, and not on any account to lethim see her distress, and least of all, her self-pity. She might pity herself,but he must not pity her. She did not want strife, she blamed him for wantingto quarrel, but unconsciously put herself into an attitude of antagonism.“Well, you’ve not been dull?” he said, eagerly andgood-humoredly, going up to her. “What a terrible passion itis—gambling!”“No, I’ve not been dull; I’ve learned long ago not to bedull. Stiva has been here and Levin.”“Yes, they meant to come and see you. Well, how did you likeLevin?” he said, sitting down beside her.“Very much. They have not long been gone. What was Yashvin doing?”“He was winning—seventeen thousand. I got him away. He had reallystarted home, but he went back again, and now he’s losing.”“Then what did you stay for?” she asked, suddenly lifting her eyesto him. The expression of her face was cold and ungracious. “You toldStiva you were staying on to get Yashvin away. And you have left himthere.”The same expression of cold readiness for the conflict appeared on his facetoo.“In the first place, I did not ask him to give you any message; andsecondly, I never tell lies. But what’s the chief point, I wanted tostay, and I stayed,” he said, frowning. “Anna, what is it for, whywill you?” he said after a moment’s silence, bending over towardsher, and he opened his hand, hoping she would lay hers in it.She was glad of this appeal for tenderness. But some strange force of evilwould not let her give herself up to her feelings, as though the rules ofwarfare would not permit her to surrender.“Of course you wanted to stay, and you stayed. You do everything you wantto. But what do you tell me that for? With what object?” she said,getting more and more excited. “Does anyone contest your rights? But youwant to be right, and you’re welcome to be right.”His hand closed, he turned away, and his face wore a still more obstinateexpression.“For you it’s a matter of obstinacy,” she said, watching himintently and suddenly finding the right word for that expression that irritatedher, “simply obstinacy. For you it’s a question of whether you keepthe upper hand of me, while for me....” Again she felt sorry for herself,and she almost burst into tears. “If you knew what it is for me! When Ifeel as I do now that you are hostile, yes, hostile to me, if you knew whatthis means for me! If you knew how I feel on the brink of calamity at thisinstant, how afraid I am of myself!” And she turned away, hiding hersobs.“But what are you talking about?” he said, horrified at herexpression of despair, and again bending over her, he took her hand and kissedit. “What is it for? Do I seek amusements outside our home? Don’t Iavoid the society of women?”“Well, yes! If that were all!” she said.“Come, tell me what I ought to do to give you peace of mind? I am readyto do anything to make you happy,” he said, touched by her expression ofdespair; “what wouldn’t I do to save you from distress of any sort,as now, Anna!” he said.“It’s nothing, nothing!” she said. “I don’t knowmyself whether it’s the solitary life, my nerves.... Come, don’tlet us talk of it. What about the race? You haven’t told me!” sheinquired, trying to conceal her triumph at the victory, which had anyway beenon her side.He asked for supper, and began telling her about the races; but in his tone, inhis eyes, which became more and more cold, she saw that he did not forgive herfor her victory, that the feeling of obstinacy with which she had beenstruggling had asserted itself again in him. He was colder to her than before,as though he were regretting his surrender. And she, remembering the words thathad given her the victory, “how I feel on the brink of calamity, howafraid I am of myself,” saw that this weapon was a dangerous one, andthat it could not be used a second time. And she felt that beside the love thatbound them together there had grown up between them some evil spirit of strife,which she could not exorcise from his, and still less from her own heart.Chapter 13There are no conditions to which a man cannot become used, especially if hesees that all around him are living in the same way. Levin could not havebelieved three months before that he could have gone quietly to sleep in thecondition in which he was that day, that leading an aimless, irrational life,living too beyond his means, after drinking to excess (he could not call whathappened at the club anything else), forming inappropriately friendly relationswith a man with whom his wife had once been in love, and a still moreinappropriate call upon a woman who could only be called a lost woman, afterbeing fascinated by that woman and causing his wife distress—he couldstill go quietly to sleep. But under the influence of fatigue, a sleeplessnight, and the wine he had drunk, his sleep was sound and untroubled.At five o’clock the creak of a door opening waked him. He jumped up andlooked round. Kitty was not in bed beside him. But there was a light movingbehind the screen, and he heard her steps.“What is it?... what is it?” he said, half-asleep. “Kitty!What is it?”“Nothing,” she said, coming from behind the screen with a candle inher hand. “I felt unwell,” she said, smiling a particularly sweetand meaning smile.“What? has it begun?” he said in terror. “We ought tosend....” and hurriedly he reached after his clothes.“No, no,” she said, smiling and holding his hand. “It’ssure to be nothing. I was rather unwell, only a little. It’s all overnow.”And getting into bed, she blew out the candle, lay down and was still. Thoughhe thought her stillness suspicious, as though she were holding her breath, andstill more suspicious the expression of peculiar tenderness and excitement withwhich, as she came from behind the screen, she said “nothing,” hewas so sleepy that he fell asleep at once. Only later he remembered thestillness of her breathing, and understood all that must have been passing inher sweet, precious heart while she lay beside him, not stirring, inanticipation of the greatest event in a woman’s life. At seveno’clock he was waked by the touch of her hand on his shoulder, and agentle whisper. She seemed struggling between regret at waking him, and thedesire to talk to him.“Kostya, don’t be frightened. It’s all right. But I fancy....We ought to send for Lizaveta Petrovna.”The candle was lighted again. She was sitting up in bed, holding some knitting,which she had been busy upon during the last few days.“Please, don’t be frightened, it’s all right. I’m not abit afraid,” she said, seeing his scared face, and she pressed his handto her bosom and then to her lips.He hurriedly jumped up, hardly awake, and kept his eyes fixed on her, as he puton his dressing gown; then he stopped, still looking at her. He had to go, buthe could not tear himself from her eyes. He thought he loved her face, knew herexpression, her eyes, but never had he seen it like this. How hateful andhorrible he seemed to himself, thinking of the distress he had caused heryesterday. Her flushed face, fringed with soft curling hair under her nightcap, was radiant with joy and courage.Though there was so little that was complex or artificial in Kitty’scharacter in general, Levin was struck by what was revealed now, when suddenlyall disguises were thrown off and the very kernel of her soul shone in hereyes. And in this simplicity and nakedness of her soul, she, the very woman heloved in her, was more manifest than ever. She looked at him, smiling; but allat once her brows twitched, she threw up her head, and going quickly up to him,clutched his hand and pressed close up to him, breathing her hot breath uponhim. She was in pain and was, as it were, complaining to him of her suffering.And for the first minute, from habit, it seemed to him that he was to blame.But in her eyes there was a tenderness that told him that she was far fromreproaching him, that she loved him for her sufferings. “If not I, who isto blame for it?” he thought unconsciously, seeking someone responsiblefor this suffering for him to punish; but there was no one responsible. She wassuffering, complaining, and triumphing in her sufferings, and rejoicing inthem, and loving them. He saw that something sublime was being accomplished inher soul, but what? He could not make it out. It was beyond his understanding.“I have sent to mamma. You go quickly to fetch Lizaveta Petrovna ...Kostya!... Nothing, it’s over.”She moved away from him and rang the bell.“Well, go now; Pasha’s coming. I am all right.”And Levin saw with astonishment that she had taken up the knitting she hadbrought in in the night and begun working at it again.As Levin was going out of one door, he heard the maid-servant come in at theother. He stood at the door and heard Kitty giving exact directions to themaid, and beginning to help her move the bedstead.He dressed, and while they were putting in his horses, as a hired sledge wasnot to be seen yet, he ran again up to the bedroom, not on tiptoe, it seemed tohim, but on wings. Two maid-servants were carefully moving something in thebedroom.Kitty was walking about knitting rapidly and giving directions.“I’m going for the doctor. They have sent for Lizaveta Petrovna,but I’ll go on there too. Isn’t there anything wanted? Yes, shall Igo to Dolly’s?”She looked at him, obviously not hearing what he was saying.“Yes, yes. Do go,” she said quickly, frowning and waving her handto him.He had just gone into the drawing-room, when suddenly a plaintive moan soundedfrom the bedroom, smothered instantly. He stood still, and for a long while hecould not understand.“Yes, that is she,” he said to himself, and clutching at his headhe ran downstairs.“Lord have mercy on us! pardon us! aid us!” he repeated the wordsthat for some reason came suddenly to his lips. And he, an unbeliever, repeatedthese words not with his lips only. At that instant he knew that all hisdoubts, even the impossibility of believing with his reason, of which he wasaware in himself, did not in the least hinder his turning to God. All of thatnow floated out of his soul like dust. To whom was he to turn if not to Him inwhose hands he felt himself, his soul, and his love?The horse was not yet ready, but feeling a peculiar concentration of hisphysical forces and his intellect on what he had to do, he started off on footwithout waiting for the horse, and told Kouzma to overtake him.At the corner he met a night cabman driving hurriedly. In the little sledge,wrapped in a velvet cloak, sat Lizaveta Petrovna with a kerchief round herhead. “Thank God! thank God!” he said, overjoyed to recognize herlittle fair face which wore a peculiarly serious, even stern expression.Telling the driver not to stop, he ran along beside her.“For two hours, then? Not more?” she inquired. “You shouldlet Pyotr Dmitrievitch know, but don’t hurry him. And get some opium atthe chemist’s.”“So you think that it may go on well? Lord have mercy on us and helpus!” Levin said, seeing his own horse driving out of the gate. Jumpinginto the sledge beside Kouzma, he told him to drive to the doctor’s.Chapter 14The doctor was not yet up, and the footman said that “he had been uplate, and had given orders not to be waked, but would get up soon.” Thefootman was cleaning the lamp-chimneys, and seemed very busy about them. Thisconcentration of the footman upon his lamps, and his indifference to what waspassing in Levin, at first astounded him, but immediately on considering thequestion he realized that no one knew or was bound to know his feelings, andthat it was all the more necessary to act calmly, sensibly, and resolutely toget through this wall of indifference and attain his aim.“Don’t be in a hurry or let anything slip,” Levin said tohimself, feeling a greater and greater flow of physical energy and attention toall that lay before him to do.Having ascertained that the doctor was not getting up, Levin considered variousplans, and decided on the following one: that Kouzma should go for anotherdoctor, while he himself should go to the chemist’s for opium, and ifwhen he came back the doctor had not yet begun to get up, he would either bytipping the footman, or by force, wake the doctor at all hazards.At the chemist’s the lank shopman sealed up a packet of powders for acoachman who stood waiting, and refused him opium with the same callousnesswith which the doctor’s footman had cleaned his lamp chimneys. Trying notto get flurried or out of temper, Levin mentioned the names of the doctor andmidwife, and explaining what the opium was needed for, tried to persuade him.The assistant inquired in German whether he should give it, and receiving anaffirmative reply from behind the partition, he took out a bottle and a funnel,deliberately poured the opium from a bigger bottle into a little one, stuck ona label, sealed it up, in spite of Levin’s request that he would not doso, and was about to wrap it up too. This was more than Levin could stand; hetook the bottle firmly out of his hands, and ran to the big glass doors. Thedoctor was not even now getting up, and the footman, busy now in putting downthe rugs, refused to wake him. Levin deliberately took out a ten rouble note,and, careful to speak slowly, though losing no time over the business, hehanded him the note, and explained that Pyotr Dmitrievitch (what a great andimportant personage he seemed to Levin now, this Pyotr Dmitrievitch, who hadbeen of so little consequence in his eyes before!) had promised to come at anytime; that he would certainly not be angry! and that he must therefore wake himat once.The footman agreed, and went upstairs, taking Levin into the waiting room.Levin could hear through the door the doctor coughing, moving about, washing,and saying something. Three minutes passed; it seemed to Levin that more thanan hour had gone by. He could not wait any longer.“Pyotr Dmitrievitch, Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” he said in an imploringvoice at the open door. “For God’s sake, forgive me! See me as youare. It’s been going on more than two hours already.”“In a minute; in a minute!” answered a voice, and to his amazementLevin heard that the doctor was smiling as he spoke.“For one instant.”“In a minute.”Two minutes more passed while the doctor was putting on his boots, and twominutes more while the doctor put on his coat and combed his hair.“Pyotr Dmitrievitch!” Levin was beginning again in a plaintivevoice, just as the doctor came in dressed and ready. “These people haveno conscience,” thought Levin. “Combing his hair, while we’redying!”“Good morning!” the doctor said to him, shaking hands, and, as itwere, teasing him with his composure. “There’s no hurry. Wellnow?”Trying to be as accurate as possible, Levin began to tell him every unnecessarydetail of his wife’s condition, interrupting his account repeatedly withentreaties that the doctor would come with him at once.“Oh, you needn’t be in any hurry. You don’t understand, youknow. I’m certain I’m not wanted, still I’ve promised, and ifyou like, I’ll come. But there’s no hurry. Please sit down;won’t you have some coffee?”Levin stared at him with eyes that asked whether he was laughing at him; butthe doctor had no notion of making fun of him.“I know, I know,” the doctor said, smiling; “I’m amarried man myself; and at these moments we husbands are very much to bepitied. I’ve a patient whose husband always takes refuge in the stableson such occasions.”“But what do you think, Pyotr Dmitrievitch? Do you suppose it may go allright?”“Everything points to a favorable issue.”“So you’ll come immediately?” said Levin, looking wrathfullyat the servant who was bringing in the coffee.“In an hour’s time.”“Oh, for mercy’s sake!”“Well, let me drink my coffee, anyway.”The doctor started upon his coffee. Both were silent.“The Turks are really getting beaten, though. Did you readyesterday’s telegrams?” said the doctor, munching some roll.“No, I can’t stand it!” said Levin, jumping up. “Soyou’ll be with us in a quarter of an hour.”“In half an hour.”“On your honor?”When Levin got home, he drove up at the same time as the princess, and theywent up to the bedroom door together. The princess had tears in her eyes, andher hands were shaking. Seeing Levin, she embraced him, and burst into tears.“Well, my dear Lizaveta Petrovna?” she queried, clasping the handof the midwife, who came out to meet them with a beaming and anxious face.“She’s going on well,” she said; “persuade her to liedown. She will be easier so.”From the moment when he had waked up and understood what was going on, Levinhad prepared his mind to bear resolutely what was before him, and withoutconsidering or anticipating anything, to avoid upsetting his wife, and on thecontrary to soothe her and keep up her courage. Without allowing himself evento think of what was to come, of how it would end, judging from his inquiriesas to the usual duration of these ordeals, Levin had in his imagination bracedhimself to bear up and to keep a tight rein on his feelings for five hours, andit had seemed to him he could do this. But when he came back from thedoctor’s and saw her sufferings again, he fell to repeating more and morefrequently: “Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” He sighed, andflung his head up, and began to feel afraid he could not bear it, that he wouldburst into tears or run away. Such agony it was to him. And only one hour hadpassed.But after that hour there passed another hour, two hours, three, the full fivehours he had fixed as the furthest limit of his sufferings, and the positionwas still unchanged; and he was still bearing it because there was nothing tobe done but bear it; every instant feeling that he had reached the utmostlimits of his endurance, and that his heart would break with sympathy and pain.But still the minutes passed by and the hours, and still hours more, and hismisery and horror grew and were more and more intense.All the ordinary conditions of life, without which one can form no conceptionof anything, had ceased to exist for Levin. He lost all sense of time.Minutes—those minutes when she sent for him and he held her moist hand,that would squeeze his hand with extraordinary violence and then push itaway—seemed to him hours, and hours seemed to him minutes. He wassurprised when Lizaveta Petrovna asked him to light a candle behind a screen,and he found that it was five o’clock in the afternoon. If he had beentold it was only ten o’clock in the morning, he would not have been moresurprised. Where he was all this time, he knew as little as the time ofanything. He saw her swollen face, sometimes bewildered and in agony, sometimessmiling and trying to reassure him. He saw the old princess too, flushed andoverwrought, with her gray curls in disorder, forcing herself to gulp down hertears, biting her lips; he saw Dolly too and the doctor, smoking fatcigarettes, and Lizaveta Petrovna with a firm, resolute, reassuring face, andthe old prince walking up and down the hall with a frowning face. But why theycame in and went out, where they were, he did not know. The princess was withthe doctor in the bedroom, then in the study, where a table set for dinnersuddenly appeared; then she was not there, but Dolly was. Then Levin rememberedhe had been sent somewhere. Once he had been sent to move a table and sofa. Hehad done this eagerly, thinking it had to be done for her sake, and only lateron he found it was his own bed he had been getting ready. Then he had been sentto the study to ask the doctor something. The doctor had answered and then hadsaid something about the irregularities in the municipal council. Then he hadbeen sent to the bedroom to help the old princess to move the holy picture inits silver and gold setting, and with the princess’s old waiting maid hehad clambered on a shelf to reach it and had broken the little lamp, and theold servant had tried to reassure him about the lamp and about his wife, and hecarried the holy picture and set it at Kitty’s head, carefully tucking itin behind the pillow. But where, when, and why all this had happened, he couldnot tell. He did not understand why the old princess took his hand, and lookingcompassionately at him, begged him not to worry himself, and Dolly persuadedhim to eat something and led him out of the room, and even the doctor lookedseriously and with commiseration at him and offered him a drop of something.All he knew and felt was that what was happening was what had happened nearly ayear before in the hotel of the country town at the deathbed of his brotherNikolay. But that had been grief—this was joy. Yet that grief and thisjoy were alike outside all the ordinary conditions of life; they wereloop-holes, as it were, in that ordinary life through which there came glimpsesof something sublime. And in the contemplation of this sublime something thesoul was exalted to inconceivable heights of which it had before had noconception, while reason lagged behind, unable to keep up with it.“Lord, have mercy on us, and succor us!” he repeated to himselfincessantly, feeling, in spite of his long and, as it seemed, completealienation from religion, that he turned to God just as trustfully and simplyas he had in his childhood and first youth.All this time he had two distinct spiritual conditions. One was away from her,with the doctor, who kept smoking one fat cigarette after another andextinguishing them on the edge of a full ashtray, with Dolly, and with the oldprince, where there was talk about dinner, about politics, about MaryaPetrovna’s illness, and where Levin suddenly forgot for a minute what washappening, and felt as though he had waked up from sleep; the other was in herpresence, at her pillow, where his heart seemed breaking and still did notbreak from sympathetic suffering, and he prayed to God without ceasing. Andevery time he was brought back from a moment of oblivion by a scream reachinghim from the bedroom, he fell into the same strange terror that had come uponhim the first minute. Every time he heard a shriek, he jumped up, ran tojustify himself, remembered on the way that he was not to blame, and he longedto defend her, to help her. But as he looked at her, he saw again that help wasimpossible, and he was filled with terror and prayed: “Lord, have mercyon us, and help us!” And as time went on, both these conditions becamemore intense; the calmer he became away from her, completely forgetting her,the more agonizing became both her sufferings and his feeling of helplessnessbefore them. He jumped up, would have liked to run away, but ran to her.Sometimes, when again and again she called upon him, he blamed her; but seeingher patient, smiling face, and hearing the words, “I am worryingyou,” he threw the blame on God; but thinking of God, at once he fell tobeseeching God to forgive him and have mercy.Chapter 15He did not know whether it was late or early. The candles had all burned out.Dolly had just been in the study and had suggested to the doctor that he shouldlie down. Levin sat listening to the doctor’s stories of a quackmesmerizer and looking at the ashes of his cigarette. There had been a periodof repose, and he had sunk into oblivion. He had completely forgotten what wasgoing on now. He heard the doctor’s chat and understood it. Suddenlythere came an unearthly shriek. The shriek was so awful that Levin did not evenjump up, but holding his breath, gazed in terrified inquiry at the doctor. Thedoctor put his head on one side, listened, and smiled approvingly. Everythingwas so extraordinary that nothing could strike Levin as strange. “Isuppose it must be so,” he thought, and still sat where he was. Whosescream was this? He jumped up, ran on tiptoe to the bedroom, edged roundLizaveta Petrovna and the princess, and took up his position at Kitty’spillow. The scream had subsided, but there was some change now. What it was hedid not see and did not comprehend, and he had no wish to see or comprehend.But he saw it by the face of Lizaveta Petrovna. Lizaveta Petrovna’s facewas stern and pale, and still as resolute, though her jaws were twitching, andher eyes were fixed intently on Kitty. Kitty’s swollen and agonized face,a tress of hair clinging to her moist brow, was turned to him and sought hiseyes. Her lifted hands asked for his hands. Clutching his chill hands in hermoist ones, she began squeezing them to her face.“Don’t go, don’t go! I’m not afraid, I’m notafraid!” she said rapidly. “Mamma, take my earrings. They botherme. You’re not afraid? Quick, quick, Lizaveta Petrovna....”She spoke quickly, very quickly, and tried to smile. But suddenly her face wasdrawn, she pushed him away.“Oh, this is awful! I’m dying, I’m dying! Go away!” sheshrieked, and again he heard that unearthly scream.Levin clutched at his head and ran out of the room.“It’s nothing, it’s nothing, it’s all right,”Dolly called after him.But they might say what they liked, he knew now that all was over. He stood inthe next room, his head leaning against the door post, and heard shrieks, howlssuch as he had never heard before, and he knew that what had been Kitty wasuttering these shrieks. He had long ago ceased to wish for the child. By now heloathed this child. He did not even wish for her life now, all he longed forwas the end of this awful anguish.“Doctor! What is it? What is it? By God!” he said, snatching at thedoctor’s hand as he came up.“It’s the end,” said the doctor. And the doctor’s facewas so grave as he said it that Levin took the end as meaning her death.Beside himself, he ran into the bedroom. The first thing he saw was the face ofLizaveta Petrovna. It was even more frowning and stern. Kitty’s face hedid not know. In the place where it had been was something that was fearful inits strained distortion and in the sounds that came from it. He fell down withhis head on the wooden framework of the bed, feeling that his heart wasbursting. The awful scream never paused, it became still more awful, and asthough it had reached the utmost limit of terror, suddenly it ceased. Levincould not believe his ears, but there could be no doubt; the scream had ceasedand he heard a subdued stir and bustle, and hurried breathing, and her voice,gasping, alive, tender, and blissful, uttered softly, “It’sover!”He lifted his head. With her hands hanging exhausted on the quilt, lookingextraordinarily lovely and serene, she looked at him in silence and tried tosmile, and could not.And suddenly, from the mysterious and awful far-away world in which he had beenliving for the last twenty-two hours, Levin felt himself all in an instantborne back to the old every-day world, glorified though now, by such a radianceof happiness that he could not bear it. The strained chords snapped, sobs andtears of joy which he had never foreseen rose up with such violence that hiswhole body shook, that for long they prevented him from speaking.Falling on his knees before the bed, he held his wife’s hand before hislips and kissed it, and the hand, with a weak movement of the fingers,responded to his kiss. And meanwhile, there at the foot of the bed, in the defthands of Lizaveta Petrovna, like a flickering light in a lamp, lay the life ofa human creature, which had never existed before, and which would now with thesame right, with the same importance to itself, live and create in its ownimage.“Alive! alive! And a boy too! Set your mind at rest!” Levin heardLizaveta Petrovna saying, as she slapped the baby’s back with a shakinghand.“Mamma, is it true?” said Kitty’s voice.The princess’s sobs were all the answers she could make. And in the midstof the silence there came in unmistakable reply to the mother’s question,a voice quite unlike the subdued voices speaking in the room. It was the bold,clamorous, self-assertive squall of the new human being, who had soincomprehensibly appeared.If Levin had been told before that Kitty was dead, and that he had died withher, and that their children were angels, and that God was standing before him,he would have been surprised at nothing. But now, coming back to the world ofreality, he had to make great mental efforts to take in that she was alive andwell, and that the creature squalling so desperately was his son. Kitty wasalive, her agony was over. And he was unutterably happy. That he understood; hewas completely happy in it. But the baby? Whence, why, who was he?... He couldnot get used to the idea. It seemed to him something extraneous, superfluous,to which he could not accustom himself.Chapter 16At ten o’clock the old prince, Sergey Ivanovitch, and Stepan Arkadyevitchwere sitting at Levin’s. Having inquired after Kitty, they had droppedinto conversation upon other subjects. Levin heard them, and unconsciously, asthey talked, going over the past, over what had been up to that morning, hethought of himself as he had been yesterday till that point. It was as though ahundred years had passed since then. He felt himself exalted to unattainableheights, from which he studiously lowered himself so as not to wound the peoplehe was talking to. He talked, and was all the time thinking of his wife, of hercondition now, of his son, in whose existence he tried to school himself intobelieving. The whole world of woman, which had taken for him since his marriagea new value he had never suspected before, was now so exalted that he could nottake it in in his imagination. He heard them talk of yesterday’s dinnerat the club, and thought: “What is happening with her now? Is she asleep?How is she? What is she thinking of? Is he crying, my son Dmitri?” And inthe middle of the conversation, in the middle of a sentence, he jumped up andwent out of the room.“Send me word if I can see her,” said the prince.“Very well, in a minute,” answered Levin, and without stopping, hewent to her room.She was not asleep, she was talking gently with her mother, making plans aboutthe christening.Carefully set to rights, with hair well-brushed, in a smart little cap withsome blue in it, her arms out on the quilt, she was lying on her back. Meetinghis eyes, her eyes drew him to her. Her face, bright before, brightened stillmore as he drew near her. There was the same change in it from earthly tounearthly that is seen in the face of the dead. But then it means farewell,here it meant welcome. Again a rush of emotion, such as he had felt at themoment of the child’s birth, flooded his heart. She took his hand andasked him if he had slept. He could not answer, and turned away, strugglingwith his weakness.“I have had a nap, Kostya!” she said to him; “and I am socomfortable now.”She looked at him, but suddenly her expression changed.“Give him to me,” she said, hearing the baby’s cry.“Give him to me, Lizaveta Petrovna, and he shall look at him.”“To be sure, his papa shall look at him,” said Lizaveta Petrovna,getting up and bringing something red, and queer, and wriggling. “Wait aminute, we’ll make him tidy first,” and Lizaveta Petrovna laid thered wobbling thing on the bed, began untrussing and trussing up the baby,lifting it up and turning it over with one finger and powdering it withsomething.Levin, looking at the tiny, pitiful creature, made strenuous efforts todiscover in his heart some traces of fatherly feeling for it. He felt nothingtowards it but disgust. But when it was undressed and he caught a glimpse ofwee, wee, little hands, little feet, saffron-colored, with little toes, too,and positively with a little big toe different from the rest, and when he sawLizaveta Petrovna closing the wide-open little hands, as though they were softsprings, and putting them into linen garments, such pity for the littlecreature came upon him, and such terror that she would hurt it, that he heldher hand back.Lizaveta Petrovna laughed.“Don’t be frightened, don’t be frightened!”When the baby had been put to rights and transformed into a firm doll, LizavetaPetrovna dandled it as though proud of her handiwork, and stood a little awayso that Levin might see his son in all his glory.Kitty looked sideways in the same direction, never taking her eyes off thebaby. “Give him to me! give him to me!” she said, and even made asthough she would sit up.“What are you thinking of, Katerina Alexandrovna, you mustn’t movelike that! Wait a minute. I’ll give him to you. Here we’re showingpapa what a fine fellow we are!”And Lizaveta Petrovna, with one hand supporting the wobbling head, lifted up onthe other arm the strange, limp, red creature, whose head was lost in itsswaddling clothes. But it had a nose, too, and slanting eyes and smacking lips.“A splendid baby!” said Lizaveta Petrovna.Levin sighed with mortification. This splendid baby excited in him no feelingbut disgust and compassion. It was not at all the feeling he had looked forwardto.He turned away while Lizaveta Petrovna put the baby to the unaccustomed breast.Suddenly laughter made him look round. The baby had taken the breast.“Come, that’s enough, that’s enough!” said LizavetaPetrovna, but Kitty would not let the baby go. He fell asleep in her arms.“Look, now,” said Kitty, turning the baby so that he could see it.The aged-looking little face suddenly puckered up still more and the babysneezed.Smiling, hardly able to restrain his tears, Levin kissed his wife and went outof the dark room. What he felt towards this little creature was utterly unlikewhat he had expected. There was nothing cheerful and joyous in the feeling; onthe contrary, it was a new torture of apprehension. It was the consciousness ofa new sphere of liability to pain. And this sense was so painful at first, theapprehension lest this helpless creature should suffer was so intense, that itprevented him from noticing the strange thrill of senseless joy and even pridethat he had felt when the baby sneezed.Chapter 17Stepan Arkadyevitch’s affairs were in a very bad way.The money for two-thirds of the forest had all been spent already, and he hadborrowed from the merchant in advance at ten per cent discount, almost all theremaining third. The merchant would not give more, especially as DaryaAlexandrovna, for the first time that winter insisting on her right to her ownproperty, had refused to sign the receipt for the payment of the last third ofthe forest. All his salary went on household expenses and in payment of pettydebts that could not be put off. There was positively no money.This was unpleasant and awkward, and in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s opinionthings could not go on like this. The explanation of the position was, in hisview, to be found in the fact that his salary was too small. The post he filledhad been unmistakably very good five years ago, but it was so no longer.Petrov, the bank director, had twelve thousand; Sventitsky, a company director,had seventeen thousand; Mitin, who had founded a bank, received fifty thousand.“Clearly I’ve been napping, and they’ve overlooked me,”Stepan Arkadyevitch thought about himself. And he began keeping his eyes andears open, and towards the end of the winter he had discovered a very goodberth and had formed a plan of attack upon it, at first from Moscow throughaunts, uncles, and friends, and then, when the matter was well advanced, in thespring, he went himself to Petersburg. It was one of those snug, lucrativeberths of which there are so many more nowadays than there used to be, withincomes ranging from one thousand to fifty thousand roubles. It was the post ofsecretary of the committee of the amalgamated agency of the southern railways,and of certain banking companies. This position, like all such appointments,called for such immense energy and such varied qualifications, that it wasdifficult for them to be found united in any one man. And since a man combiningall the qualifications was not to be found, it was at least better that thepost be filled by an honest than by a dishonest man. And Stepan Arkadyevitchwas not merely an honest man—unemphatically—in the commonacceptation of the words, he was an honest man—emphatically—in thatspecial sense which the word has in Moscow, when they talk of an“honest” politician, an “honest” writer, an“honest” newspaper, an “honest” institution, an“honest” tendency, meaning not simply that the man or theinstitution is not dishonest, but that they are capable on occasion of taking aline of their own in opposition to the authorities.Stepan Arkadyevitch moved in those circles in Moscow in which that expressionhad come into use, was regarded there as an honest man, and so had more rightto this appointment than others.The appointment yielded an income of from seven to ten thousand a year, andOblonsky could fill it without giving up his government position. It was in thehands of two ministers, one lady, and two Jews, and all these people, thoughthe way had been paved already with them, Stepan Arkadyevitch had to see inPetersburg. Besides this business, Stepan Arkadyevitch had promised his sisterAnna to obtain from Karenin a definite answer on the question of divorce. Andbegging fifty roubles from Dolly, he set off for Petersburg.Stepan Arkadyevitch sat in Karenin’s study listening to his report on thecauses of the unsatisfactory position of Russian finance, and only waiting forthe moment when he would finish to speak about his own business or about Anna.“Yes, that’s very true,” he said, when Alexey Alexandrovitchtook off the pince-nez, without which he could not read now, and lookedinquiringly at his former brother-in-law, “that’s very true inparticular cases, but still the principle of our day is freedom.”“Yes, but I lay down another principle, embracing the principle offreedom,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, with emphasis on the word“embracing,” and he put on his pince-nez again, so as to read thepassage in which this statement was made. And turning over the beautifullywritten, wide-margined manuscript, Alexey Alexandrovitch read aloud over againthe conclusive passage.“I don’t advocate protection for the sake of private interests, butfor the public weal, and for the lower and upper classes equally,” hesaid, looking over his pince-nez at Oblonsky. “But they cannotgrasp that, they are taken up now with personal interests, and carriedaway by phrases.”Stepan Arkadyevitch knew that when Karenin began to talk of what theywere doing and thinking, the persons who would not accept his report and werethe cause of everything wrong in Russia, that it was coming near the end. Andso now he eagerly abandoned the principle of free-trade, and fully agreed.Alexey Alexandrovitch paused, thoughtfully turning over the pages of hismanuscript.“Oh, by the way,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, “I wanted to askyou, some time when you see Pomorsky, to drop him a hint that I should be veryglad to get that new appointment of secretary of the committee of theamalgamated agency of the southern railways and banking companies.”Stepan Arkadyevitch was familiar by now with the title of the post he coveted,and he brought it out rapidly without mistake.Alexey Alexandrovitch questioned him as to the duties of this new committee,and pondered. He was considering whether the new committee would not be actingin some way contrary to the views he had been advocating. But as the influenceof the new committee was of a very complex nature, and his views were of verywide application, he could not decide this straight off, and taking off hispince-nez, he said:“Of course, I can mention it to him; but what is your reason preciselyfor wishing to obtain the appointment?”“It’s a good salary, rising to nine thousand, and mymeans....”“Nine thousand!” repeated Alexey Alexandrovitch, and he frowned.The high figure of the salary made him reflect that on that side StepanArkadyevitch’s proposed position ran counter to the main tendency of hisown projects of reform, which always leaned towards economy.“I consider, and I have embodied my views in a note on the subject, thatin our day these immense salaries are evidence of the unsound economicassiette of our finances.”“But what’s to be done?” said Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Suppose a bank director gets ten thousand—well, he’s worthit; or an engineer gets twenty thousand—after all, it’s a growingthing, you know!”“I assume that a salary is the price paid for a commodity, and it oughtto conform with the law of supply and demand. If the salary is fixed withoutany regard for that law, as, for instance, when I see two engineers leavingcollege together, both equally well trained and efficient, and one gettingforty thousand while the other is satisfied with two; or when I see lawyers andhussars, having no special qualifications, appointed directors of bankingcompanies with immense salaries, I conclude that the salary is not fixed inaccordance with the law of supply and demand, but simply through personalinterest. And this is an abuse of great gravity in itself, and one that reactsinjuriously on the government service. I consider....”Stepan Arkadyevitch made haste to interrupt his brother-in-law.“Yes; but you must agree that it’s a new institution of undoubtedutility that’s being started. After all, you know, it’s a growingthing! What they lay particular stress on is the thing being carried onhonestly,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch with emphasis.But the Moscow significance of the word “honest” was lost on AlexeyAlexandrovitch.“Honesty is only a negative qualification,” he said.“Well, you’ll do me a great service, anyway,” said StepanArkadyevitch, “by putting in a word to Pomorsky—just in the way ofconversation....”“But I fancy it’s more in Volgarinov’s hands,” saidAlexey Alexandrovitch.“Volgarinov has fully assented, as far as he’s concerned,”said Stepan Arkadyevitch, turning red. Stepan Arkadyevitch reddened at themention of that name, because he had been that morning at the JewVolgarinov’s, and the visit had left an unpleasant recollection.Stepan Arkadyevitch believed most positively that the committee in which he wastrying to get an appointment was a new, genuine, and honest public body, butthat morning when Volgarinov had—intentionally, beyond a doubt—kepthim two hours waiting with other petitioners in his waiting room, he hadsuddenly felt uneasy.Whether he was uncomfortable that he, a descendant of Rurik, Prince Oblonsky,had been kept for two hours waiting to see a Jew, or that for the first time inhis life he was not following the example of his ancestors in serving thegovernment, but was turning off into a new career, anyway he was veryuncomfortable. During those two hours in Volgarinov’s waiting room StepanArkadyevitch, stepping jauntily about the room, pulling his whiskers, enteringinto conversation with the other petitioners, and inventing an epigram on hisposition, assiduously concealed from others, and even from himself, the feelinghe was experiencing.But all the time he was uncomfortable and angry, he could not have saidwhy—whether because he could not get his epigram just right, or from someother reason. When at last Volgarinov had received him with exaggeratedpoliteness and unmistakable triumph at his humiliation, and had all but refusedthe favor asked of him, Stepan Arkadyevitch had made haste to forget it all assoon as possible. And now, at the mere recollection, he blushed.Chapter 18“Now there is something I want to talk about, and you know what it is.About Anna,” Stepan Arkadyevitch said, pausing for a brief space, andshaking off the unpleasant impression.As soon as Oblonsky uttered Anna’s name, the face of AlexeyAlexandrovitch was completely transformed; all the life was gone out of it, andit looked weary and dead.“What is it exactly that you want from me?” he said, moving in hischair and snapping his pince-nez.“A definite settlement, Alexey Alexandrovitch, some settlement of theposition. I’m appealing to you” (“not as an injuredhusband,” Stepan Arkadyevitch was going to say, but afraid of wreckinghis negotiation by this, he changed the words) “not as a statesman”(which did not sound à propos), “but simply as a man, and agood-hearted man and a Christian. You must have pity on her,” he said.“That is, in what way precisely?” Karenin said softly.“Yes, pity on her. If you had seen her as I have!—I have beenspending all the winter with her—you would have pity on her. Her positionis awful, simply awful!”“I had imagined,” answered Alexey Alexandrovitch in a higher,almost shrill voice, “that Anna Arkadyevna had everything she had desiredfor herself.”“Oh, Alexey Alexandrovitch, for heaven’s sake, don’t let usindulge in recriminations! What is past is past, and you know what she wantsand is waiting for—divorce.”“But I believe Anna Arkadyevna refuses a divorce, if I make it acondition to leave me my son. I replied in that sense, and supposed that thematter was ended. I consider it at an end,” shrieked AlexeyAlexandrovitch.“But, for heaven’s sake, don’t get hot!” said StepanArkadyevitch, touching his brother-in-law’s knee. “The matter isnot ended. If you will allow me to recapitulate, it was like this: when youparted, you were as magnanimous as could possibly be; you were ready to giveher everything—freedom, divorce even. She appreciated that. No,don’t think that. She did appreciate it—to such a degree that atthe first moment, feeling how she had wronged you, she did not consider andcould not consider everything. She gave up everything. But experience, time,have shown that her position is unbearable, impossible.”“The life of Anna Arkadyevna can have no interest for me,” AlexeyAlexandrovitch put in, lifting his eyebrows.“Allow me to disbelieve that,” Stepan Arkadyevitch replied gently.“Her position is intolerable for her, and of no benefit to anyonewhatever. She has deserved it, you will say. She knows that and asks you fornothing; she says plainly that she dare not ask you. But I, all of us, herrelatives, all who love her, beg you, entreat you. Why should she suffer? Whois any the better for it?”“Excuse me, you seem to put me in the position of the guiltyparty,” observed Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Oh, no, oh, no, not at all! please understand me,” said StepanArkadyevitch, touching his hand again, as though feeling sure this physicalcontact would soften his brother-in-law. “All I say is this: her positionis intolerable, and it might be alleviated by you, and you will lose nothing byit. I will arrange it all for you, so that you’ll not notice it. You didpromise it, you know.”“The promise was given before. And I had supposed that the question of myson had settled the matter. Besides, I had hoped that Anna Arkadyevna hadenough generosity....” Alexey Alexandrovitch articulated with difficulty,his lips twitching and his face white.“She leaves it all to your generosity. She begs, she implores one thingof you—to extricate her from the impossible position in which she isplaced. She does not ask for her son now. Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are a goodman. Put yourself in her position for a minute. The question of divorce for herin her position is a question of life and death. If you had not promised itonce, she would have reconciled herself to her position, she would have gone onliving in the country. But you promised it, and she wrote to you, and moved toMoscow. And here she’s been for six months in Moscow, where every chancemeeting cuts her to the heart, every day expecting an answer. Why, it’slike keeping a condemned criminal for six months with the rope round his neck,promising him perhaps death, perhaps mercy. Have pity on her, and I willundertake to arrange everything. Vos scrupules....”“I am not talking about that, about that....” Alexey Alexandrovitchinterrupted with disgust. “But, perhaps, I promised what I had no rightto promise.”“So you go back from your promise?”“I have never refused to do all that is possible, but I want time toconsider how much of what I promised is possible.”“No, Alexey Alexandrovitch!” cried Oblonsky, jumping up, “Iwon’t believe that! She’s unhappy as only an unhappy woman can be,and you cannot refuse in such....”“As much of what I promised as is possible. Vous professezd’être libre penseur. But I as a believer cannot, in a matter of suchgravity, act in opposition to the Christian law.”“But in Christian societies and among us, as far as I’m aware,divorce is allowed,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Divorce issanctioned even by our church. And we see....”“It is allowed, but not in the sense....”“Alexey Alexandrovitch, you are not like yourself,” said Oblonsky,after a brief pause. “Wasn’t it you (and didn’t we allappreciate it in you?) who forgave everything, and moved simply by Christianfeeling was ready to make any sacrifice? You said yourself: if a man take thycoat, give him thy cloak also, and now....”“I beg,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch shrilly, getting suddenly ontohis feet, his face white and his jaws twitching, “I beg you to drop this... to drop ... this subject!”“Oh, no! Oh, forgive me, forgive me if I have wounded you,” saidStepan Arkadyevitch, holding out his hand with a smile of embarrassment;“but like a messenger I have simply performed the commission givenme.”Alexey Alexandrovitch gave him his hand, pondered a little, and said:“I must think it over and seek for guidance. The day after tomorrow Iwill give you a final answer,” he said, after considering a moment.Chapter 19Stepan Arkadyevitch was about to go away when Korney came in to announce:“Sergey Alexyevitch!”“Who’s Sergey Alexyevitch?” Stepan Arkadyevitch wasbeginning, but he remembered immediately.“Ah, Seryozha!” he said aloud. “Sergey Alexyevitch! I thoughtit was the director of a department. Anna asked me to see him too,” hethought.And he recalled the timid, piteous expression with which Anna had said to himat parting: “Anyway, you will see him. Find out exactly where he is, whois looking after him. And Stiva ... if it were possible! Could it bepossible?” Stepan Arkadyevitch knew what was meant by that “if itwere possible,”—if it were possible to arrange the divorce so as tolet her have her son.... Stepan Arkadyevitch saw now that it was no good todream of that, but still he was glad to see his nephew.Alexey Alexandrovitch reminded his brother-in-law that they never spoke to theboy of his mother, and he begged him not to mention a single word about her.“He was very ill after that interview with his mother, which we had notforeseen,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch. “Indeed, we feared for hislife. But with rational treatment, and sea-bathing in the summer, he regainedhis strength, and now, by the doctor’s advice, I have let him go toschool. And certainly the companionship of school has had a good effect on him,and he is perfectly well, and making good progress.”“What a fine fellow he’s grown! He’s not Seryozha now, butquite full-fledged Sergey Alexyevitch!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,smiling, as he looked at the handsome, broad-shouldered lad in blue coat andlong trousers, who walked in alertly and confidently. The boy looked healthyand good-humored. He bowed to his uncle as to a stranger, but recognizing him,he blushed and turned hurriedly away from him, as though offended and irritatedat something. The boy went up to his father and handed him a note of the markshe had gained in school.“Well, that’s very fair,” said his father, “you cango.”“He’s thinner and taller, and has grown out of being a child into aboy; I like that,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch. “Do you rememberme?”The boy looked back quickly at his uncle.“Yes, mon oncle,” he answered, glancing at his father, andagain he looked downcast.His uncle called him to him, and took his hand.“Well, and how are you getting on?” he said, wanting to talk tohim, and not knowing what to say.The boy, blushing and making no answer, cautiously drew his hand away. As soonas Stepan Arkadyevitch let go his hand, he glanced doubtfully at his father,and like a bird set free, he darted out of the room.A year had passed since the last time Seryozha had seen his mother. Since thenhe had heard nothing more of her. And in the course of that year he had gone toschool, and made friends among his schoolfellows. The dreams and memories ofhis mother, which had made him ill after seeing her, did not occupy histhoughts now. When they came back to him, he studiously drove them away,regarding them as shameful and girlish, below the dignity of a boy and aschoolboy. He knew that his father and mother were separated by some quarrel,he knew that he had to remain with his father, and he tried to get used to thatidea.He disliked seeing his uncle, so like his mother, for it called up thosememories of which he was ashamed. He disliked it all the more as from somewords he had caught as he waited at the study door, and still more from thefaces of his father and uncle, he guessed that they must have been talking ofhis mother. And to avoid condemning the father with whom he lived and on whomhe was dependent, and, above all, to avoid giving way to sentimentality, whichhe considered so degrading, Seryozha tried not to look at his uncle who hadcome to disturb his peace of mind, and not to think of what he recalled to him.But when Stepan Arkadyevitch, going out after him, saw him on the stairs, andcalling to him, asked him how he spent his playtime at school, Seryozha talkedmore freely to him away from his father’s presence.“We have a railway now,” he said in answer to his uncle’squestion. “It’s like this, do you see: two sit on abench—they’re the passengers; and one stands up straight on thebench. And all are harnessed to it by their arms or by their belts, and theyrun through all the rooms—the doors are left open beforehand. Well, andit’s pretty hard work being the conductor!”“That’s the one that stands?” Stepan Arkadyevitch inquired,smiling.“Yes, you want pluck for it, and cleverness too, especially when theystop all of a sudden, or someone falls down.”“Yes, that must be a serious matter,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,watching with mournful interest the eager eyes, like his mother’s; notchildish now—no longer fully innocent. And though he had promised AlexeyAlexandrovitch not to speak of Anna, he could not restrain himself.“Do you remember your mother?” he asked suddenly.“No, I don’t,” Seryozha said quickly. He blushed crimson, andhis face clouded over. And his uncle could get nothing more out of him. Histutor found his pupil on the staircase half an hour later, and for a long whilehe could not make out whether he was ill-tempered or crying.“What is it? I expect you hurt yourself when you fell down?” saidthe tutor. “I told you it was a dangerous game. And we shall have tospeak to the director.”“If I had hurt myself, nobody should have found it out, that’scertain.”“Well, what is it, then?”“Leave me alone! If I remember, or if I don’t remember?... whatbusiness is it of his? Why should I remember? Leave me in peace!” hesaid, addressing not his tutor, but the whole world.Chapter 20Stepan Arkadyevitch, as usual, did not waste his time in Petersburg. InPetersburg, besides business, his sister’s divorce, and his covetedappointment, he wanted, as he always did, to freshen himself up, as he said,after the mustiness of Moscow.In spite of its cafés chantants and its omnibuses, Moscow was yet astagnant bog. Stepan Arkadyevitch always felt it. After living for some time inMoscow, especially in close relations with his family, he was conscious of adepression of spirits. After being a long time in Moscow without a change, hereached a point when he positively began to be worrying himself over hiswife’s ill-humor and reproaches, over his children’s health andeducation, and the petty details of his official work; even the fact of beingin debt worried him. But he had only to go and stay a little while inPetersburg, in the circle there in which he moved, where peoplelived—really lived—instead of vegetating as in Moscow, and all suchideas vanished and melted away at once, like wax before the fire. His wife?...Only that day he had been talking to Prince Tchetchensky. Prince Tchetchenskyhad a wife and family, grown-up pages in the corps, ... and he had anotherillegitimate family of children also. Though the first family was very nicetoo, Prince Tchetchensky felt happier in his second family; and he used to takehis eldest son with him to his second family, and told Stepan Arkadyevitch thathe thought it good for his son, enlarging his ideas. What would have been saidto that in Moscow?His children? In Petersburg children did not prevent their parents fromenjoying life. The children were brought up in schools, and there was no traceof the wild idea that prevailed in Moscow, in Lvov’s household, forinstance, that all the luxuries of life were for the children, while theparents have nothing but work and anxiety. Here people understood that a man isin duty bound to live for himself, as every man of culture should live.His official duties? Official work here was not the stiff, hopeless drudgerythat it was in Moscow. Here there was some interest in official life. A chancemeeting, a service rendered, a happy phrase, a knack of facetious mimicry, anda man’s career might be made in a trice. So it had been with Bryantsev,whom Stepan Arkadyevitch had met the previous day, and who was one of thehighest functionaries in government now. There was some interest in officialwork like that.The Petersburg attitude on pecuniary matters had an especially soothing effecton Stepan Arkadyevitch. Bartnyansky, who must spend at least fifty thousand tojudge by the style he lived in, had made an interesting comment the day beforeon that subject.As they were talking before dinner, Stepan Arkadyevitch said to Bartnyansky:“You’re friendly, I fancy, with Mordvinsky; you might do me afavor: say a word to him, please, for me. There’s an appointment I shouldlike to get—secretary of the agency....”“Oh, I shan’t remember all that, if you tell it to me.... But whatpossesses you to have to do with railways and Jews?... Take it as you will,it’s a low business.”Stepan Arkadyevitch did not say to Bartnyansky that it was a “growingthing”—Bartnyansky would not have understood that.“I want the money, I’ve nothing to live on.”“You’re living, aren’t you?”“Yes, but in debt.”“Are you, though? Heavily?” said Bartnyansky sympathetically.“Very heavily: twenty thousand.”Bartnyansky broke into good-humored laughter.“Oh, lucky fellow!” said he. “My debts mount up to a millionand a half, and I’ve nothing, and still I can live, as you see!”And Stepan Arkadyevitch saw the correctness of this view not in words only butin actual fact. Zhivahov owed three hundred thousand, and hadn’t afarthing to bless himself with, and he lived, and in style too! Count Krivtsovwas considered a hopeless case by everyone, and yet he kept two mistresses.Petrovsky had run through five millions, and still lived in just the samestyle, and was even a manager in the financial department with a salary oftwenty thousand. But besides this, Petersburg had physically an agreeableeffect on Stepan Arkadyevitch. It made him younger. In Moscow he sometimesfound a gray hair in his head, dropped asleep after dinner, stretched, walkedslowly upstairs, breathing heavily, was bored by the society of young women,and did not dance at balls. In Petersburg he always felt ten years younger.His experience in Petersburg was exactly what had been described to him on theprevious day by Prince Pyotr Oblonsky, a man of sixty, who had just come backfrom abroad:“We don’t know the way to live here,” said Pyotr Oblonsky.“I spent the summer in Baden, and you wouldn’t believe it, I feltquite a young man. At a glimpse of a pretty woman, my thoughts.... One dinesand drinks a glass of wine, and feels strong and ready for anything. I camehome to Russia—had to see my wife, and, what’s more, go to mycountry place; and there, you’d hardly believe it, in a fortnightI’d got into a dressing gown and given up dressing for dinner.Needn’t say I had no thoughts left for pretty women. I became quite anold gentleman. There was nothing left for me but to think of my eternalsalvation. I went off to Paris—I was as right as could be at once.”Stepan Arkadyevitch felt exactly the difference that Pyotr Oblonsky described.In Moscow he degenerated so much that if he had had to be there for longtogether, he might in good earnest have come to considering his salvation; inPetersburg he felt himself a man of the world again.Between Princess Betsy Tverskaya and Stepan Arkadyevitch there had long existedrather curious relations. Stepan Arkadyevitch always flirted with her in jest,and used to say to her, also in jest, the most unseemly things, knowing thatnothing delighted her so much. The day after his conversation with Karenin,Stepan Arkadyevitch went to see her, and felt so youthful that in this jestingflirtation and nonsense he recklessly went so far that he did not know how toextricate himself, as unluckily he was so far from being attracted by her thathe thought her positively disagreeable. What made it hard to change theconversation was the fact that he was very attractive to her. So that he wasconsiderably relieved at the arrival of Princess Myakaya, which cut short theirtête-à-tête.“Ah, so you’re here!” said she when she saw him. “Well,and what news of your poor sister? You needn’t look at me likethat,” she added. “Ever since they’ve all turned against her,all those who’re a thousand times worse than she, I’ve thought shedid a very fine thing. I can’t forgive Vronsky for not letting me knowwhen she was in Petersburg. I’d have gone to see her and gone about withher everywhere. Please give her my love. Come, tell me about her.”“Yes, her position is very difficult; she....” began StepanArkadyevitch, in the simplicity of his heart accepting as sterling coinPrincess Myakaya’s words “tell me about her.” PrincessMyakaya interrupted him immediately, as she always did, and began talkingherself.“She’s done what they all do, except me—only they hide it.But she wouldn’t be deceitful, and she did a fine thing. And she didbetter still in throwing up that crazy brother-in-law of yours. You must excuseme. Everybody used to say he was so clever, so very clever; I was the only onethat said he was a fool. Now that he’s so thick with Lidia Ivanovna andLandau, they all say he’s crazy, and I should prefer not to agree witheverybody, but this time I can’t help it.”“Oh, do please explain,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch; “what doesit mean? Yesterday I was seeing him on my sister’s behalf, and I askedhim to give me a final answer. He gave me no answer, and said he would think itover. But this morning, instead of an answer, I received an invitation fromCountess Lidia Ivanovna for this evening.”“Ah, so that’s it, that’s it!” said Princess Myakayagleefully, “they’re going to ask Landau what he’s tosay.”“Ask Landau? What for? Who or what’s Landau?”“What! you don’t know Jules Landau, le fameux Jules Landau, leclairvoyant? He’s crazy too, but on him your sister’s fatedepends. See what comes of living in the provinces—you know nothing aboutanything. Landau, do you see, was a commis in a shop in Paris, and hewent to a doctor’s; and in the doctor’s waiting room he fellasleep, and in his sleep he began giving advice to all the patients. Andwonderful advice it was! Then the wife of Yury Meledinsky—you know, theinvalid?—heard of this Landau, and had him to see her husband. And hecured her husband, though I can’t say that I see he did him much good,for he’s just as feeble a creature as ever he was, but they believed inhim, and took him along with them and brought him to Russia. Here there’sbeen a general rush to him, and he’s begun doctoring everyone. He curedCountess Bezzubova, and she took such a fancy to him that she adoptedhim.”“Adopted him?”“Yes, as her son. He’s not Landau any more now, but Count Bezzubov.That’s neither here nor there, though; but Lidia—I’m veryfond of her, but she has a screw loose somewhere—has lost her heart tothis Landau now, and nothing is settled now in her house or AlexeyAlexandrovitch’s without him, and so your sister’s fate is now inthe hands of Landau, alias Count Bezzubov.”Chapter 21After a capital dinner and a great deal of cognac drunk at Bartnyansky’s,Stepan Arkadyevitch, only a little later than the appointed time, went in toCountess Lidia Ivanovna’s.“Who else is with the countess?—a Frenchman?” StepanArkadyevitch asked the hall-porter, as he glanced at the familiar overcoat ofAlexey Alexandrovitch and a queer, rather artless-looking overcoat with clasps.“Alexey Alexandrovitch Karenin and Count Bezzubov,” the porteranswered severely.“Princess Myakaya guessed right,” thought Stepan Arkadyevitch, ashe went upstairs. “Curious! It would be quite as well, though, to get onfriendly terms with her. She has immense influence. If she would say a word toPomorsky, the thing would be a certainty.”It was still quite light out-of-doors, but in Countess Lidia Ivanovna’slittle drawing-room the blinds were drawn and the lamps lighted. At a roundtable under a lamp sat the countess and Alexey Alexandrovitch, talking softly.A short, thinnish man, very pale and handsome, with feminine hips andknock-kneed legs, with fine brilliant eyes and long hair lying on the collar ofhis coat, was standing at the end of the room gazing at the portraits on thewall. After greeting the lady of the house and Alexey Alexandrovitch, StepanArkadyevitch could not resist glancing once more at the unknown man.“Monsieur Landau!” the countess addressed him with a softness andcaution that impressed Oblonsky. And she introduced them.Landau looked round hurriedly, came up, and smiling, laid his moist, lifelesshand in Stepan Arkadyevitch’s outstretched hand and immediately walkedaway and fell to gazing at the portraits again. The countess and AlexeyAlexandrovitch looked at each other significantly.“I am very glad to see you, particularly today,” said CountessLidia Ivanovna, pointing Stepan Arkadyevitch to a seat beside Karenin.“I introduced you to him as Landau,” she said in a soft voice,glancing at the Frenchman and again immediately after at Alexey Alexandrovitch,“but he is really Count Bezzubov, as you’re probably aware. Only hedoes not like the title.”“Yes, I heard so,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch; “they say hecompletely cured Countess Bezzubova.”“She was here today, poor thing!” the countess said, turning toAlexey Alexandrovitch. “This separation is awful for her. It’s sucha blow to her!”“And he positively is going?” queried Alexey Alexandrovitch.“Yes, he’s going to Paris. He heard a voice yesterday,” saidCountess Lidia Ivanovna, looking at Stepan Arkadyevitch.“Ah, a voice!” repeated Oblonsky, feeling that he must be ascircumspect as he possibly could in this society, where something peculiar wasgoing on, or was to go on, to which he had not the key.A moment’s silence followed, after which Countess Lidia Ivanovna, asthough approaching the main topic of conversation, said with a fine smile toOblonsky:“I’ve known you for a long while, and am very glad to make a closeracquaintance with you. Les amis de nos amis sont nos amis. But to be atrue friend, one must enter into the spiritual state of one’s friend, andI fear that you are not doing so in the case of Alexey Alexandrovitch. Youunderstand what I mean?” she said, lifting her fine pensive eyes.“In part, countess, I understand the position of AlexeyAlexandrovitch....” said Oblonsky. Having no clear idea what they weretalking about, he wanted to confine himself to generalities.“The change is not in his external position,” Countess LidiaIvanovna said sternly, following with eyes of love the figure of AlexeyAlexandrovitch as he got up and crossed over to Landau; “his heart ischanged, a new heart has been vouchsafed him, and I fear you don’t fullyapprehend the change that has taken place in him.”“Oh, well, in general outlines I can conceive the change. We have alwaysbeen friendly, and now....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, responding with asympathetic glance to the expression of the countess, and mentally balancingthe question with which of the two ministers she was most intimate, so as toknow about which to ask her to speak for him.“The change that has taken place in him cannot lessen his love for hisneighbors; on the contrary, that change can only intensify love in his heart.But I am afraid you do not understand me. Won’t you have some tea?”she said, with her eyes indicating the footman, who was handing round tea on atray.“Not quite, countess. Of course, his misfortune....”“Yes, a misfortune which has proved the highest happiness, when his heartwas made new, was filled full of it,” she said, gazing with eyes full oflove at Stepan Arkadyevitch.“I do believe I might ask her to speak to both of them,” thoughtStepan Arkadyevitch.“Oh, of course, countess,” he said; “but I imagine suchchanges are a matter so private that no one, even the most intimate friend,would care to speak of them.”“On the contrary! We ought to speak freely and help one another.”“Yes, undoubtedly so, but there is such a difference of convictions, andbesides....” said Oblonsky with a soft smile.“There can be no difference where it is a question of holy truth.”“Oh, no, of course; but....” and Stepan Arkadyevitch paused inconfusion. He understood at last that they were talking of religion.“I fancy he will fall asleep immediately,” said AlexeyAlexandrovitch in a whisper full of meaning, going up to Lidia Ivanovna.Stepan Arkadyevitch looked round. Landau was sitting at the window, leaning onhis elbow and the back of his chair, his head drooping. Noticing that all eyeswere turned on him he raised his head and smiled a smile of childlikeartlessness.“Don’t take any notice,” said Lidia Ivanovna, and she lightlymoved a chair up for Alexey Alexandrovitch. “I have observed....”she was beginning, when a footman came into the room with a letter. LidiaIvanovna rapidly ran her eyes over the note, and excusing herself, wrote ananswer with extraordinary rapidity, handed it to the man, and came back to thetable. “I have observed,” she went on, “that Moscow people,especially the men, are more indifferent to religion than anyone.”“Oh, no, countess, I thought Moscow people had the reputation of beingthe firmest in the faith,” answered Stepan Arkadyevitch.“But as far as I can make out, you are unfortunately one of theindifferent ones,” said Alexey Alexandrovitch, turning to him with aweary smile.“How anyone can be indifferent!” said Lidia Ivanovna.“I am not so much indifferent on that subject as I am waiting insuspense,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, with his most deprecating smile.“I hardly think that the time for such questions has come yet forme.”Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna looked at each other.“We can never tell whether the time has come for us or not,” saidAlexey Alexandrovitch severely. “We ought not to think whether we areready or not ready. God’s grace is not guided by human considerations:sometimes it comes not to those that strive for it, and comes to those that areunprepared, like Saul.”“No, I believe it won’t be just yet,” said Lidia Ivanovna,who had been meanwhile watching the movements of the Frenchman. Landau got upand came to them.“Do you allow me to listen?” he asked.“Oh, yes; I did not want to disturb you,” said Lidia Ivanovna,gazing tenderly at him; “sit here with us.”“One has only not to close one’s eyes to shut out the light,”Alexey Alexandrovitch went on.“Ah, if you knew the happiness we know, feeling His presence ever in ourhearts!” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna with a rapturous smile.“But a man may feel himself unworthy sometimes to rise to thatheight,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, conscious of hypocrisy in admittingthis religious height, but at the same time unable to bring himself toacknowledge his free-thinking views before a person who, by a single word toPomorsky, might procure him the coveted appointment.“That is, you mean that sin keeps him back?” said Lidia Ivanovna.“But that is a false idea. There is no sin for believers, their sin hasbeen atoned for. Pardon,” she added, looking at the footman, whocame in again with another letter. She read it and gave a verbal answer:“Tomorrow at the Grand Duchess’s, say.” “For thebeliever sin is not,” she went on.“Yes, but faith without works is dead,” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,recalling the phrase from the catechism, and only by his smile clinging to hisindependence.“There you have it—from the epistle of St. James,” saidAlexey Alexandrovitch, addressing Lidia Ivanovna, with a certainreproachfulness in his tone. It was unmistakably a subject they had discussedmore than once before. “What harm has been done by the falseinterpretation of that passage! Nothing holds men back from belief like thatmisinterpretation. ‘I have not works, so I cannot believe,’ thoughall the while that is not said. But the very opposite is said.”“Striving for God, saving the soul by fasting,” said Countess LidiaIvanovna, with disgusted contempt, “those are the crude ideas of ourmonks.... Yet that is nowhere said. It is far simpler and easier,” sheadded, looking at Oblonsky with the same encouraging smile with which at courtshe encouraged youthful maids of honor, disconcerted by the new surroundings ofthe court.“We are saved by Christ who suffered for us. We are saved byfaith,” Alexey Alexandrovitch chimed in, with a glance of approval at herwords.“Vous comprenez l’anglais?” asked Lidia Ivanovna, andreceiving a reply in the affirmative, she got up and began looking through ashelf of books.“I want to read him ‘Safe and Happy,’ or ‘Under theWing,’” she said, looking inquiringly at Karenin. And finding thebook, and sitting down again in her place, she opened it. “It’svery short. In it is described the way by which faith can be reached, and thehappiness, above all earthly bliss, with which it fills the soul. The believercannot be unhappy because he is not alone. But you will see.” She wasjust settling herself to read when the footman came in again. “MadameBorozdina? Tell her, tomorrow at two o’clock. Yes,” she said,putting her finger in the place in the book, and gazing before her with herfine pensive eyes, “that is how true faith acts. You know Marie Sanina?You know about her trouble? She lost her only child. She was in despair. Andwhat happened? She found this comforter, and she thanks God now for the deathof her child. Such is the happiness faith brings!”“Oh, yes, that is most....” said Stepan Arkadyevitch, glad they weregoing to read, and let him have a chance to collect his faculties. “No, Isee I’d better not ask her about anything today,” he thought.“If only I can get out of this without putting my foot in it!”“It will be dull for you,” said Countess Lidia Ivanovna, addressingLandau; “you don’t know English, but it’s short.”“Oh, I shall understand,” said Landau, with the same smile, and heclosed his eyes. Alexey Alexandrovitch and Lidia Ivanovna exchanged meaningfulglances, and the reading began.Chapter 22Stepan Arkadyevitch felt completely nonplussed by the strange talk which he washearing for the first time. The complexity of Petersburg, as a rule, had astimulating effect on him, rousing him out of his Moscow stagnation. But heliked these complications, and understood them only in the circles he knew andwas at home in. In these unfamiliar surroundings he was puzzled anddisconcerted, and could not get his bearings. As he listened to Countess LidiaIvanovna, aware of the beautiful, artless—or perhaps artful, he could notdecide which—eyes of Landau fixed upon him, Stepan Arkadyevitch began tobe conscious of a peculiar heaviness in his head.The most incongruous ideas were in confusion in his head. “Marie Saninais glad her child’s dead.... How good a smoke would be now!... To besaved, one need only believe, and the monks don’t know how thething’s to be done, but Countess Lidia Ivanovna does know.... And why ismy head so heavy? Is it the cognac, or all this being so queer? Anyway, I fancyI’ve done nothing unsuitable so far. But anyway, it won’t do to askher now. They say they make one say one’s prayers. I only hope theywon’t make me! That’ll be too imbecile. And what stuff it isshe’s reading! but she has a good accent.Landau—Bezzubov—what’s he Bezzubov for?” All at onceStepan Arkadyevitch became aware that his lower jaw was uncontrollably forminga yawn. He pulled his whiskers to cover the yawn, and shook himself together.But soon after he became aware that he was dropping asleep and on the verypoint of snoring. He recovered himself at the very moment when the voice ofCountess Lidia Ivanovna was saying “he’s asleep.” StepanArkadyevitch started with dismay, feeling guilty and caught. But he wasreassured at once by seeing that the words “he’s asleep”referred not to him, but to Landau. The Frenchman was asleep as well as StepanArkadyevitch. But Stepan Arkadyevitch’s being asleep would have offendedthem, as he thought (though even this, he thought, might not be so, aseverything seemed so queer), while Landau’s being asleep delighted themextremely, especially Countess Lidia Ivanovna.“Mon ami,” said Lidia Ivanovna, carefully holding the foldsof her silk gown so as not to rustle, and in her excitement calling Karenin notAlexey Alexandrovitch, but “mon ami,” “donnez-lui la main.Vous voyez? Sh!” she hissed at the footman as he came in again.“Not at home.”The Frenchman was asleep, or pretending to be asleep, with his head on the backof his chair, and his moist hand, as it lay on his knee, made faint movements,as though trying to catch something. Alexey Alexandrovitch got up, tried tomove carefully, but stumbled against the table, went up and laid his hand inthe Frenchman’s hand. Stepan Arkadyevitch got up too, and opening hiseyes wide, trying to wake himself up if he were asleep, he looked first at oneand then at the other. It was all real. Stepan Arkadyevitch felt that his headwas getting worse and worse.“Que la personne qui est arrivée la dernière, celle qui demande,qu’elle sorte! Qu’elle sorte!” articulated the Frenchman,without opening his eyes.“Vous m’excuserez, mais vous voyez.... Revenez vers dix heures,encore mieux demain.”“Qu’elle sorte!” repeated the Frenchman impatiently.“C’est moi, n’est-ce pas?” And receiving ananswer in the affirmative, Stepan Arkadyevitch, forgetting the favor he hadmeant to ask of Lidia Ivanovna, and forgetting his sister’s affairs,caring for nothing, but filled with the sole desire to get away as soon aspossible, went out on tiptoe and ran out into the street as though from aplague-stricken house. For a long while he chatted and joked with hiscab-driver, trying to recover his spirits.At the French theater where he arrived for the last act, and afterwards at theTatar restaurant after his champagne, Stepan Arkadyevitch felt a littlerefreshed in the atmosphere he was used to. But still he felt quite unlikehimself all that evening.On getting home to Pyotr Oblonsky’s, where he was staying, StepanArkadyevitch found a note from Betsy. She wrote to him that she was veryanxious to finish their interrupted conversation, and begged him to come nextday. He had scarcely read this note, and frowned at its contents, when he heardbelow the ponderous tramp of the servants, carrying something heavy.Stepan Arkadyevitch went out to look. It was the rejuvenated Pyotr Oblonsky. Hewas so drunk that he could not walk upstairs; but he told them to set him onhis legs when he saw Stepan Arkadyevitch, and clinging to him, walked with himinto his room and there began telling him how he had spent the evening, andfell asleep doing so.Stepan Arkadyevitch was in very low spirits, which happened rarely with him,and for a long while he could not go to sleep. Everything he could recall tohis mind, everything was disgusting; but most disgusting of all, as if it weresomething shameful, was the memory of the evening he had spent at CountessLidia Ivanovna’s.Next day he received from Alexey Alexandrovitch a final answer, refusing togrant Anna’s divorce, and he understood that this decision was based onwhat the Frenchman had said in his real or pretended trance.Chapter 23In order to carry through any undertaking in family life, there mustnecessarily be either complete division between the husband and wife, or lovingagreement. When the relations of a couple are vacillating and neither one thingnor the other, no sort of enterprise can be undertaken.Many families remain for years in the same place, though both husband and wifeare sick of it, simply because there is neither complete division nor agreementbetween them.Both Vronsky and Anna felt life in Moscow insupportable in the heat and dust,when the spring sunshine was followed by the glare of summer, and all the treesin the boulevards had long since been in full leaf, and the leaves were coveredwith dust. But they did not go back to Vozdvizhenskoe, as they had arranged todo long before; they went on staying in Moscow, though they both loathed it,because of late there had been no agreement between them.The irritability that kept them apart had no external cause, and all efforts tocome to an understanding intensified it, instead of removing it. It was aninner irritation, grounded in her mind on the conviction that his love hadgrown less; in his, on regret that he had put himself for her sake in adifficult position, which she, instead of lightening, made still moredifficult. Neither of them gave full utterance to their sense of grievance, butthey considered each other in the wrong, and tried on every pretext to provethis to one another.In her eyes the whole of him, with all his habits, ideas, desires, with all hisspiritual and physical temperament, was one thing—love for women, andthat love, she felt, ought to be entirely concentrated on her alone. That lovewas less; consequently, as she reasoned, he must have transferred part of hislove to other women or to another woman—and she was jealous. She wasjealous not of any particular woman but of the decrease of his love. Not havinggot an object for her jealousy, she was on the lookout for it. At the slightesthint she transferred her jealousy from one object to another. At one time shewas jealous of those low women with whom he might so easily renew his oldbachelor ties; then she was jealous of the society women he might meet; thenshe was jealous of the imaginary girl whom he might want to marry, for whosesake he would break with her. And this last form of jealousy tortured her mostof all, especially as he had unwarily told her, in a moment of frankness, thathis mother knew him so little that she had had the audacity to try and persuadehim to marry the young Princess Sorokina.And being jealous of him, Anna was indignant against him and found grounds forindignation in everything. For everything that was difficult in her positionshe blamed him. The agonizing condition of suspense she had passed in Moscow,the tardiness and indecision of Alexey Alexandrovitch, her solitude—sheput it all down to him. If he had loved her he would have seen all thebitterness of her position, and would have rescued her from it. For her beingin Moscow and not in the country, he was to blame too. He could not live buriedin the country as she would have liked to do. He must have society, and he hadput her in this awful position, the bitterness of which he would not see. Andagain, it was his fault that she was forever separated from her son.Even the rare moments of tenderness that came from time to time did not sootheher; in his tenderness now she saw a shade of complacency, of self-confidence,which had not been of old, and which exasperated her.It was dusk. Anna was alone, and waiting for him to come back from a bachelordinner. She walked up and down in his study (the room where the noise from thestreet was least heard), and thought over every detail of theiryesterday’s quarrel. Going back from the well-remembered, offensive wordsof the quarrel to what had been the ground of it, she arrived at last at itsorigin. For a long while she could hardly believe that their dissension hadarisen from a conversation so inoffensive, of so little moment to either. Butso it actually had been. It all arose from his laughing at the girls’high schools, declaring they were useless, while she defended them. He hadspoken slightingly of women’s education in general, and had said thatHannah, Anna’s English protégée, had not the slightest need to knowanything of physics.This irritated Anna. She saw in this a contemptuous reference to heroccupations. And she bethought her of a phrase to pay him back for the pain hehad given her. “I don’t expect you to understand me, my feelings,as anyone who loved me might, but simple delicacy I did expect,” shesaid.And he had actually flushed with vexation, and had said something unpleasant.She could not recall her answer, but at that point, with an unmistakable desireto wound her too, he had said:“I feel no interest in your infatuation over this girl, that’strue, because I see it’s unnatural.”The cruelty with which he shattered the world she had built up for herself solaboriously to enable her to endure her hard life, the injustice with which hehad accused her of affectation, of artificiality, aroused her.“I am very sorry that nothing but what’s coarse and material iscomprehensible and natural to you,” she said and walked out of the room.When he had come in to her yesterday evening, they had not referred to thequarrel, but both felt that the quarrel had been smoothed over, but was not atan end.Today he had not been at home all day, and she felt so lonely and wretched inbeing on bad terms with him that she wanted to forget it all, to forgive him,and be reconciled with him; she wanted to throw the blame on herself and tojustify him.“I am myself to blame. I’m irritable, I’m insanely jealous. Iwill make it up with him, and we’ll go away to the country; there I shallbe more at peace.”“Unnatural!” She suddenly recalled the word that had stung her mostof all, not so much the word itself as the intent to wound her with which itwas said. “I know what he meant; he meant—unnatural, not loving myown daughter, to love another person’s child. What does he know of lovefor children, of my love for Seryozha, whom I’ve sacrificed for him? Butthat wish to wound me! No, he loves another woman, it must be so.”And perceiving that, while trying to regain her peace of mind, she had goneround the same circle that she had been round so often before, and had comeback to her former state of exasperation, she was horrified at herself.“Can it be impossible? Can it be beyond me to control myself?” shesaid to herself, and began again from the beginning. “He’struthful, he’s honest, he loves me. I love him, and in a few days thedivorce will come. What more do I want? I want peace of mind and trust, and Iwill take the blame on myself. Yes, now when he comes in, I will tell him I waswrong, though I was not wrong, and we will go away tomorrow.”And to escape thinking any more, and being overcome by irritability, she rang,and ordered the boxes to be brought up for packing their things for thecountry.At ten o’clock Vronsky came in.Chapter 24“Well, was it nice?” she asked, coming out to meet him with apenitent and meek expression.“Just as usual,” he answered, seeing at a glance that she was inone of her good moods. He was used by now to these transitions, and he wasparticularly glad to see it today, as he was in a specially good humor himself.“What do I see? Come, that’s good!” he said, pointing to theboxes in the passage.“Yes, we must go. I went out for a drive, and it was so fine I longed tobe in the country. There’s nothing to keep you, is there?”“It’s the one thing I desire. I’ll be back directly, andwe’ll talk it over; I only want to change my coat. Order some tea.”And he went into his room.There was something mortifying in the way he had said “Come, that’sgood,” as one says to a child when it leaves off being naughty, and stillmore mortifying was the contrast between her penitent and his self-confidenttone; and for one instant she felt the lust of strife rising up in her again,but making an effort she conquered it, and met Vronsky as good-humoredly asbefore.When he came in she told him, partly repeating phrases she had preparedbeforehand, how she had spent the day, and her plans for going away.“You know it came to me almost like an inspiration,” she said.“Why wait here for the divorce? Won’t it be just the same in thecountry? I can’t wait any longer! I don’t want to go on hoping, Idon’t want to hear anything about the divorce. I have made up my mind itshall not have any more influence on my life. Do you agree?”“Oh, yes!” he said, glancing uneasily at her excited face.“What did you do? Who was there?” she said, after a pause.Vronsky mentioned the names of the guests. “The dinner was first rate,and the boat race, and it was all pleasant enough, but in Moscow they can neverdo anything without something ridicule. A lady of a sort appeared on thescene, teacher of swimming to the Queen of Sweden, and gave us an exhibition ofher skill.”“How? did she swim?” asked Anna, frowning.“In an absurd red costume de natation; she was old and hideoustoo. So when shall we go?”“What an absurd fancy! Why, did she swim in some special way,then?” said Anna, not answering.“There was absolutely nothing in it. That’s just what I say, it wasawfully stupid. Well, then, when do you think of going?”Anna shook her head as though trying to drive away some unpleasant idea.“When? Why, the sooner the better! By tomorrow we shan’t be ready.The day after tomorrow.”“Yes ... oh, no, wait a minute! The day after tomorrow’s Sunday, Ihave to be at maman’s,” said Vronsky, embarrassed, because as soonas he uttered his mother’s name he was aware of her intent, suspiciouseyes. His embarrassment confirmed her suspicion. She flushed hotly and drewaway from him. It was now not the Queen of Sweden’s swimming-mistress whofilled Anna’s imagination, but the young Princess Sorokina. She wasstaying in a village near Moscow with Countess Vronskaya.“Can’t you go tomorrow?” she said.“Well, no! The deeds and the money for the business I’m going therefor I can’t get by tomorrow,” he answered.“If so, we won’t go at all.”“But why so?”“I shall not go later. Monday or never!”“What for?” said Vronsky, as though in amazement. “Why,there’s no meaning in it!”“There’s no meaning in it to you, because you care nothing for me.You don’t care to understand my life. The one thing that I cared for herewas Hannah. You say it’s affectation. Why, you said yesterday that Idon’t love my daughter, that I love this English girl, that it’sunnatural. I should like to know what life there is for me that could benatural!”For an instant she had a clear vision of what she was doing, and was horrifiedat how she had fallen away from her resolution. But even though she knew it washer own ruin, she could not restrain herself, could not keep herself fromproving to him that he was wrong, could not give way to him.“I never said that; I said I did not sympathize with this suddenpassion.”“How is it, though you boast of your straightforwardness, you don’ttell the truth?”“I never boast, and I never tell lies,” he said slowly, restraininghis rising anger. “It’s a great pity if you can’trespect....”“Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be. Andif you don’t love me any more, it would be better and more honest to sayso.”“No, this is becoming unbearable!” cried Vronsky, getting up fromhis chair; and stopping short, facing her, he said, speaking deliberately:“What do you try my patience for?” looking as though he might havesaid much more, but was restraining himself. “It has limits.”“What do you mean by that?” she cried, looking with terror at theundisguised hatred in his whole face, and especially in his cruel, menacingeyes.“I mean to say....” he was beginning, but he checked himself.“I must ask what it is you want of me?”“What can I want? All I can want is that you should not desert me, as youthink of doing,” she said, understanding all he had not uttered.“But that I don’t want; that’s secondary. I want love, andthere is none. So then all is over.”She turned towards the door.“Stop! sto-op!” said Vronsky, with no change in the gloomy lines ofhis brows, though he held her by the hand. “What is it all about? I saidthat we must put off going for three days, and on that you told me I was lying,that I was not an honorable man.”“Yes, and I repeat that the man who reproaches me with having sacrificedeverything for me,” she said, recalling the words of a still earlierquarrel, “that he’s worse than a dishonorable man—he’sa heartless man.”“Oh, there are limits to endurance!” he cried, and hastily let goher hand.“He hates me, that’s clear,” she thought, and in silence,without looking round, she walked with faltering steps out of the room.“He loves another woman, that’s even clearer,” she said toherself as she went into her own room. “I want love, and there is none.So, then, all is over.” She repeated the words she had said, “andit must be ended.”“But how?” she asked herself, and she sat down in a low chairbefore the looking-glass.Thoughts of where she would go now, whether to the aunt who had brought her up,to Dolly, or simply alone abroad, and of what he was doing now alone inhis study; whether this was the final quarrel, or whether reconciliation werestill possible; and of what all her old friends at Petersburg would say of hernow; and of how Alexey Alexandrovitch would look at it, and many other ideas ofwhat would happen now after this rupture, came into her head; but she did notgive herself up to them with all her heart. At the bottom of her heart was someobscure idea that alone interested her, but she could not get clear sight ofit. Thinking once more of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she recalled the time of herillness after her confinement, and the feeling which never left her at thattime. “Why didn’t I die?” and the words and the feeling ofthat time came back to her. And all at once she knew what was in her soul. Yes,it was that idea which alone solved all. “Yes, to die!... And the shameand disgrace of Alexey Alexandrovitch and of Seryozha, and my awful shame, itwill all be saved by death. To die! and he will feel remorse; will be sorry;will love me; he will suffer on my account.” With the trace of a smile ofcommiseration for herself she sat down in the armchair, taking off and puttingon the rings on her left hand, vividly picturing from different sides hisfeelings after her death.Approaching footsteps—his steps—distracted her attention. As thoughabsorbed in the arrangement of her rings, she did not even turn to him.He went up to her, and taking her by the hand, said softly:“Anna, we’ll go the day after tomorrow, if you like. I agree toeverything.”She did not speak.“What is it?” he urged.“You know,” she said, and at the same instant, unable to restrainherself any longer, she burst into sobs.“Cast me off!” she articulated between her sobs. “I’llgo away tomorrow ... I’ll do more. What am I? An immoral woman! A stoneround your neck. I don’t want to make you wretched, I don’t wantto! I’ll set you free. You don’t love me; you love someoneelse!”Vronsky besought her to be calm, and declared that there was no trace offoundation for her jealousy; that he had never ceased, and never would cease,to love her; that he loved her more than ever.“Anna, why distress yourself and me so?” he said to her, kissingher hands. There was tenderness now in his face, and she fancied she caught thesound of tears in his voice, and she felt them wet on her hand. And instantlyAnna’s despairing jealousy changed to a despairing passion of tenderness.She put her arms round him, and covered with kisses his head, his neck, hishands.Chapter 25Feeling that the reconciliation was complete, Anna set eagerly to work in themorning preparing for their departure. Though it was not settled whether theyshould go on Monday or Tuesday, as they had each given way to the other, Annapacked busily, feeling absolutely indifferent whether they went a day earlieror later. She was standing in her room over an open box, taking things out ofit, when he came in to see her earlier than usual, dressed to go out.“I’m going off at once to see maman; she can send me the money byYegorov. And I shall be ready to go tomorrow,” he said.Though she was in such a good mood, the thought of his visit to hismother’s gave her a pang.“No, I shan’t be ready by then myself,” she said; and at oncereflected, “so then it was possible to arrange to do as I wished.”“No, do as you meant to do. Go into the dining-room, I’m comingdirectly. It’s only to turn out those things that aren’twanted,” she said, putting something more on the heap of frippery thatlay in Annushka’s arms.Vronsky was eating his beefsteak when she came into the dining-room.“You wouldn’t believe how distasteful these rooms have become tome,” she said, sitting down beside him to her coffee.“There’s nothing more awful than these chambres garnies.There’s no individuality in them, no soul. These clocks, and curtains,and, worst of all, the wallpapers—they’re a nightmare. I think ofVozdvizhenskoe as the promised land. You’re not sending the horses offyet?”“No, they will come after us. Where are you going to?”“I wanted to go to Wilson’s to take some dresses to her. Soit’s really to be tomorrow?” she said in a cheerful voice; butsuddenly her face changed.Vronsky’s valet came in to ask him to sign a receipt for a telegram fromPetersburg. There was nothing out of the way in Vronsky’s getting atelegram, but he said, as though anxious to conceal something from her, thatthe receipt was in his study, and he turned hurriedly to her.“By tomorrow, without fail, I will finish it all.”“From whom is the telegram?” she asked, not hearing him.“From Stiva,” he answered reluctantly.“Why didn’t you show it to me? What secret can there be betweenStiva and me?”Vronsky called the valet back, and told him to bring the telegram.“I didn’t want to show it to you, because Stiva has such a passionfor telegraphing: why telegraph when nothing is settled?”“About the divorce?”“Yes; but he says he has not been able to come at anything yet. He haspromised a decisive answer in a day or two. But here it is; read it.”With trembling hands Anna took the telegram, and read what Vronsky had toldher. At the end was added: “Little hope; but I will do everythingpossible and impossible.”“I said yesterday that it’s absolutely nothing to me when I get, orwhether I never get, a divorce,” she said, flushing crimson. “Therewas not the slightest necessity to hide it from me.” “So he mayhide and does hide his correspondence with women from me,” she thought.“Yashvin meant to come this morning with Voytov,” said Vronsky;“I believe he’s won from Pyevtsov all and more than he can pay,about sixty thousand.”“No,” she said, irritated by his so obviously showing by thischange of subject that he was irritated, “why did you suppose that thisnews would affect me so, that you must even try to hide it? I said Idon’t want to consider it, and I should have liked you to care as littleabout it as I do.”“I care about it because I like definiteness,” he said.“Definiteness is not in the form but the love,” she said, more andmore irritated, not by his words, but by the tone of cool composure in which hespoke. “What do you want it for?”“My God! love again,” he thought, frowning.“Oh, you know what for; for your sake and your children’s in thefuture.”“There won’t be children in the future.”“That’s a great pity,” he said.“You want it for the children’s sake, but you don’t think ofme?” she said, quite forgetting or not having heard that he had said,“For your sake and the children’s.”The question of the possibility of having children had long been a subject ofdispute and irritation to her. His desire to have children she interpreted as aproof he did not prize her beauty.“Oh, I said: for your sake. Above all for your sake,” he repeated,frowning as though in pain, “because I am certain that the greater partof your irritability comes from the indefiniteness of the position.”“Yes, now he has laid aside all pretense, and all his cold hatred for meis apparent,” she thought, not hearing his words, but watching withterror the cold, cruel judge who looked mocking her out of his eyes.“The cause is not that,” she said, “and, indeed, Idon’t see how the cause of my irritability, as you call it, can be that Iam completely in your power. What indefiniteness is there in the position? onthe contrary....”“I am very sorry that you don’t care to understand,” heinterrupted, obstinately anxious to give utterance to his thought. “Theindefiniteness consists in your imagining that I am free.”“On that score you can set your mind quite at rest,” she said, andturning away from him, she began drinking her coffee.She lifted her cup, with her little finger held apart, and put it to her lips.After drinking a few sips she glanced at him, and by his expression, she sawclearly that he was repelled by her hand, and her gesture, and the sound madeby her lips.“I don’t care in the least what your mother thinks, and what matchshe wants to make for you,” she said, putting the cup down with a shakinghand.“But we are not talking about that.”“Yes, that’s just what we are talking about. And let me tell youthat a heartless woman, whether she’s old or not old, your mother oranyone else, is of no consequence to me, and I would not consent to knowher.”“Anna, I beg you not to speak disrespectfully of my mother.”“A woman whose heart does not tell her where her son’s happinessand honor lie has no heart.”“I repeat my request that you will not speak disrespectfully of mymother, whom I respect,” he said, raising his voice and looking sternlyat her.She did not answer. Looking intently at him, at his face, his hands, sherecalled all the details of their reconciliation the previous day, and hispassionate caresses. “There, just such caresses he has lavished, and willlavish, and longs to lavish on other women!” she thought.“You don’t love your mother. That’s all talk, and talk, andtalk!” she said, looking at him with hatred in her eyes.“Even if so, you must....”“Must decide, and I have decided,” she said, and she would havegone away, but at that moment Yashvin walked into the room. Anna greeted himand remained.Why, when there was a tempest in her soul, and she felt she was standing at aturning point in her life, which might have fearful consequences—why, atthat minute, she had to keep up appearances before an outsider, who sooner orlater must know it all—she did not know. But at once quelling the stormwithin her, she sat down and began talking to their guest.“Well, how are you getting on? Has your debt been paid you?” sheasked Yashvin.“Oh, pretty fair; I fancy I shan’t get it all, but I shall get agood half. And when are you off?” said Yashvin, looking at Vronsky, andunmistakably guessing at a quarrel.“The day after tomorrow, I think,” said Vronsky.“You’ve been meaning to go so long, though.”“But now it’s quite decided,” said Anna, looking Vronskystraight in the face with a look which told him not to dream of the possibilityof reconciliation.“Don’t you feel sorry for that unlucky Pyevtsov?” she wenton, talking to Yashvin.“I’ve never asked myself the question, Anna Arkadyevna, whetherI’m sorry for him or not. You see, all my fortune’shere”—he touched his breast pocket—“and just nowI’m a wealthy man. But today I’m going to the club, and I may comeout a beggar. You see, whoever sits down to play with me—he wants toleave me without a shirt to my back, and so do I him. And so we fight it out,and that’s the pleasure of it.”“Well, but suppose you were married,” said Anna, “how wouldit be for your wife?”Yashvin laughed.“That’s why I’m not married, and never mean to be.”“And Helsingfors?” said Vronsky, entering into the conversation andglancing at Anna’s smiling face. Meeting his eyes, Anna’s faceinstantly took a coldly severe expression as though she were saying to him:“It’s not forgotten. It’s all the same.”“Were you really in love?” she said to Yashvin.“Oh heavens! ever so many times! But you see, some men can play but onlyso that they can always lay down their cards when the hour of arendezvous comes, while I can take up love, but only so as not to belate for my cards in the evening. That’s how I manage things.”“No, I didn’t mean that, but the real thing.” She would havesaid Helsingfors, but would not repeat the word used by Vronsky.Voytov, who was buying the horse, came in. Anna got up and went out of theroom.Before leaving the house, Vronsky went into her room. She would have pretendedto be looking for something on the table, but ashamed of making a pretense, shelooked straight in his face with cold eyes.“What do you want?” she asked in French.“To get the guarantee for Gambetta, I’ve sold him,” he said,in a tone which said more clearly than words, “I’ve no time fordiscussing things, and it would lead to nothing.”“I’m not to blame in any way,” he thought. “If she willpunish herself, tant pis pour elle. But as he was going he fancied thatshe said something, and his heart suddenly ached with pity for her.“Eh, Anna?” he queried.“I said nothing,” she answered just as coldly and calmly.“Oh, nothing, tant pis then,” he thought, feeling coldagain, and he turned and went out. As he was going out he caught a glimpse inthe looking-glass of her face, white, with quivering lips. He even wanted tostop and to say some comforting word to her, but his legs carried him out ofthe room before he could think what to say. The whole of that day he spent awayfrom home, and when he came in late in the evening the maid told him that AnnaArkadyevna had a headache and begged him not to go in to her.Chapter 26Never before had a day been passed in quarrel. Today was the first time. Andthis was not a quarrel. It was the open acknowledgment of complete coldness.Was it possible to glance at her as he had glanced when he came into the roomfor the guarantee?—to look at her, see her heart was breaking withdespair, and go out without a word with that face of callous composure? He wasnot merely cold to her, he hated her because he loved another woman—thatwas clear.And remembering all the cruel words he had said, Anna supplied, too, the wordsthat he had unmistakably wished to say and could have said to her, and she grewmore and more exasperated.“I won’t prevent you,” he might say. “You can go whereyou like. You were unwilling to be divorced from your husband, no doubt so thatyou might go back to him. Go back to him. If you want money, I’ll give itto you. How many roubles do you want?”All the most cruel words that a brutal man could say, he said to her in herimagination, and she could not forgive him for them, as though he had actuallysaid them.“But didn’t he only yesterday swear he loved me, he, a truthful andsincere man? Haven’t I despaired for nothing many times already?”she said to herself afterwards.All that day, except for the visit to Wilson’s, which occupied two hours,Anna spent in doubts whether everything were over or whether there were stillhope of reconciliation, whether she should go away at once or see him oncemore. She was expecting him the whole day, and in the evening, as she went toher own room, leaving a message for him that her head ached, she said toherself, “If he comes in spite of what the maid says, it means that heloves me still. If not, it means that all is over, and then I will decide whatI’m to do!...”In the evening she heard the rumbling of his carriage stop at the entrance, hisring, his steps and his conversation with the servant; he believed what wastold him, did not care to find out more, and went to his own room. So theneverything was over.And death rose clearly and vividly before her mind as the sole means ofbringing back love for her in his heart, of punishing him and of gaining thevictory in that strife which the evil spirit in possession of her heart waswaging with him.Now nothing mattered: going or not going to Vozdvizhenskoe, getting or notgetting a divorce from her husband—all that did not matter. The one thingthat mattered was punishing him. When she poured herself out her usual dose ofopium, and thought that she had only to drink off the whole bottle to die, itseemed to her so simple and easy, that she began musing with enjoyment on howhe would suffer, and repent and love her memory when it would be too late. Shelay in bed with open eyes, by the light of a single burned-down candle, gazingat the carved cornice of the ceiling and at the shadow of the screen thatcovered part of it, while she vividly pictured to herself how he would feelwhen she would be no more, when she would be only a memory to him. “Howcould I say such cruel things to her?” he would say. “How could Igo out of the room without saying anything to her? But now she is no more. Shehas gone away from us forever. She is....” Suddenly the shadow of thescreen wavered, pounced on the whole cornice, the whole ceiling; other shadowsfrom the other side swooped to meet it, for an instant the shadows flittedback, but then with fresh swiftness they darted forward, wavered, commingled,and all was darkness. “Death!” she thought. And such horror cameupon her that for a long while she could not realize where she was, and for along while her trembling hands could not find the matches and light anothercandle, instead of the one that had burned down and gone out. “No,anything—only to live! Why, I love him! Why, he loves me! This has beenbefore and will pass,” she said, feeling that tears of joy at the returnto life were trickling down her cheeks. And to escape from her panic she wenthurriedly to his room.He was asleep there, and sleeping soundly. She went up to him, and holding thelight above his face, she gazed a long while at him. Now when he was asleep,she loved him so that at the sight of him she could not keep back tears oftenderness. But she knew that if he waked up he would look at her with coldeyes, convinced that he was right, and that before telling him of her love, shewould have to prove to him that he had been wrong in his treatment of her.Without waking him, she went back, and after a second dose of opium she felltowards morning into a heavy, incomplete sleep, during which she never quitelost consciousness.In the morning she was waked by a horrible nightmare, which had recurredseveral times in her dreams, even before her connection with Vronsky. A littleold man with unkempt beard was doing something bent down over some iron,muttering meaningless French words, and she, as she always did in thisnightmare (it was what made the horror of it), felt that this peasant wastaking no notice of her, but was doing something horrible with theiron—over her. And she waked up in a cold sweat.When she got up, the previous day came back to her as though veiled in mist.“There was a quarrel. Just what has happened several times. I said I hada headache, and he did not come in to see me. Tomorrow we’re going away;I must see him and get ready for the journey,” she said to herself. Andlearning that he was in his study, she went down to him. As she passed throughthe drawing-room she heard a carriage stop at the entrance, and looking out ofthe window she saw the carriage, from which a young girl in a lilac hat wasleaning out giving some direction to the footman ringing the bell. After aparley in the hall, someone came upstairs, and Vronsky’s steps could beheard passing the drawing-room. He went rapidly downstairs. Anna went again tothe window. She saw him come out onto the steps without his hat and go up tothe carriage. The young girl in the lilac hat handed him a parcel. Vronsky,smiling, said something to her. The carriage drove away, he ran rapidlyupstairs again.The mists that had shrouded everything in her soul parted suddenly. Thefeelings of yesterday pierced the sick heart with a fresh pang. She could notunderstand now how she could have lowered herself by spending a whole day withhim in his house. She went into his room to announce her determination.“That was Madame Sorokina and her daughter. They came and brought me themoney and the deeds from maman. I couldn’t get them yesterday. How isyour head, better?” he said quietly, not wishing to see and to understandthe gloomy and solemn expression of her face.She looked silently, intently at him, standing in the middle of the room. Heglanced at her, frowned for a moment, and went on reading a letter. She turned,and went deliberately out of the room. He still might have turned her back, butshe had reached the door, he was still silent, and the only sound audible wasthe rustling of the note paper as he turned it.“Oh, by the way,” he said at the very moment she was in thedoorway, “we’re going tomorrow for certain, aren’t we?”“You, but not I,” she said, turning round to him.“Anna, we can’t go on like this....”“You, but not I,” she repeated.“This is getting unbearable!”“You ... you will be sorry for this,” she said, and went out.Frightened by the desperate expression with which these words were uttered, hejumped up and would have run after her, but on second thoughts he sat down andscowled, setting his teeth. This vulgar—as he thought it—threat ofsomething vague exasperated him. “I’ve tried everything,” hethought; “the only thing left is not to pay attention,” and hebegan to get ready to drive into town, and again to his mother’s to gether signature to the deeds.She heard the sound of his steps about the study and the dining-room. At thedrawing-room he stood still. But he did not turn in to see her, he merely gavean order that the horse should be given to Voytov if he came while he was away.Then she heard the carriage brought round, the door opened, and he came outagain. But he went back into the porch again, and someone was running upstairs.It was the valet running up for his gloves that had been forgotten. She went tothe window and saw him take the gloves without looking, and touching thecoachman on the back he said something to him. Then without looking up at thewindow he settled himself in his usual attitude in the carriage, with his legscrossed, and drawing on his gloves he vanished round the corner.Chapter 27“He has gone! It is over!” Anna said to herself, standing at thewindow; and in answer to this statement the impression of the darkness when thecandle had flickered out, and of her fearful dream mingling into one, filledher heart with cold terror.“No, that cannot be!” she cried, and crossing the room she rang thebell. She was so afraid now of being alone, that without waiting for theservant to come in, she went out to meet him.“Inquire where the count has gone,” she said. The servant answeredthat the count had gone to the stable.“His honor left word that if you cared to drive out, the carriage wouldbe back immediately.”“Very good. Wait a minute. I’ll write a note at once. Send Mihailwith the note to the stables. Make haste.”She sat down and wrote:“I was wrong. Come back home; I must explain. For God’s sake come!I’m afraid.”She sealed it up and gave it to the servant.She was afraid of being left alone now; she followed the servant out of theroom, and went to the nursery.“Why, this isn’t it, this isn’t he! Where are his blue eyes,his sweet, shy smile?” was her first thought when she saw her chubby,rosy little girl with her black, curly hair instead of Seryozha, whom in thetangle of her ideas she had expected to see in the nursery. The little girlsitting at the table was obstinately and violently battering on it with a cork,and staring aimlessly at her mother with her pitch-black eyes. Answering theEnglish nurse that she was quite well, and that she was going to the countrytomorrow, Anna sat down by the little girl and began spinning the cork to showher. But the child’s loud, ringing laugh, and the motion of her eyebrows,recalled Vronsky so vividly that she got up hurriedly, restraining her sobs,and went away. “Can it be all over? No, it cannot be!” she thought.“He will come back. But how can he explain that smile, that excitementafter he had been talking to her? But even if he doesn’t explain, I willbelieve. If I don’t believe, there’s only one thing left for me,and I can’t.”She looked at her watch. Twenty minutes had passed. “By now he hasreceived the note and is coming back. Not long, ten minutes more.... But whatif he doesn’t come? No, that cannot be. He mustn’t see me withtear-stained eyes. I’ll go and wash. Yes, yes; did I do my hair ornot?” she asked herself. And she could not remember. She felt her headwith her hand. “Yes, my hair has been done, but when I did it Ican’t in the least remember.” She could not believe the evidence ofher hand, and went up to the pier-glass to see whether she really had done herhair. She certainly had, but she could not think when she had done it.“Who’s that?” she thought, looking in the looking-glass atthe swollen face with strangely glittering eyes, that looked in a scared way ather. “Why, it’s I!” she suddenly understood, and lookinground, she seemed all at once to feel his kisses on her, and twitched hershoulders, shuddering. Then she lifted her hand to her lips and kissed it.“What is it? Why, I’m going out of my mind!” and she wentinto her bedroom, where Annushka was tidying the room.“Annushka,” she said, coming to a standstill before her, and shestared at the maid, not knowing what to say to her.“You meant to go and see Darya Alexandrovna,” said the girl, asthough she understood.“Darya Alexandrovna? Yes, I’ll go.”“Fifteen minutes there, fifteen minutes back. He’s coming,he’ll be here soon.” She took out her watch and looked at it.“But how could he go away, leaving me in such a state? How can he live,without making it up with me?” She went to the window and began lookinginto the street. Judging by the time, he might be back now. But hercalculations might be wrong, and she began once more to recall when he hadstarted and to count the minutes.At the moment when she had moved away to the big clock to compare it with herwatch, someone drove up. Glancing out of the window, she saw his carriage. Butno one came upstairs, and voices could be heard below. It was the messenger whohad come back in the carriage. She went down to him.“We didn’t catch the count. The count had driven off on the lowercity road.”“What do you say? What!...” she said to the rosy, good-humoredMihail, as he handed her back her note.“Why, then, he has never received it!” she thought.“Go with this note to Countess Vronskaya’s place, you know? andbring an answer back immediately,” she said to the messenger.“And I, what am I going to do?” she thought. “Yes, I’mgoing to Dolly’s, that’s true or else I shall go out of my mind.Yes, and I can telegraph, too.” And she wrote a telegram. “Iabsolutely must talk to you; come at once.” After sending off thetelegram, she went to dress. When she was dressed and in her hat, she glancedagain into the eyes of the plump, comfortable-looking Annushka. There wasunmistakable sympathy in those good-natured little gray eyes.“Annushka, dear, what am I to do?” said Anna, sobbing and sinkinghelplessly into a chair.“Why fret yourself so, Anna Arkadyevna? Why, there’s nothing out ofthe way. You drive out a little, and it’ll cheer you up,” said themaid.“Yes, I’m going,” said Anna, rousing herself and getting up.“And if there’s a telegram while I’m away, send it on toDarya Alexandrovna’s ... but no, I shall be back myself.”“Yes, I mustn’t think, I must do something, drive somewhere, andmost of all, get out of this house,” she said, feeling with terror thestrange turmoil going on in her own heart, and she made haste to go out and getinto the carriage.“Where to?” asked Pyotr before getting onto the box.“To Znamenka, the Oblonskys’.”Chapter 28It was bright and sunny. A fine rain had been falling all the morning, and nowit had not long cleared up. The iron roofs, the flags of the roads, the flintsof the pavements, the wheels and leather, the brass and the tinplate of thecarriages—all glistened brightly in the May sunshine. It was threeo’clock, and the very liveliest time in the streets.As she sat in a corner of the comfortable carriage, that hardly swayed on itssupple springs, while the grays trotted swiftly, in the midst of the unceasingrattle of wheels and the changing impressions in the pure air, Anna ran overthe events of the last days, and she saw her position quite differently fromhow it had seemed at home. Now the thought of death seemed no longer soterrible and so clear to her, and death itself no longer seemed so inevitable.Now she blamed herself for the humiliation to which she had lowered herself.“I entreat him to forgive me. I have given in to him. I have owned myselfin fault. What for? Can’t I live without him?” And leavingunanswered the question how she was going to live without him, she fell toreading the signs on the shops. “Office and warehouse. Dental surgeon.Yes, I’ll tell Dolly all about it. She doesn’t like Vronsky. Ishall be sick and ashamed, but I’ll tell her. She loves me, andI’ll follow her advice. I won’t give in to him; I won’t lethim train me as he pleases. Filippov, bun shop. They say they send their doughto Petersburg. The Moscow water is so good for it. Ah, the springs atMitishtchen, and the pancakes!”And she remembered how, long, long ago, when she was a girl of seventeen, shehad gone with her aunt to Troitsa. “Riding, too. Was that really me, withred hands? How much that seemed to me then splendid and out of reach has becomeworthless, while what I had then has gone out of my reach forever! Could I everhave believed then that I could come to such humiliation? How conceited andself-satisfied he will be when he gets my note! But I will show him.... Howhorrid that paint smells! Why is it they’re always painting and building?Modes et robes, she read. A man bowed to her. It was Annushka’shusband. “Our parasites”; she remembered how Vronsky had said that.“Our? Why our? What’s so awful is that one can’t tear up thepast by its roots. One can’t tear it out, but one can hide one’smemory of it. And I’ll hide it.” And then she thought of her pastwith Alexey Alexandrovitch, of how she had blotted the memory of it out of herlife. “Dolly will think I’m leaving my second husband, and so Icertainly must be in the wrong. As if I cared to be right! I can’t helpit!” she said, and she wanted to cry. But at once she fell to wonderingwhat those two girls could be smiling about. “Love, most likely. Theydon’t know how dreary it is, how low.... The boulevard and the children.Three boys running, playing at horses. Seryozha! And I’m losingeverything and not getting him back. Yes, I’m losing everything, if hedoesn’t return. Perhaps he was late for the train and has come back bynow. Longing for humiliation again!” she said to herself. “No,I’ll go to Dolly, and say straight out to her, I’m unhappy, Ideserve this, I’m to blame, but still I’m unhappy, help me. Thesehorses, this carriage—how loathsome I am to myself in thiscarriage—all his; but I won’t see them again.”Thinking over the words in which she would tell Dolly, and mentally working herheart up to great bitterness, Anna went upstairs.“Is there anyone with her?” she asked in the hall.“Katerina Alexandrovna Levin,” answered the footman.“Kitty! Kitty, whom Vronsky was in love with!” thought Anna,“the girl he thinks of with love. He’s sorry he didn’t marryher. But me he thinks of with hatred, and is sorry he had anything to do withme.”The sisters were having a consultation about nursing when Anna called. Dollywent down alone to see the visitor who had interrupted their conversation.“Well, so you’ve not gone away yet? I meant to have come toyou,” she said; “I had a letter from Stiva today.”“We had a telegram too,” answered Anna, looking round for Kitty.“He writes that he can’t make out quite what Alexey Alexandrovitchwants, but he won’t go away without a decisive answer.”“I thought you had someone with you. Can I see the letter?”“Yes; Kitty,” said Dolly, embarrassed. “She stayed in thenursery. She has been very ill.”“So I heard. May I see the letter?”“I’ll get it directly. But he doesn’t refuse; on thecontrary, Stiva has hopes,” said Dolly, stopping in the doorway.“I haven’t, and indeed I don’t wish it,” said Anna.“What’s this? Does Kitty consider it degrading to meet me?”thought Anna when she was alone. “Perhaps she’s right, too. Butit’s not for her, the girl who was in love with Vronsky, it’s notfor her to show me that, even if it is true. I know that in my position Ican’t be received by any decent woman. I knew that from the first momentI sacrificed everything to him. And this is my reward! Oh, how I hate him! Andwhat did I come here for? I’m worse here, more miserable.” Sheheard from the next room the sisters’ voices in consultation. “Andwhat am I going to say to Dolly now? Amuse Kitty by the sight of mywretchedness, submit to her patronizing? No; and besides, Dolly wouldn’tunderstand. And it would be no good my telling her. It would only beinteresting to see Kitty, to show her how I despise everyone and everything,how nothing matters to me now.”Dolly came in with the letter. Anna read it and handed it back in silence.“I knew all that,” she said, “and it doesn’t interestme in the least.”“Oh, why so? On the contrary, I have hopes,” said Dolly, lookinginquisitively at Anna. She had never seen her in such a strangely irritablecondition. “When are you going away?” she asked.Anna, half-closing her eyes, looked straight before her and did not answer.“Why does Kitty shrink from me?” she said, looking at the door andflushing red.“Oh, what nonsense! She’s nursing, and things aren’t goingright with her, and I’ve been advising her.... She’s delighted.She’ll be here in a minute,” said Dolly awkwardly, not clever atlying. “Yes, here she is.”Hearing that Anna had called, Kitty had wanted not to appear, but Dollypersuaded her. Rallying her forces, Kitty went in, walked up to her, blushing,and shook hands.“I am so glad to see you,” she said with a trembling voice.Kitty had been thrown into confusion by the inward conflict between herantagonism to this bad woman and her desire to be nice to her. But as soon asshe saw Anna’s lovely and attractive face, all feeling of antagonismdisappeared.“I should not have been surprised if you had not cared to meet me.I’m used to everything. You have been ill? Yes, you are changed,”said Anna.Kitty felt that Anna was looking at her with hostile eyes. She ascribed thishostility to the awkward position in which Anna, who had once patronized her,must feel with her now, and she felt sorry for her.They talked of Kitty’s illness, of the baby, of Stiva, but it was obviousthat nothing interested Anna.“I came to say good-bye to you,” she said, getting up.“Oh, when are you going?”But again not answering, Anna turned to Kitty.“Yes, I am very glad to have seen you,” she said with a smile.“I have heard so much of you from everyone, even from your husband. Hecame to see me, and I liked him exceedingly,” she said, unmistakably withmalicious intent. “Where is he?”“He has gone back to the country,” said Kitty, blushing.“Remember me to him, be sure you do.”“I’ll be sure to!” Kitty said naïvely, lookingcompassionately into her eyes.“So good-bye, Dolly.” And kissing Dolly and shaking hands withKitty, Anna went out hurriedly.“She’s just the same and just as charming! She’s verylovely!” said Kitty, when she was alone with her sister. “Butthere’s something piteous about her. Awfully piteous!”“Yes, there’s something unusual about her today,” said Dolly.“When I went with her into the hall, I fancied she was almostcrying.”Chapter 29Anna got into the carriage again in an even worse frame of mind than when sheset out from home. To her previous tortures was added now that sense ofmortification and of being an outcast which she had felt so distinctly onmeeting Kitty.“Where to? Home?” asked Pyotr.“Yes, home,” she said, not even thinking now where she was going.“How they looked at me as something dreadful, incomprehensible, andcurious! What can he be telling the other with such warmth?” she thought,staring at two men who walked by. “Can one ever tell anyone what one isfeeling? I meant to tell Dolly, and it’s a good thing I didn’t tellher. How pleased she would have been at my misery! She would have concealed it,but her chief feeling would have been delight at my being punished for thehappiness she envied me for. Kitty, she would have been even more pleased. HowI can see through her! She knows I was more than usually sweet to her husband.And she’s jealous and hates me. And she despises me. In her eyesI’m an immoral woman. If I were an immoral woman I could have made herhusband fall in love with me ... if I’d cared to. And, indeed, I did careto. There’s someone who’s pleased with himself,” she thought,as she saw a fat, rubicund gentleman coming towards her. He took her for anacquaintance, and lifted his glossy hat above his bald, glossy head, and thenperceived his mistake. “He thought he knew me. Well, he knows me as wellas anyone in the world knows me. I don’t know myself. I know myappetites, as the French say. They want that dirty ice cream, that they do knowfor certain,” she thought, looking at two boys stopping an ice creamseller, who took a barrel off his head and began wiping his perspiring facewith a towel. “We all want what is sweet and nice. If not sweetmeats,then a dirty ice. And Kitty’s the same—if not Vronsky, then Levin.And she envies me, and hates me. And we all hate each other. I Kitty, Kitty me.Yes, that’s the truth. ‘Tiutkin, coiffeur.’ Je mefais coiffer par Tiutkin.... I’ll tell him that when he comes,”she thought and smiled. But the same instant she remembered that she had no onenow to tell anything amusing to. “And there’s nothing amusing,nothing mirthful, really. It’s all hateful. They’re singing forvespers, and how carefully that merchant crosses himself! as if he were afraidof missing something. Why these churches and this singing and this humbug?Simply to conceal that we all hate each other like these cab drivers who areabusing each other so angrily. Yashvin says, ‘He wants to strip me of myshirt, and I him of his.’ Yes, that’s the truth!”She was plunged in these thoughts, which so engrossed her that she left offthinking of her own position, when the carriage drew up at the steps of herhouse. It was only when she saw the porter running out to meet her that sheremembered she had sent the note and the telegram.“Is there an answer?” she inquired.“I’ll see this minute,” answered the porter, and glancinginto his room, he took out and gave her the thin square envelope of a telegram.“I can’t come before ten o’clock.—Vronsky,” sheread.“And hasn’t the messenger come back?”“No,” answered the porter.“Then, since it’s so, I know what I must do,” she said, andfeeling a vague fury and craving for revenge rising up within her, she ranupstairs. “I’ll go to him myself. Before going away forever,I’ll tell him all. Never have I hated anyone as I hate that man!”she thought. Seeing his hat on the rack, she shuddered with aversion. She didnot consider that his telegram was an answer to her telegram and that he hadnot yet received her note. She pictured him to herself as talking calmly to hismother and Princess Sorokina and rejoicing at her sufferings. “Yes, Imust go quickly,” she said, not knowing yet where she was going. Shelonged to get away as quickly as possible from the feelings she had gonethrough in that awful house. The servants, the walls, the things in thathouse—all aroused repulsion and hatred in her and lay like a weight uponher.“Yes, I must go to the railway station, and if he’s not there, thengo there and catch him.” Anna looked at the railway timetable in thenewspapers. An evening train went at two minutes past eight. “Yes, Ishall be in time.” She gave orders for the other horses to be put in thecarriage, and packed in a traveling-bag the things needed for a few days. Sheknew she would never come back here again.Among the plans that came into her head she vaguely determined that after whatwould happen at the station or at the countess’s house, she would go asfar as the first town on the Nizhni road and stop there.Dinner was on the table; she went up, but the smell of the bread and cheese wasenough to make her feel that all food was disgusting. She ordered the carriageand went out. The house threw a shadow now right across the street, but it wasa bright evening and still warm in the sunshine. Annushka, who came down withher things, and Pyotr, who put the things in the carriage, and the coachman,evidently out of humor, were all hateful to her, and irritated her by theirwords and actions.“I don’t want you, Pyotr.”“But how about the ticket?”“Well, as you like, it doesn’t matter,” she said crossly.Pyotr jumped on the box, and putting his arms akimbo, told the coachman todrive to the booking-office.Chapter 30“Here it is again! Again I understand it all!” Anna said toherself, as soon as the carriage had started and swaying lightly, rumbled overthe tiny cobbles of the paved road, and again one impression followed rapidlyupon another.“Yes; what was the last thing I thought of so clearly?” she triedto recall it. “‘Tiutkin, coiffeur?’—no, notthat. Yes, of what Yashvin says, the struggle for existence and hatred is theone thing that holds men together. No, it’s a useless journeyyou’re making,” she said, mentally addressing a party in a coachand four, evidently going for an excursion into the country. “And the dogyou’re taking with you will be no help to you. You can’t get awayfrom yourselves.” Turning her eyes in the direction Pyotr had turned tolook, she saw a factory-hand almost dead-drunk, with hanging head, being ledaway by a policeman. “Come, he’s found a quicker way,” shethought. “Count Vronsky and I did not find that happiness either, thoughwe expected so much from it.” And now for the first time Anna turned thatglaring light in which she was seeing everything on to her relations with him,which she had hitherto avoided thinking about. “What was it he sought inme? Not love so much as the satisfaction of vanity.” She remembered hiswords, the expression of his face, that recalled an abject setter-dog, in theearly days of their connection. And everything now confirmed this. “Yes,there was the triumph of success in him. Of course there was love too, but thechief element was the pride of success. He boasted of me. Now that’sover. There’s nothing to be proud of. Not to be proud of, but to beashamed of. He has taken from me all he could, and now I am no use to him. Heis weary of me and is trying not to be dishonorable in his behavior to me. Helet that out yesterday—he wants divorce and marriage so as to burn hisships. He loves me, but how? The zest is gone, as the English say. That fellowwants everyone to admire him and is very much pleased with himself,” shethought, looking at a red-faced clerk, riding on a riding-school horse.“Yes, there’s not the same flavor about me for him now. If I goaway from him, at the bottom of his heart he will be glad.”This was not mere supposition, she saw it distinctly in the piercing light,which revealed to her now the meaning of life and human relations.“My love keeps growing more passionate and egoistic, while his is waningand waning, and that’s why we’re drifting apart.” She went onmusing. “And there’s no help for it. He is everything for me, and Iwant him more and more to give himself up to me entirely. And he wants more andmore to get away from me. We walked to meet each other up to the time of ourlove, and then we have been irresistibly drifting in different directions. Andthere’s no altering that. He tells me I’m insanely jealous, and Ihave told myself that I am insanely jealous; but it’s not true. I’mnot jealous, but I’m unsatisfied. But....” she opened her lips, andshifted her place in the carriage in the excitement, aroused by the thoughtthat suddenly struck her. “If I could be anything but a mistress,passionately caring for nothing but his caresses; but I can’t and Idon’t care to be anything else. And by that desire I rouse aversion inhim, and he rouses fury in me, and it cannot be different. Don’t I knowthat he wouldn’t deceive me, that he has no schemes about PrincessSorokina, that he’s not in love with Kitty, that he won’t desertme! I know all that, but it makes it no better for me. If without loving me,from duty he’ll be good and kind to me, without what I want,that’s a thousand times worse than unkindness! That’s—hell!And that’s just how it is. For a long while now he hasn’t loved me.And where love ends, hate begins. I don’t know these streets at all.Hills it seems, and still houses, and houses.... And in the houses alwayspeople and people.... How many of them, no end, and all hating each other!Come, let me try and think what I want, to make me happy. Well? Suppose I amdivorced, and Alexey Alexandrovitch lets me have Seryozha, and I marryVronsky.” Thinking of Alexey Alexandrovitch, she at once pictured himwith extraordinary vividness as though he were alive before her, with his mild,lifeless, dull eyes, the blue veins in his white hands, his intonations and thecracking of his fingers, and remembering the feeling which had existed betweenthem, and which was also called love, she shuddered with loathing. “Well,I’m divorced, and become Vronsky’s wife. Well, will Kitty ceaselooking at me as she looked at me today? No. And will Seryozha leave off askingand wondering about my two husbands? And is there any new feeling I can awakenbetween Vronsky and me? Is there possible, if not happiness, some sort of easefrom misery? No, no!” she answered now without the slightest hesitation.“Impossible! We are drawn apart by life, and I make his unhappiness, andhe mine, and there’s no altering him or me. Every attempt has been made,the screw has come unscrewed. Oh, a beggar woman with a baby. She thinksI’m sorry for her. Aren’t we all flung into the world only to hateeach other, and so to torture ourselves and each other? Schoolboyscoming—laughing Seryozha?” she thought. “I thought, too, thatI loved him, and used to be touched by my own tenderness. But I have livedwithout him, I gave him up for another love, and did not regret the exchangetill that love was satisfied.” And with loathing she thought of what shemeant by that love. And the clearness with which she saw life now, her own andall men’s, was a pleasure to her. “It’s so with me and Pyotr,and the coachman, Fyodor, and that merchant, and all the people living alongthe Volga, where those placards invite one to go, and everywhere andalways,” she thought when she had driven under the low-pitched roof ofthe Nizhigorod station, and the porters ran to meet her.“A ticket to Obiralovka?” said Pyotr.She had utterly forgotten where and why she was going, and only by a greateffort she understood the question.“Yes,” she said, handing him her purse, and taking a little red bagin her hand, she got out of the carriage.Making her way through the crowd to the first-class waiting-room, she graduallyrecollected all the details of her position, and the plans between which shewas hesitating. And again at the old sore places, hope and then despairpoisoned the wounds of her tortured, fearfully throbbing heart. As she sat onthe star-shaped sofa waiting for the train, she gazed with aversion at thepeople coming and going (they were all hateful to her), and thought how shewould arrive at the station, would write him a note, and what she would writeto him, and how he was at this moment complaining to his mother of hisposition, not understanding her sufferings, and how she would go into the room,and what she would say to him. Then she thought that life might still be happy,and how miserably she loved and hated him, and how fearfully her heart wasbeating.Chapter 31A bell rang, some young men, ugly and impudent, and at the same time careful ofthe impression they were making, hurried by. Pyotr, too, crossed the room inhis livery and top-boots, with his dull, animal face, and came up to her totake her to the train. Some noisy men were quiet as she passed them on theplatform, and one whispered something about her to another—somethingvile, no doubt. She stepped up on the high step, and sat down in a carriage byherself on a dirty seat that had been white. Her bag lay beside her, shaken upand down by the springiness of the seat. With a foolish smile Pyotr raised hishat, with its colored band, at the window, in token of farewell; an impudentconductor slammed the door and the latch. A grotesque-looking lady wearing abustle (Anna mentally undressed the woman, and was appalled at herhideousness), and a little girl laughing affectedly ran down the platform.“Katerina Andreevna, she’s got them all, ma tante!”cried the girl.“Even the child’s hideous and affected,” thought Anna. Toavoid seeing anyone, she got up quickly and seated herself at the oppositewindow of the empty carriage. A misshapen-looking peasant covered with dirt, ina cap from which his tangled hair stuck out all round, passed by that window,stooping down to the carriage wheels. “There’s something familiarabout that hideous peasant,” thought Anna. And remembering her dream, shemoved away to the opposite door, shaking with terror. The conductor opened thedoor and let in a man and his wife.“Do you wish to get out?”Anna made no answer. The conductor and her two fellow-passengers did not noticeunder her veil her panic-stricken face. She went back to her corner and satdown. The couple seated themselves on the opposite side, and intently butsurreptitiously scrutinized her clothes. Both husband and wife seemed repulsiveto Anna. The husband asked, would she allow him to smoke, obviously not with aview to smoking but to getting into conversation with her. Receiving herassent, he said to his wife in French something about caring less to smoke thanto talk. They made inane and affected remarks to one another, entirely for herbenefit. Anna saw clearly that they were sick of each other, and hated eachother. And no one could have helped hating such miserable monstrosities.A second bell sounded, and was followed by moving of luggage, noise, shoutingand laughter. It was so clear to Anna that there was nothing for anyone to beglad of, that this laughter irritated her agonizingly, and she would have likedto stop up her ears not to hear it. At last the third bell rang, there was awhistle and a hiss of steam, and a clank of chains, and the man in her carriagecrossed himself. “It would be interesting to ask him what meaning heattaches to that,” thought Anna, looking angrily at him. She looked pastthe lady out of the window at the people who seemed whirling by as they ranbeside the train or stood on the platform. The train, jerking at regularintervals at the junctions of the rails, rolled by the platform, past a stonewall, a signal-box, past other trains; the wheels, moving more smoothly andevenly, resounded with a slight clang on the rails. The window was lighted upby the bright evening sun, and a slight breeze fluttered the curtain. Annaforgot her fellow passengers, and to the light swaying of the train she fell tothinking again, as she breathed the fresh air.“Yes, what did I stop at? That I couldn’t conceive a position inwhich life would not be a misery, that we are all created to be miserable, andthat we all know it, and all invent means of deceiving each other. And when onesees the truth, what is one to do?”“That’s what reason is given man for, to escape from what worrieshim,” said the lady in French, lisping affectedly, and obviously pleasedwith her phrase.The words seemed an answer to Anna’s thoughts.“To escape from what worries him,” repeated Anna. And glancing atthe red-cheeked husband and the thin wife, she saw that the sickly wifeconsidered herself misunderstood, and the husband deceived her and encouragedher in that idea of herself. Anna seemed to see all their history and all thecrannies of their souls, as it were turning a light upon them. But there wasnothing interesting in them, and she pursued her thought.“Yes, I’m very much worried, and that’s what reason was givenme for, to escape; so then one must escape: why not put out the light whenthere’s nothing more to look at, when it’s sickening to look at itall? But how? Why did the conductor run along the footboard, why are theyshrieking, those young men in that train? why are they talking, why are theylaughing? It’s all falsehood, all lying, all humbug, allcruelty!...”When the train came into the station, Anna got out into the crowd ofpassengers, and moving apart from them as if they were lepers, she stood on theplatform, trying to think what she had come here for, and what she meant to do.Everything that had seemed to her possible before was now so difficult toconsider, especially in this noisy crowd of hideous people who would not leaveher alone. One moment porters ran up to her proffering their services, thenyoung men, clacking their heels on the planks of the platform and talkingloudly, stared at her; people meeting her dodged past on the wrong side.Remembering that she had meant to go on further if there were no answer, shestopped a porter and asked if her coachman were not here with a note from CountVronsky.“Count Vronsky? They sent up here from the Vronskys just this minute, tomeet Princess Sorokina and her daughter. And what is the coachman like?”Just as she was talking to the porter, the coachman Mihail, red and cheerful inhis smart blue coat and chain, evidently proud of having so successfullyperformed his commission, came up to her and gave her a letter. She broke itopen, and her heart ached before she had read it.“I am very sorry your note did not reach me. I will be home atten,” Vronsky had written carelessly....“Yes, that’s what I expected!” she said to herself with anevil smile.“Very good, you can go home then,” she said softly, addressingMihail. She spoke softly because the rapidity of her heart’s beatinghindered her breathing. “No, I won’t let you make memiserable,” she thought menacingly, addressing not him, not herself, butthe power that made her suffer, and she walked along the platform.Two maid-servants walking along the platform turned their heads, staring at herand making some remarks about her dress. “Real,” they said of thelace she was wearing. The young men would not leave her in peace. Again theypassed by, peering into her face, and with a laugh shouting something in anunnatural voice. The station-master coming up asked her whether she was goingby train. A boy selling kvas never took his eyes off her. “My God! wheream I to go?” she thought, going farther and farther along the platform.At the end she stopped. Some ladies and children, who had come to meet agentleman in spectacles, paused in their loud laughter and talking, and staredat her as she reached them. She quickened her pace and walked away from them tothe edge of the platform. A luggage train was coming in. The platform began tosway, and she fancied she was in the train again.And all at once she thought of the man crushed by the train the day she hadfirst met Vronsky, and she knew what she had to do. With a rapid, light stepshe went down the steps that led from the tank to the rails and stopped quitenear the approaching train.She looked at the lower part of the carriages, at the screws and chains and thetall cast-iron wheel of the first carriage slowly moving up, and trying tomeasure the middle between the front and back wheels, and the very minute whenthat middle point would be opposite her.“There,” she said to herself, looking into the shadow of thecarriage, at the sand and coal dust which covered thesleepers—“there, in the very middle, and I will punish him andescape from everyone and from myself.”She tried to fling herself below the wheels of the first carriage as it reachedher; but the red bag which she tried to drop out of her hand delayed her, andshe was too late; she missed the moment. She had to wait for the next carriage.A feeling such as she had known when about to take the first plunge in bathingcame upon her, and she crossed herself. That familiar gesture brought back intoher soul a whole series of girlish and childish memories, and suddenly thedarkness that had covered everything for her was torn apart, and life rose upbefore her for an instant with all its bright past joys. But she did not takeher eyes from the wheels of the second carriage. And exactly at the moment whenthe space between the wheels came opposite her, she dropped the red bag, anddrawing her head back into her shoulders, fell on her hands under the carriage,and lightly, as though she would rise again at once, dropped on to her knees.And at the same instant she was terror-stricken at what she was doing.“Where am I? What am I doing? What for?” She tried to get up, todrop backwards; but something huge and merciless struck her on the head androlled her on her back. “Lord, forgive me all!” she said, feelingit impossible to struggle. A peasant muttering something was working at theiron above her. And the light by which she had read the book filled withtroubles, falsehoods, sorrow, and evil, flared up more brightly than everbefore, lighted up for her all that had been in darkness, flickered, began togrow dim, and was quenched forever.PART EIGHTChapter 1Almost two months had passed. The hot summer was half over, but SergeyIvanovitch was only just preparing to leave Moscow.Sergey Ivanovitch’s life had not been uneventful during this time. A yearago he had finished his book, the fruit of six years’ labor,“Sketch of a Survey of the Principles and Forms of Government in Europeand Russia.” Several sections of this book and its introduction hadappeared in periodical publications, and other parts had been read by SergeyIvanovitch to persons of his circle, so that the leading ideas of the workcould not be completely novel to the public. But still Sergey Ivanovitch hadexpected that on its appearance his book would be sure to make a seriousimpression on society, and if it did not cause a revolution in social scienceit would, at any rate, make a great stir in the scientific world.After the most conscientious revision the book had last year been published,and had been distributed among the booksellers.Though he asked no one about it, reluctantly and with feigned indifferenceanswered his friends’ inquiries as to how the book was going, and did noteven inquire of the booksellers how the book was selling, Sergey Ivanovitch wasall on the alert, with strained attention, watching for the first impressionhis book would make in the world and in literature.But a week passed, a second, a third, and in society no impression whatevercould be detected. His friends who were specialists and savants,occasionally—unmistakably from politeness—alluded to it. The restof his acquaintances, not interested in a book on a learned subject, did nottalk of it at all. And society generally—just now especially absorbed inother things—was absolutely indifferent. In the press, too, for a wholemonth there was not a word about his book.Sergey Ivanovitch had calculated to a nicety the time necessary for writing areview, but a month passed, and a second, and still there was silence.Only in the Northern Beetle, in a comic article on the singer Drabanti,who had lost his voice, there was a contemptuous allusion to Koznishev’sbook, suggesting that the book had been long ago seen through by everyone, andwas a subject of general ridicule.At last in the third month a critical article appeared in a serious review.Sergey Ivanovitch knew the author of the article. He had met him once atGolubtsov’s.The author of the article was a young man, an invalid, very bold as a writer,but extremely deficient in breeding and shy in personal relations.In spite of his absolute contempt for the author, it was with complete respectthat Sergey Ivanovitch set about reading the article. The article was awful.The critic had undoubtedly put an interpretation upon the book which could notpossibly be put on it. But he had selected quotations so adroitly that forpeople who had not read the book (and obviously scarcely anyone had read it) itseemed absolutely clear that the whole book was nothing but a medley ofhigh-flown phrases, not even—as suggested by marks ofinterrogation—used appropriately, and that the author of the book was aperson absolutely without knowledge of the subject. And all this was so wittilydone that Sergey Ivanovitch would not have disowned such wit himself. But thatwas just what was so awful.In spite of the scrupulous conscientiousness with which Sergey Ivanovitchverified the correctness of the critic’s arguments, he did not for aminute stop to ponder over the faults and mistakes which were ridiculed; butunconsciously he began immediately trying to recall every detail of his meetingand conversation with the author of the article.“Didn’t I offend him in some way?” Sergey Ivanovitchwondered.And remembering that when they met he had corrected the young man aboutsomething he had said that betrayed ignorance, Sergey Ivanovitch found the clueto explain the article.This article was followed by a deadly silence about the book both in the pressand in conversation, and Sergey Ivanovitch saw that his six years’ task,toiled at with such love and labor, had gone, leaving no trace.Sergey Ivanovitch’s position was still more difficult from the fact that,since he had finished his book, he had had no more literary work to do, such ashad hitherto occupied the greater part of his time.Sergey Ivanovitch was clever, cultivated, healthy, and energetic, and he didnot know what use to make of his energy. Conversations in drawing-rooms, inmeetings, assemblies, and committees—everywhere where talk waspossible—took up part of his time. But being used for years to town life,he did not waste all his energies in talk, as his less experienced youngerbrother did, when he was in Moscow. He had a great deal of leisure andintellectual energy still to dispose of.Fortunately for him, at this period so difficult for him from the failure ofhis book, the various public questions of the dissenting sects, of the Americanalliance, of the Samara famine, of exhibitions, and of spiritualism, weredefinitely replaced in public interest by the Slavonic question, which hadhitherto rather languidly interested society, and Sergey Ivanovitch, who hadbeen one of the first to raise this subject, threw himself into it heart andsoul.In the circle to which Sergey Ivanovitch belonged, nothing was talked of orwritten about just now but the Servian War. Everything that the idle crowdusually does to kill time was done now for the benefit of the Slavonic States.Balls, concerts, dinners, matchboxes, ladies’ dresses, beer,restaurants—everything testified to sympathy with the Slavonic peoples.From much of what was spoken and written on the subject, Sergey Ivanovitchdiffered on various points. He saw that the Slavonic question had become one ofthose fashionable distractions which succeed one another in providing societywith an object and an occupation. He saw, too, that a great many people weretaking up the subject from motives of self-interest and self-advertisement. Herecognized that the newspapers published a great deal that was superfluous andexaggerated, with the sole aim of attracting attention and outbidding oneanother. He saw that in this general movement those who thrust themselves mostforward and shouted the loudest were men who had failed and were smarting undera sense of injury—generals without armies, ministers not in the ministry,journalists not on any paper, party leaders without followers. He saw thatthere was a great deal in it that was frivolous and absurd. But he saw andrecognized an unmistakable growing enthusiasm, uniting all classes, with whichit was impossible not to sympathize. The massacre of men who were fellowChristians, and of the same Slavonic race, excited sympathy for the sufferersand indignation against the oppressors. And the heroism of the Servians andMontenegrins struggling for a great cause begot in the whole people a longingto help their brothers not in word but in deed.But in this there was another aspect that rejoiced Sergey Ivanovitch. That wasthe manifestation of public opinion. The public had definitely expressed itsdesire. The soul of the people had, as Sergey Ivanovitch said, foundexpression. And the more he worked in this cause, the more incontestable itseemed to him that it was a cause destined to assume vast dimensions, to createan epoch.He threw himself heart and soul into the service of this great cause, andforgot to think about his book. His whole time now was engrossed by it, so thathe could scarcely manage to answer all the letters and appeals addressed tohim. He worked the whole spring and part of the summer, and it was only in Julythat he prepared to go away to his brother’s in the country.He was going both to rest for a fortnight, and in the very heart of the people,in the farthest wilds of the country, to enjoy the sight of that uplifting ofthe spirit of the people, of which, like all residents in the capital and bigtowns, he was fully persuaded. Katavasov had long been meaning to carry out hispromise to stay with Levin, and so he was going with him.Chapter 2Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had only just reached the station of the Kurskline, which was particularly busy and full of people that day, when, lookinground for the groom who was following with their things, they saw a party ofvolunteers driving up in four cabs. Ladies met them with bouquets of flowers,and followed by the rushing crowd they went into the station.One of the ladies, who had met the volunteers, came out of the hall andaddressed Sergey Ivanovitch.“You too come to see them off?” she asked in French.“No, I’m going away myself, princess. To my brother’s for aholiday. Do you always see them off?” said Sergey Ivanovitch with ahardly perceptible smile.“Oh, that would be impossible!” answered the princess. “Is ittrue that eight hundred have been sent from us already? Malvinskywouldn’t believe me.”“More than eight hundred. If you reckon those who have been sent notdirectly from Moscow, over a thousand,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch.“There! That’s just what I said!” exclaimed the lady.“And it’s true too, I suppose, that more than a million has beensubscribed?”“Yes, princess.”“What do you say to today’s telegram? Beaten the Turksagain.”“Yes, so I saw,” answered Sergey Ivanovitch. They were speaking ofthe last telegram stating that the Turks had been for three days in successionbeaten at all points and put to flight, and that tomorrow a decisive engagementwas expected.“Ah, by the way, a splendid young fellow has asked leave to go, andthey’ve made some difficulty, I don’t know why. I meant to ask you;I know him; please write a note about his case. He’s being sent byCountess Lidia Ivanovna.”Sergey Ivanovitch asked for all the details the princess knew about the youngman, and going into the first-class waiting-room, wrote a note to the person onwhom the granting of leave of absence depended, and handed it to the princess.“You know Count Vronsky, the notorious one ... is going by thistrain?” said the princess with a smile full of triumph and meaning, whenhe found her again and gave her the letter.“I had heard he was going, but I did not know when. By this train?”“I’ve seen him. He’s here: there’s only his motherseeing him off. It’s the best thing, anyway, that he could do.”“Oh, yes, of course.”While they were talking the crowd streamed by them into the dining-room. Theywent forward too, and heard a gentleman with a glass in his hand delivering aloud discourse to the volunteers. “In the service of religion, humanity,and our brothers,” the gentleman said, his voice growing louder andlouder; “to this great cause mother Moscow dedicates you with herblessing. Jivio!” he concluded, loudly and tearfully.Everyone shouted Jivio! and a fresh crowd dashed into the hall, almostcarrying the princess off her legs.“Ah, princess! that was something like!” said Stepan Arkadyevitch,suddenly appearing in the middle of the crowd and beaming upon them with adelighted smile. “Capitally, warmly said, wasn’t it? Bravo! AndSergey Ivanovitch! Why, you ought to have said something—just a fewwords, you know, to encourage them; you do that so well,” he added with asoft, respectful, and discreet smile, moving Sergey Ivanovitch forward a littleby the arm.“No, I’m just off.”“Where to?”“To the country, to my brother’s,” answered SergeyIvanovitch.“Then you’ll see my wife. I’ve written to her, butyou’ll see her first. Please tell her that they’ve seen me and thatit’s ‘all right,’ as the English say. She’llunderstand. Oh, and be so good as to tell her I’m appointed secretary ofthe committee.... But she’ll understand! You know, les petites misèresde la vie humaine,” he said, as it were apologizing to the princess.“And Princess Myakaya—not Liza, but Bibish—is sending athousand guns and twelve nurses. Did I tell you?”“Yes, I heard so,” answered Koznishev indifferently.“It’s a pity you’re going away,” said StepanArkadyevitch. “Tomorrow we’re giving a dinner to two who’resetting off—Dimer-Bartnyansky from Petersburg and our Veslovsky, Grisha.They’re both going. Veslovsky’s only lately married. There’sa fine fellow for you! Eh, princess?” he turned to the lady.The princess looked at Koznishev without replying. But the fact that SergeyIvanovitch and the princess seemed anxious to get rid of him did not in theleast disconcert Stepan Arkadyevitch. Smiling, he stared at the feather in theprincess’s hat, and then about him as though he were going to picksomething up. Seeing a lady approaching with a collecting box, he beckoned herup and put in a five-rouble note.“I can never see these collecting boxes unmoved while I’ve money inmy pocket,” he said. “And how about today’s telegram? Finechaps those Montenegrins!”“You don’t say so!” he cried, when the princess told him thatVronsky was going by this train. For an instant Stepan Arkadyevitch’sface looked sad, but a minute later, when, stroking his mustaches and swingingas he walked, he went into the hall where Vronsky was, he had completelyforgotten his own despairing sobs over his sister’s corpse, and he saw inVronsky only a hero and an old friend.“With all his faults one can’t refuse to do him justice,”said the princess to Sergey Ivanovitch as soon as Stepan Arkadyevitch had leftthem. “What a typically Russian, Slav nature! Only, I’m afraid itwon’t be pleasant for Vronsky to see him. Say what you will, I’mtouched by that man’s fate. Do talk to him a little on the way,”said the princess.“Yes, perhaps, if it happens so.”“I never liked him. But this atones for a great deal. He’s notmerely going himself, he’s taking a squadron at his own expense.”“Yes, so I heard.”A bell sounded. Everyone crowded to the doors. “Here he is!” saidthe princess, indicating Vronsky, who with his mother on his arm walked by,wearing a long overcoat and wide-brimmed black hat. Oblonsky was walking besidehim, talking eagerly of something.Vronsky was frowning and looking straight before him, as though he did not hearwhat Stepan Arkadyevitch was saying.Probably on Oblonsky’s pointing them out, he looked round in thedirection where the princess and Sergey Ivanovitch were standing, and withoutspeaking lifted his hat. His face, aged and worn by suffering, looked stony.Going onto the platform, Vronsky left his mother and disappeared into acompartment.On the platform there rang out “God save the Tsar,” then shouts of“hurrah!” and “jivio!” One of the volunteers, atall, very young man with a hollow chest, was particularly conspicuous, bowingand waving his felt hat and a nosegay over his head. Then two officers emerged,bowing too, and a stout man with a big beard, wearing a greasy forage cap.Chapter 3Saying good-bye to the princess, Sergey Ivanovitch was joined by Katavasov;together they got into a carriage full to overflowing, and the train started.At Tsaritsino station the train was met by a chorus of young men singing“Hail to Thee!” Again the volunteers bowed and poked their headsout, but Sergey Ivanovitch paid no attention to them. He had had so much to dowith the volunteers that the type was familiar to him and did not interest him.Katavasov, whose scientific work had prevented his having a chance of observingthem hitherto, was very much interested in them and questioned SergeyIvanovitch.Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to go into the second-class and talk to themhimself. At the next station Katavasov acted on this suggestion.At the first stop he moved into the second-class and made the acquaintance ofthe volunteers. They were sitting in a corner of the carriage, talking loudlyand obviously aware that the attention of the passengers and Katavasov as hegot in was concentrated upon them. More loudly than all talked the tall,hollow-chested young man. He was unmistakably tipsy, and was relating somestory that had occurred at his school. Facing him sat a middle-aged officer inthe Austrian military jacket of the Guards uniform. He was listening with asmile to the hollow-chested youth, and occasionally pulling him up. The third,in an artillery uniform, was sitting on a box beside them. A fourth was asleep.Entering into conversation with the youth, Katavasov learned that he was awealthy Moscow merchant who had run through a large fortune before he wastwo-and-twenty. Katavasov did not like him, because he was unmanly andeffeminate and sickly. He was obviously convinced, especially now afterdrinking, that he was performing a heroic action, and he bragged of it in themost unpleasant way.The second, the retired officer, made an unpleasant impression too uponKatavasov. He was, it seemed, a man who had tried everything. He had been on arailway, had been a land-steward, and had started factories, and he talked,quite without necessity, of all he had done, and used learned expressions quiteinappropriately.The third, the artilleryman, on the contrary, struck Katavasov very favorably.He was a quiet, modest fellow, unmistakably impressed by the knowledge of theofficer and the heroic self-sacrifice of the merchant and saying nothing abouthimself. When Katavasov asked him what had impelled him to go to Servia, heanswered modestly:“Oh, well, everyone’s going. The Servians want help, too. I’msorry for them.”“Yes, you artillerymen especially are scarce there,” saidKatavasov.“Oh, I wasn’t long in the artillery, maybe they’ll put meinto the infantry or the cavalry.”“Into the infantry when they need artillery more than anything?”said Katavasov, fancying from the artilleryman’s apparent age that hemust have reached a fairly high grade.“I wasn’t long in the artillery; I’m a cadet retired,”he said, and he began to explain how he had failed in his examination.All of this together made a disagreeable impression on Katavasov, and when thevolunteers got out at a station for a drink, Katavasov would have liked tocompare his unfavorable impression in conversation with someone. There was anold man in the carriage, wearing a military overcoat, who had been listeningall the while to Katavasov’s conversation with the volunteers. When theywere left alone, Katavasov addressed him.“What different positions they come from, all those fellows who are goingoff there,” Katavasov said vaguely, not wishing to express his ownopinion, and at the same time anxious to find out the old man’s views.The old man was an officer who had served on two campaigns. He knew what makesa soldier, and judging by the appearance and the talk of those persons, by theswagger with which they had recourse to the bottle on the journey, heconsidered them poor soldiers. Moreover, he lived in a district town, and hewas longing to tell how one soldier had volunteered from his town, a drunkardand a thief whom no one would employ as a laborer. But knowing by experiencethat in the present condition of the public temper it was dangerous to expressan opinion opposed to the general one, and especially to criticize thevolunteers unfavorably, he too watched Katavasov without committing himself.“Well, men are wanted there,” he said, laughing with his eyes. Andthey fell to talking of the last war news, and each concealed from the otherhis perplexity as to the engagement expected next day, since the Turks had beenbeaten, according to the latest news, at all points. And so they parted,neither giving expression to his opinion.Katavasov went back to his own carriage, and with reluctant hypocrisy reportedto Sergey Ivanovitch his observations of the volunteers, from which it wouldappear that they were capital fellows.At a big station at a town the volunteers were again greeted with shouts andsinging, again men and women with collecting boxes appeared, and provincialladies brought bouquets to the volunteers and followed them into therefreshment room; but all this was on a much smaller and feebler scale than inMoscow.Chapter 4While the train was stopping at the provincial town, Sergey Ivanovitch did notgo to the refreshment room, but walked up and down the platform.The first time he passed Vronsky’s compartment he noticed that thecurtain was drawn over the window; but as he passed it the second time he sawthe old countess at the window. She beckoned to Koznishev.“I’m going, you see, taking him as far as Kursk,” she said.“Yes, so I heard,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, standing at her windowand peeping in. “What a noble act on his part!” he added, noticingthat Vronsky was not in the compartment.“Yes, after his misfortune, what was there for him to do?”“What a terrible thing it was!” said Sergey Ivanovitch.“Ah, what I have been through! But do get in.... Ah, what I have beenthrough!” she repeated, when Sergey Ivanovitch had got in and sat downbeside her. “You can’t conceive it! For six weeks he did not speakto anyone, and would not touch food except when I implored him. And not for oneminute could we leave him alone. We took away everything he could have usedagainst himself. We lived on the ground floor, but there was no reckoning onanything. You know, of course, that he had shot himself once already on heraccount,” she said, and the old lady’s eyelashes twitched at therecollection. “Yes, hers was the fitting end for such a woman. Even thedeath she chose was low and vulgar.”“It’s not for us to judge, countess,” said Sergey Ivanovitch;“but I can understand that it has been very hard for you.”“Ah, don’t speak of it! I was staying on my estate, and he was withme. A note was brought him. He wrote an answer and sent it off. We hadn’tan idea that she was close by at the station. In the evening I had only justgone to my room, when my Mary told me a lady had thrown herself under thetrain. Something seemed to strike me at once. I knew it was she. The firstthing I said was, he was not to be told. But they’d told him already. Hiscoachman was there and saw it all. When I ran into his room, he was besidehimself—it was fearful to see him. He didn’t say a word, butgalloped off there. I don’t know to this day what happened there, but hewas brought back at death’s door. I shouldn’t have known him.Prostration complète, the doctor said. And that was followed almost bymadness. Oh, why talk of it!” said the countess with a wave of her hand.“It was an awful time! No, say what you will, she was a bad woman. Why,what is the meaning of such desperate passions? It was all to show herselfsomething out of the way. Well, and that she did do. She brought herself toruin and two good men—her husband and my unhappy son.”“And what did her husband do?” asked Sergey Ivanovitch.“He has taken her daughter. Alexey was ready to agree to anything atfirst. Now it worries him terribly that he should have given his own child awayto another man. But he can’t take back his word. Karenin came to thefuneral. But we tried to prevent his meeting Alexey. For him, for her husband,it was easier, anyway. She had set him free. But my poor son was utterly givenup to her. He had thrown up everything, his career, me, and even then she hadno mercy on him, but of set purpose she made his ruin complete. No, say whatyou will, her very death was the death of a vile woman, of no religiousfeeling. God forgive me, but I can’t help hating the memory of her, whenI look at my son’s misery!”“But how is he now?”“It was a blessing from Providence for us—this Servian war.I’m old, and I don’t understand the rights and wrongs of it, butit’s come as a providential blessing to him. Of course for me, as hismother, it’s terrible; and what’s worse, they say, cen’est pas très bien vu à Pétersbourg. But it can’t be helped!It was the one thing that could rouse him. Yashvin—a friend ofhis—he had lost all he had at cards and he was going to Servia. He cameto see him and persuaded him to go. Now it’s an interest for him. Doplease talk to him a little. I want to distract his mind. He’s solow-spirited. And as bad luck would have it, he has toothache too. Buthe’ll be delighted to see you. Please do talk to him; he’s walkingup and down on that side.”Sergey Ivanovitch said he would be very glad to, and crossed over to the otherside of the station.Chapter 5In the slanting evening shadows cast by the baggage piled up on the platform,Vronsky in his long overcoat and slouch hat, with his hands in his pockets,strode up and down, like a wild beast in a cage, turning sharply after twentypaces. Sergey Ivanovitch fancied, as he approached him, that Vronsky saw himbut was pretending not to see. This did not affect Sergey Ivanovitch in theslightest. He was above all personal considerations with Vronsky.At that moment Sergey Ivanovitch looked upon Vronsky as a man taking animportant part in a great cause, and Koznishev thought it his duty to encouragehim and express his approval. He went up to him.Vronsky stood still, looked intently at him, recognized him, and going a fewsteps forward to meet him, shook hands with him very warmly.“Possibly you didn’t wish to see me,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,“but couldn’t I be of use to you?”“There’s no one I should less dislike seeing than you,” saidVronsky. “Excuse me; and there’s nothing in life for me tolike.”“I quite understand, and I merely meant to offer you my services,”said Sergey Ivanovitch, scanning Vronsky’s face, full of unmistakablesuffering. “Wouldn’t it be of use to you to have a letter toRistitch—to Milan?”“Oh, no!” Vronsky said, seeming to understand him with difficulty.“If you don’t mind, let’s walk on. It’s so stuffy amongthe carriages. A letter? No, thank you; to meet death one needs no letters ofintroduction. Nor for the Turks....” he said, with a smile that was merelyof the lips. His eyes still kept their look of angry suffering.“Yes; but you might find it easier to get into relations, which are afterall essential, with anyone prepared to see you. But that’s as you like. Iwas very glad to hear of your intention. There have been so many attacks madeon the volunteers, and a man like you raises them in public estimation.”“My use as a man,” said Vronsky, “is that life’s worthnothing to me. And that I’ve enough bodily energy to cut my way intotheir ranks, and to trample on them or fall—I know that. I’m gladthere’s something to give my life for, for it’s not simply uselessbut loathsome to me. Anyone’s welcome to it.” And his jaw twitchedimpatiently from the incessant gnawing toothache, that prevented him from evenspeaking with a natural expression.“You will become another man, I predict,” said Sergey Ivanovitch,feeling touched. “To deliver one’s brother-men from bondage is anaim worth death and life. God grant you success outwardly—and inwardlypeace,” he added, and he held out his hand. Vronsky warmly pressed hisoutstretched hand.“Yes, as a weapon I may be of some use. But as a man, I’m awreck,” he jerked out.He could hardly speak for the throbbing ache in his strong teeth, that werelike rows of ivory in his mouth. He was silent, and his eyes rested on thewheels of the tender, slowly and smoothly rolling along the rails.And all at once a different pain, not an ache, but an inner trouble, that sethis whole being in anguish, made him for an instant forget his toothache. As heglanced at the tender and the rails, under the influence of the conversationwith a friend he had not met since his misfortune, he suddenly recalledher—that is, what was left of her when he had run like onedistraught into the cloak room of the railway station—on the table,shamelessly sprawling out among strangers, the bloodstained body so lately fullof life; the head unhurt dropping back with its weight of hair, and the curlingtresses about the temples, and the exquisite face, with red, half-opened mouth,the strange, fixed expression, piteous on the lips and awful in the still openeyes, that seemed to utter that fearful phrase—that he would be sorry forit—that she had said when they were quarreling.And he tried to think of her as she was when he met her the first time, at arailway station too, mysterious, exquisite, loving, seeking and givinghappiness, and not cruelly revengeful as he remembered her on that last moment.He tried to recall his best moments with her, but those moments were poisonedforever. He could only think of her as triumphant, successful in her menace ofa wholly useless remorse never to be effaced. He lost all consciousness oftoothache, and his face worked with sobs.Passing twice up and down beside the baggage in silence and regaining hisself-possession, he addressed Sergey Ivanovitch calmly:“You have had no telegrams since yesterday’s? Yes, driven back fora third time, but a decisive engagement expected for tomorrow.”And after talking a little more of King Milan’s proclamation, and theimmense effect it might have, they parted, going to their carriages on hearingthe second bell.Chapter 6Sergey Ivanovitch had not telegraphed to his brother to send to meet him, as hedid not know when he should be able to leave Moscow. Levin was not at home whenKatavasov and Sergey Ivanovitch in a fly hired at the station drove up to thesteps of the Pokrovskoe house, as black as Moors from the dust of the road.Kitty, sitting on the balcony with her father and sister, recognized herbrother-in-law, and ran down to meet him.“What a shame not to have let us know,” she said, giving her handto Sergey Ivanovitch, and putting her forehead up for him to kiss.“We drove here capitally, and have not put you out,” answeredSergey Ivanovitch. “I’m so dirty. I’m afraid to touch you.I’ve been so busy, I didn’t know when I should be able to tearmyself away. And so you’re still as ever enjoying your peaceful, quiethappiness,” he said, smiling, “out of the reach of the current inyour peaceful backwater. Here’s our friend Fyodor Vassilievitch who hassucceeded in getting here at last.”“But I’m not a negro, I shall look like a human being when Iwash,” said Katavasov in his jesting fashion, and he shook hands andsmiled, his teeth flashing white in his black face.“Kostya will be delighted. He has gone to his settlement. It’s timehe should be home.”“Busy as ever with his farming. It really is a peaceful backwater,”said Katavasov; “while we in town think of nothing but the Servian war.Well, how does our friend look at it? He’s sure not to think like otherpeople.”“Oh, I don’t know, like everybody else,” Kitty answered, alittle embarrassed, looking round at Sergey Ivanovitch. “I’ll sendto fetch him. Papa’s staying with us. He’s only just come home fromabroad.”And making arrangements to send for Levin and for the guests to wash, one inhis room and the other in what had been Dolly’s, and giving orders fortheir luncheon, Kitty ran out onto the balcony, enjoying the freedom, andrapidity of movement, of which she had been deprived during the months of herpregnancy.“It’s Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov, a professor,” shesaid.“Oh, that’s a bore in this heat,” said the prince.“No, papa, he’s very nice, and Kostya’s very fond ofhim,” Kitty said, with a deprecating smile, noticing the irony on herfather’s face.“Oh, I didn’t say anything.”“You go to them, darling,” said Kitty to her sister, “andentertain them. They saw Stiva at the station; he was quite well. And I mustrun to Mitya. As ill-luck would have it, I haven’t fed him since tea.He’s awake now, and sure to be screaming.” And feeling a rush ofmilk, she hurried to the nursery.This was not a mere guess; her connection with the child was still so close,that she could gauge by the flow of her milk his need of food, and knew forcertain he was hungry.She knew he was crying before she reached the nursery. And he was indeedcrying. She heard him and hastened. But the faster she went, the louder hescreamed. It was a fine healthy scream, hungry and impatient.“Has he been screaming long, nurse, very long?” said Kittyhurriedly, seating herself on a chair, and preparing to give the baby thebreast. “But give me him quickly. Oh, nurse, how tiresome you are! There,tie the cap afterwards, do!”The baby’s greedy scream was passing into sobs.“But you can’t manage so, ma’am,” said AgafeaMihalovna, who was almost always to be found in the nursery. “He must beput straight. A-oo! a-oo!” she chanted over him, paying no attention tothe mother.The nurse brought the baby to his mother. Agafea Mihalovna followed him with aface dissolving with tenderness.“He knows me, he knows me. In God’s faith, Katerina Alexandrovna,ma’am, he knew me!” Agafea Mihalovna cried above the baby’sscreams.But Kitty did not hear her words. Her impatience kept growing, like thebaby’s.Their impatience hindered things for a while. The baby could not get hold ofthe breast right, and was furious.At last, after despairing, breathless screaming, and vain sucking, things wentright, and mother and child felt simultaneously soothed, and both subsided intocalm.“But poor darling, he’s all in perspiration!” said Kitty in awhisper, touching the baby.“What makes you think he knows you?” she added, with a sidelongglance at the baby’s eyes, that peered roguishly, as she fancied, fromunder his cap, at his rhythmically puffing cheeks, and the little red-palmedhand he was waving.“Impossible! If he knew anyone, he would have known me,” saidKitty, in response to Agafea Mihalovna’s statement, and she smiled.She smiled because, though she said he could not know her, in her heart she wassure that he knew not merely Agafea Mihalovna, but that he knew and understoodeverything, and knew and understood a great deal too that no one else knew, andthat she, his mother, had learned and come to understand only through him. ToAgafea Mihalovna, to the nurse, to his grandfather, to his father even, Mityawas a living being, requiring only material care, but for his mother he hadlong been a mortal being, with whom there had been a whole series of spiritualrelations already.“When he wakes up, please God, you shall see for yourself. Then when I dolike this, he simply beams on me, the darling! Simply beams like a sunnyday!” said Agafea Mihalovna.“Well, well; then we shall see,” whispered Kitty. “But now goaway, he’s going to sleep.”Chapter 7Agafea Mihalovna went out on tiptoe; the nurse let down the blind, chased a flyout from under the muslin canopy of the crib, and a bumblebee struggling on thewindow-frame, and sat down waving a faded branch of birch over the mother andthe baby.“How hot it is! if God would send a drop of rain,” she said.“Yes, yes, sh—sh—sh——” was all Kittyanswered, rocking a little, and tenderly squeezing the plump little arm, withrolls of fat at the wrist, which Mitya still waved feebly as he opened and shuthis eyes. That hand worried Kitty; she longed to kiss the little hand, but wasafraid to for fear of waking the baby. At last the little hand ceased waving,and the eyes closed. Only from time to time, as he went on sucking, the babyraised his long, curly eyelashes and peeped at his mother with wet eyes, thatlooked black in the twilight. The nurse had left off fanning, and was dozing.From above came the peals of the old prince’s voice, and the chuckle ofKatavasov.“They have got into talk without me,” thought Kitty, “butstill it’s vexing that Kostya’s out. He’s sure to have goneto the bee-house again. Though it’s a pity he’s there so often,still I’m glad. It distracts his mind. He’s become altogetherhappier and better now than in the spring. He used to be so gloomy and worriedthat I felt frightened for him. And how absurd he is!” she whispered,smiling.She knew what worried her husband. It was his unbelief. Although, if she hadbeen asked whether she supposed that in the future life, if he did not believe,he would be damned, she would have had to admit that he would be damned, hisunbelief did not cause her unhappiness. And she, confessing that for anunbeliever there can be no salvation, and loving her husband’s soul morethan anything in the world, thought with a smile of his unbelief, and toldherself that he was absurd.“What does he keep reading philosophy of some sort for all thisyear?” she wondered. “If it’s all written in those books, hecan understand them. If it’s all wrong, why does he read them? He sayshimself that he would like to believe. Then why is it he doesn’t believe?Surely from his thinking so much? And he thinks so much from being solitary.He’s always alone, alone. He can’t talk about it all to us. I fancyhe’ll be glad of these visitors, especially Katavasov. He likesdiscussions with them,” she thought, and passed instantly to theconsideration of where it would be more convenient to put Katavasov, to sleepalone or to share Sergey Ivanovitch’s room. And then an idea suddenlystruck her, which made her shudder and even disturb Mitya, who glanced severelyat her. “I do believe the laundress hasn’t sent the washing yet,and all the best sheets are in use. If I don’t see to it, AgafeaMihalovna will give Sergey Ivanovitch the wrong sheets,” and at the veryidea of this the blood rushed to Kitty’s face.“Yes, I will arrange it,” she decided, and going back to her formerthoughts, she remembered that some spiritual question of importance had beeninterrupted, and she began to recall what. “Yes, Kostya, anunbeliever,” she thought again with a smile.“Well, an unbeliever then! Better let him always be one than like MadameStahl, or what I tried to be in those days abroad. No, he won’t ever shamanything.”And a recent instance of his goodness rose vividly to her mind. A fortnight agoa penitent letter had come from Stepan Arkadyevitch to Dolly. He besought herto save his honor, to sell her estate to pay his debts. Dolly was in despair,she detested her husband, despised him, pitied him, resolved on a separation,resolved to refuse, but ended by agreeing to sell part of her property. Afterthat, with an irrepressible smile of tenderness, Kitty recalled herhusband’s shamefaced embarrassment, his repeated awkward efforts toapproach the subject, and how at last, having thought of the one means ofhelping Dolly without wounding her pride, he had suggested to Kitty—whathad not occurred to her before—that she should give up her share of theproperty.“He an unbeliever indeed! With his heart, his dread of offending anyone,even a child! Everything for others, nothing for himself. Sergey Ivanovitchsimply considers it as Kostya’s duty to be his steward. And it’sthe same with his sister. Now Dolly and her children are under hisguardianship; all these peasants who come to him every day, as though he werebound to be at their service.”“Yes, only be like your father, only like him,” she said, handingMitya over to the nurse, and putting her lips to his cheek.Chapter 8Ever since, by his beloved brother’s deathbed, Levin had first glancedinto the questions of life and death in the light of these new convictions, ashe called them, which had during the period from his twentieth to histhirty-fourth year imperceptibly replaced his childish and youthfulbeliefs—he had been stricken with horror, not so much of death, as oflife, without any knowledge of whence, and why, and how, and what it was. Thephysical organization, its decay, the indestructibility of matter, the law ofthe conservation of energy, evolution, were the words which usurped the placeof his old belief. These words and the ideas associated with them were verywell for intellectual purposes. But for life they yielded nothing, and Levinfelt suddenly like a man who has changed his warm fur cloak for a muslingarment, and going for the first time into the frost is immediately convinced,not by reason, but by his whole nature that he is as good as naked, and that hemust infallibly perish miserably.From that moment, though he did not distinctly face it, and still went onliving as before, Levin had never lost this sense of terror at his lack ofknowledge.He vaguely felt, too, that what he called his new convictions were not merelylack of knowledge, but that they were part of a whole order of ideas, in whichno knowledge of what he needed was possible.At first, marriage, with the new joys and duties bound up with it, hadcompletely crowded out these thoughts. But of late, while he was staying inMoscow after his wife’s confinement, with nothing to do, the questionthat clamored for solution had more and more often, more and more insistently,haunted Levin’s mind.The question was summed up for him thus: “If I do not accept the answersChristianity gives to the problems of my life, what answers do I accept?”And in the whole arsenal of his convictions, so far from finding anysatisfactory answers, he was utterly unable to find anything at all like ananswer.He was in the position of a man seeking food in toy shops and tool shops.Instinctively, unconsciously, with every book, with every conversation, withevery man he met, he was on the lookout for light on these questions and theirsolution.What puzzled and distracted him above everything was that the majority of menof his age and circle had, like him, exchanged their old beliefs for the samenew convictions, and yet saw nothing to lament in this, and were perfectlysatisfied and serene. So that, apart from the principal question, Levin wastortured by other questions too. Were these people sincere? he asked himself,or were they playing a part? or was it that they understood the answers sciencegave to these problems in some different, clearer sense than he did? And heassiduously studied both these men’s opinions and the books which treatedof these scientific explanations.One fact he had found out since these questions had engrossed his mind, wasthat he had been quite wrong in supposing from the recollections of the circleof his young days at college, that religion had outlived its day, and that itwas now practically non-existent. All the people nearest to him who were goodin their lives were believers. The old prince, and Lvov, whom he liked so much,and Sergey Ivanovitch, and all the women believed, and his wife believed assimply as he had believed in his earliest childhood, and ninety-nine hundredthsof the Russian people, all the working people for whose life he felt thedeepest respect, believed.Another fact of which he became convinced, after reading many scientific books,was that the men who shared his views had no other construction to put on them,and that they gave no explanation of the questions which he felt he could notlive without answering, but simply ignored their existence and attempted toexplain other questions of no possible interest to him, such as the evolutionof organisms, the materialistic theory of consciousness, and so forth.Moreover, during his wife’s confinement, something had happened thatseemed extraordinary to him. He, an unbeliever, had fallen into praying, and atthe moment he prayed, he believed. But that moment had passed, and he could notmake his state of mind at that moment fit into the rest of his life.He could not admit that at that moment he knew the truth, and that now he waswrong; for as soon as he began thinking calmly about it, it all fell to pieces.He could not admit that he was mistaken then, for his spiritual condition thenwas precious to him, and to admit that it was a proof of weakness would havebeen to desecrate those moments. He was miserably divided against himself, andstrained all his spiritual forces to the utmost to escape from this condition.Chapter 9These doubts fretted and harassed him, growing weaker or stronger from time totime, but never leaving him. He read and thought, and the more he read and themore he thought, the further he felt from the aim he was pursuing.Of late in Moscow and in the country, since he had become convinced that hewould find no solution in the materialists, he had read and re-read thoroughlyPlato, Spinoza, Kant, Schelling, Hegel, and Schopenhauer, the philosophers whogave a non-materialistic explanation of life.Their ideas seemed to him fruitful when he was reading or was himself seekingarguments to refute other theories, especially those of the materialists; butas soon as he began to read or sought for himself a solution of problems, thesame thing always happened. As long as he followed the fixed definition ofobscure words such as spirit, will, freedom, essence, purposely lettinghimself go into the snare of words the philosophers set for him, he seemed tocomprehend something. But he had only to forget the artificial train ofreasoning, and to turn from life itself to what had satisfied him whilethinking in accordance with the fixed definitions, and all this artificialedifice fell to pieces at once like a house of cards, and it became clear thatthe edifice had been built up out of those transposed words, apart fromanything in life more important than reason.At one time, reading Schopenhauer, he put in place of his will the wordlove, and for a couple of days this new philosophy charmed him, till heremoved a little away from it. But then, when he turned from life itself toglance at it again, it fell away too, and proved to be the same muslin garmentwith no warmth in it.His brother Sergey Ivanovitch advised him to read the theological works ofHomiakov. Levin read the second volume of Homiakov’s works, and in spiteof the elegant, epigrammatic, argumentative style which at first repelled him,he was impressed by the doctrine of the church he found in them. He was struckat first by the idea that the apprehension of divine truths had not beenvouchsafed to man, but to a corporation of men bound together by love—tothe church. What delighted him was the thought how much easier it was tobelieve in a still existing living church, embracing all the beliefs of men,and having God at its head, and therefore holy and infallible, and from it toaccept the faith in God, in the creation, the fall, the redemption, than tobegin with God, a mysterious, far-away God, the creation, etc. But afterwards,on reading a Catholic writer’s history of the church, and then a Greekorthodox writer’s history of the church, and seeing that the twochurches, in their very conception infallible, each deny the authority of theother, Homiakov’s doctrine of the church lost all its charm for him, andthis edifice crumbled into dust like the philosophers’ edifices.All that spring he was not himself, and went through fearful moments of horror.“Without knowing what I am and why I am here, life’s impossible;and that I can’t know, and so I can’t live,” Levin said tohimself.“In infinite time, in infinite matter, in infinite space, is formed abubble-organism, and that bubble lasts a while and bursts, and that bubble isMe.”It was an agonizing error, but it was the sole logical result of ages of humanthought in that direction.This was the ultimate belief on which all the systems elaborated by humanthought in almost all their ramifications rested. It was the prevalentconviction, and of all other explanations Levin had unconsciously, not knowingwhen or how, chosen it, as anyway the clearest, and made it his own.But it was not merely a falsehood, it was the cruel jeer of some wicked power,some evil, hateful power, to whom one could not submit.He must escape from this power. And the means of escape every man had in hisown hands. He had but to cut short this dependence on evil. And there was onemeans—death.And Levin, a happy father and husband, in perfect health, was several times sonear suicide that he hid the cord that he might not be tempted to hang himself,and was afraid to go out with his gun for fear of shooting himself.But Levin did not shoot himself, and did not hang himself; he went on living.Chapter 10When Levin thought what he was and what he was living for, he could find noanswer to the questions and was reduced to despair, but he left off questioninghimself about it. It seemed as though he knew both what he was and for what hewas living, for he acted and lived resolutely and without hesitation. Indeed,in these latter days he was far more decided and unhesitating in life than hehad ever been.When he went back to the country at the beginning of June, he went back also tohis usual pursuits. The management of the estate, his relations with thepeasants and the neighbors, the care of his household, the management of hissister’s and brother’s property, of which he had the direction, hisrelations with his wife and kindred, the care of his child, and the newbee-keeping hobby he had taken up that spring, filled all his time.These things occupied him now, not because he justified them to himself by anysort of general principles, as he had done in former days; on the contrary,disappointed by the failure of his former efforts for the general welfare, andtoo much occupied with his own thought and the mass of business with which hewas burdened from all sides, he had completely given up thinking of the generalgood, and he busied himself with all this work simply because it seemed to himthat he must do what he was doing—that he could not do otherwise. Informer days—almost from childhood, and increasingly up to fullmanhood—when he had tried to do anything that would be good for all, forhumanity, for Russia, for the whole village, he had noticed that the idea of ithad been pleasant, but the work itself had always been incoherent, that then hehad never had a full conviction of its absolute necessity, and that the workthat had begun by seeming so great, had grown less and less, till it vanishedinto nothing. But now, since his marriage, when he had begun to confine himselfmore and more to living for himself, though he experienced no delight at all atthe thought of the work he was doing, he felt a complete conviction of itsnecessity, saw that it succeeded far better than in old days, and that it kepton growing more and more.Now, involuntarily it seemed, he cut more and more deeply into the soil like aplough, so that he could not be drawn out without turning aside the furrow.To live the same family life as his father and forefathers—that is, inthe same condition of culture—and to bring up his children in the same,was incontestably necessary. It was as necessary as dining when one was hungry.And to do this, just as it was necessary to cook dinner, it was necessary tokeep the mechanism of agriculture at Pokrovskoe going so as to yield an income.Just as incontestably as it was necessary to repay a debt was it necessary tokeep the property in such a condition that his son, when he received it as aheritage, would say “thank you” to his father as Levin had said“thank you” to his grandfather for all he built and planted. And todo this it was necessary to look after the land himself, not to let it, and tobreed cattle, manure the fields, and plant timber.It was impossible not to look after the affairs of Sergey Ivanovitch, of hissister, of the peasants who came to him for advice and were accustomed to doso—as impossible as to fling down a child one is carrying in one’sarms. It was necessary to look after the comfort of his sister-in-law and herchildren, and of his wife and baby, and it was impossible not to spend withthem at least a short time each day.And all this, together with shooting and his new bee-keeping, filled up thewhole of Levin’s life, which had no meaning at all for him, when he beganto think.But besides knowing thoroughly what he had to do, Levin knew in just the sameway how he had to do it all, and what was more important than the rest.He knew he must hire laborers as cheaply as possible; but to hire men underbond, paying them in advance at less than the current rate of wages, was whathe must not do, even though it was very profitable. Selling straw to thepeasants in times of scarcity of provender was what he might do, even though hefelt sorry for them; but the tavern and the pothouse must be put down, thoughthey were a source of income. Felling timber must be punished as severely aspossible, but he could not exact forfeits for cattle being driven onto hisfields; and though it annoyed the keeper and made the peasants not afraid tograze their cattle on his land, he could not keep their cattle as a punishment.To Pyotr, who was paying a money-lender ten per cent. a month, he must lend asum of money to set him free. But he could not let off peasants who did not paytheir rent, nor let them fall into arrears. It was impossible to overlook thebailiff’s not having mown the meadows and letting the hay spoil; and itwas equally impossible to mow those acres where a young copse had been planted.It was impossible to excuse a laborer who had gone home in the busy seasonbecause his father was dying, however sorry he might feel for him, and he mustsubtract from his pay those costly months of idleness. But it was impossiblenot to allow monthly rations to the old servants who were of no use foranything.Levin knew that when he got home he must first of all go to his wife, who wasunwell, and that the peasants who had been waiting for three hours to see himcould wait a little longer. He knew too that, regardless of all the pleasure hefelt in taking a swarm, he must forego that pleasure, and leave the old man tosee to the bees alone, while he talked to the peasants who had come after himto the bee-house.Whether he were acting rightly or wrongly he did not know, and far from tryingto prove that he was, nowadays he avoided all thought or talk about it.Reasoning had brought him to doubt, and prevented him from seeing what he oughtto do and what he ought not. When he did not think, but simply lived, he wascontinually aware of the presence of an infallible judge in his soul,determining which of two possible courses of action was the better and whichwas the worse, and as soon as he did not act rightly, he was at once aware ofit.So he lived, not knowing and not seeing any chance of knowing what he was andwhat he was living for, and harassed at this lack of knowledge to such a pointthat he was afraid of suicide, and yet firmly laying down his own individualdefinite path in life.Chapter 11The day on which Sergey Ivanovitch came to Pokrovskoe was one of Levin’smost painful days. It was the very busiest working time, when all the peasantryshow an extraordinary intensity of self-sacrifice in labor, such as is nevershown in any other conditions of life, and would be highly esteemed if the menwho showed these qualities themselves thought highly of them, and if it werenot repeated every year, and if the results of this intense labor were not sosimple.To reap and bind the rye and oats and to carry it, to mow the meadows, turnover the fallows, thrash the seed and sow the winter corn—all this seemsso simple and ordinary; but to succeed in getting through it all everyone inthe village, from the old man to the young child, must toil incessantly forthree or four weeks, three times as hard as usual, living on rye-beer, onions,and black bread, thrashing and carrying the sheaves at night, and not givingmore than two or three hours in the twenty-four to sleep. And every year thisis done all over Russia.Having lived the greater part of his life in the country and in the closestrelations with the peasants, Levin always felt in this busy time that he wasinfected by this general quickening of energy in the people.In the early morning he rode over to the first sowing of the rye, and to theoats, which were being carried to the stacks, and returning home at the timehis wife and sister-in-law were getting up, he drank coffee with them andwalked to the farm, where a new thrashing machine was to be set working to getready the seed-corn.He was standing in the cool granary, still fragrant with the leaves of thehazel branches interlaced on the freshly peeled aspen beams of the new thatchroof. He gazed through the open door in which the dry bitter dust of thethrashing whirled and played, at the grass of the thrashing floor in thesunlight and the fresh straw that had been brought in from the barn, then atthe speckly-headed, white-breasted swallows that flew chirping in under theroof and, fluttering their wings, settled in the crevices of the doorway, thenat the peasants bustling in the dark, dusty barn, and he thought strangethoughts.“Why is it all being done?” he thought. “Why am I standinghere, making them work? What are they all so busy for, trying to show theirzeal before me? What is that old Matrona, my old friend, toiling for? (Idoctored her, when the beam fell on her in the fire)” he thought, lookingat a thin old woman who was raking up the grain, moving painfully with herbare, sun-blackened feet over the uneven, rough floor. “Then sherecovered, but today or tomorrow or in ten years she won’t; they’llbury her, and nothing will be left either of her or of that smart girl in thered jacket, who with that skillful, soft action shakes the ears out of theirhusks. They’ll bury her and this piebald horse, and very soon too,”he thought, gazing at the heavily moving, panting horse that kept walking upthe wheel that turned under him. “And they will bury her and Fyodor thethrasher with his curly beard full of chaff and his shirt torn on his whiteshoulders—they will bury him. He’s untying the sheaves, and givingorders, and shouting to the women, and quickly setting straight the strap onthe moving wheel. And what’s more, it’s not them alone—methey’ll bury too, and nothing will be left. What for?”He thought this, and at the same time looked at his watch to reckon how muchthey thrashed in an hour. He wanted to know this so as to judge by it the taskto set for the day.“It’ll soon be one, and they’re only beginning the thirdsheaf,” thought Levin. He went up to the man that was feeding themachine, and shouting over the roar of the machine he told him to put it inmore slowly. “You put in too much at a time, Fyodor. Do you see—itgets choked, that’s why it isn’t getting on. Do it evenly.”Fyodor, black with the dust that clung to his moist face, shouted something inresponse, but still went on doing it as Levin did not want him to.Levin, going up to the machine, moved Fyodor aside, and began feeding the cornin himself. Working on till the peasants’ dinner hour, which was not longin coming, he went out of the barn with Fyodor and fell into talk with him,stopping beside a neat yellow sheaf of rye laid on the thrashing floor forseed.Fyodor came from a village at some distance from the one in which Levin hadonce allotted land to his cooperative association. Now it had been let to aformer house porter.Levin talked to Fyodor about this land and asked whether Platon, a well-to-dopeasant of good character belonging to the same village, would not take theland for the coming year.“It’s a high rent; it wouldn’t pay Platon, KonstantinDmitrievitch,” answered the peasant, picking the ears off hissweat-drenched shirt.“But how does Kirillov make it pay?”“Mituh!” (so the peasant called the house porter, in a tone ofcontempt), “you may be sure he’ll make it pay, KonstantinDmitrievitch! He’ll get his share, however he has to squeeze to get it!He’s no mercy on a Christian. But Uncle Fokanitch” (so he calledthe old peasant Platon), “do you suppose he’d flay the skin off aman? Where there’s debt, he’ll let anyone off. And he’ll notwring the last penny out. He’s a man too.”“But why will he let anyone off?”“Oh, well, of course, folks are different. One man lives for his ownwants and nothing else, like Mituh, he only thinks of filling his belly, butFokanitch is a righteous man. He lives for his soul. He does not forgetGod.”“How thinks of God? How does he live for his soul?” Levin almostshouted.“Why, to be sure, in truth, in God’s way. Folks are different. Takeyou now, you wouldn’t wrong a man....”“Yes, yes, good-bye!” said Levin, breathless with excitement, andturning round he took his stick and walked quickly away towards home. At thepeasant’s words that Fokanitch lived for his soul, in truth, inGod’s way, undefined but significant ideas seemed to burst out as thoughthey had been locked up, and all striving towards one goal, they throngedwhirling through his head, blinding him with their light.Chapter 12Levin strode along the highroad, absorbed not so much in his thoughts (he couldnot yet disentangle them) as in his spiritual condition, unlike anything he hadexperienced before.The words uttered by the peasant had acted on his soul like an electric shock,suddenly transforming and combining into a single whole the whole swarm ofdisjointed, impotent, separate thoughts that incessantly occupied his mind.These thoughts had unconsciously been in his mind even when he was talkingabout the land.He was aware of something new in his soul, and joyfully tested this new thing,not yet knowing what it was.“Not living for his own wants, but for God? For what God? And could onesay anything more senseless than what he said? He said that one must not livefor one’s own wants, that is, that one must not live for what weunderstand, what we are attracted by, what we desire, but must live forsomething incomprehensible, for God, whom no one can understand nor evendefine. What of it? Didn’t I understand those senseless words ofFyodor’s? And understanding them, did I doubt of their truth? Did I thinkthem stupid, obscure, inexact? No, I understood him, and exactly as heunderstands the words. I understood them more fully and clearly than Iunderstand anything in life, and never in my life have I doubted nor can Idoubt about it. And not only I, but everyone, the whole world understandsnothing fully but this, and about this only they have no doubt and are alwaysagreed.“And I looked out for miracles, complained that I did not see a miraclewhich would convince me. A material miracle would have persuaded me. And hereis a miracle, the sole miracle possible, continually existing, surrounding meon all sides, and I never noticed it!“Fyodor says that Kirillov lives for his belly. That’scomprehensible and rational. All of us as rational beings can’t doanything else but live for our belly. And all of a sudden the same Fyodor saysthat one mustn’t live for one’s belly, but must live for truth, forGod, and at a hint I understand him! And I and millions of men, men who livedages ago and men living now—peasants, the poor in spirit and the learned,who have thought and written about it, in their obscure words saying the samething—we are all agreed about this one thing: what we must live for andwhat is good. I and all men have only one firm, incontestable, clear knowledge,and that knowledge cannot be explained by the reason—it is outside it,and has no causes and can have no effects.“If goodness has causes, it is not goodness; if it has effects, a reward,it is not goodness either. So goodness is outside the chain of cause andeffect.“And yet I know it, and we all know it.“What could be a greater miracle than that?“Can I have found the solution of it all? can my sufferings beover?” thought Levin, striding along the dusty road, not noticing theheat nor his weariness, and experiencing a sense of relief from prolongedsuffering. This feeling was so delicious that it seemed to him incredible. Hewas breathless with emotion and incapable of going farther; he turned off theroad into the forest and lay down in the shade of an aspen on the uncut grass.He took his hat off his hot head and lay propped on his elbow in the lush,feathery, woodland grass.“Yes, I must make it clear to myself and understand,” he thought,looking intently at the untrampled grass before him, and following themovements of a green beetle, advancing along a blade of couch-grass and liftingup in its progress a leaf of goat-weed. “What have I discovered?”he asked himself, bending aside the leaf of goat-weed out of the beetle’sway and twisting another blade of grass above for the beetle to cross over ontoit. “What is it makes me glad? What have I discovered?“I have discovered nothing. I have only found out what I knew. Iunderstand the force that in the past gave me life, and now too gives me life.I have been set free from falsity, I have found the Master.“Of old I used to say that in my body, that in the body of this grass andof this beetle (there, she didn’t care for the grass, she’s openedher wings and flown away), there was going on a transformation of matter inaccordance with physical, chemical, and physiological laws. And in all of us,as well as in the aspens and the clouds and the misty patches, there was aprocess of evolution. Evolution from what? into what?—Eternal evolutionand struggle.... As though there could be any sort of tendency and struggle inthe eternal! And I was astonished that in spite of the utmost effort of thoughtalong that road I could not discover the meaning of life, the meaning of myimpulses and yearnings. Now I say that I know the meaning of my life: ‘Tolive for God, for my soul.’ And this meaning, in spite of its clearness,is mysterious and marvelous. Such, indeed, is the meaning of everythingexisting. Yes, pride,” he said to himself, turning over on his stomachand beginning to tie a noose of blades of grass, trying not to break them.“And not merely pride of intellect, but dulness of intellect. And most ofall, the deceitfulness; yes, the deceitfulness of intellect. The cheatingknavishness of intellect, that’s it,” he said to himself.And he briefly went through, mentally, the whole course of his ideas during thelast two years, the beginning of which was the clear confronting of death atthe sight of his dear brother hopelessly ill.Then, for the first time, grasping that for every man, and himself too, therewas nothing in store but suffering, death, and forgetfulness, he had made uphis mind that life was impossible like that, and that he must either interpretlife so that it would not present itself to him as the evil jest of some devil,or shoot himself.But he had not done either, but had gone on living, thinking, and feeling, andhad even at that very time married, and had had many joys and had been happy,when he was not thinking of the meaning of his life.What did this mean? It meant that he had been living rightly, but thinkingwrongly.He had lived (without being aware of it) on those spiritual truths that he hadsucked in with his mother’s milk, but he had thought, not merely withoutrecognition of these truths, but studiously ignoring them.Now it was clear to him that he could only live by virtue of the beliefs inwhich he had been brought up.“What should I have been, and how should I have spent my life, if I hadnot had these beliefs, if I had not known that I must live for God and not formy own desires? I should have robbed and lied and killed. Nothing of what makesthe chief happiness of my life would have existed for me.” And with theutmost stretch of imagination he could not conceive the brutal creature hewould have been himself, if he had not known what he was living for.“I looked for an answer to my question. And thought could not give ananswer to my question—it is incommensurable with my question. The answerhas been given me by life itself, in my knowledge of what is right and what iswrong. And that knowledge I did not arrive at in any way, it was given to me asto all men, given, because I could not have got it from anywhere.“Where could I have got it? By reason could I have arrived at knowingthat I must love my neighbor and not oppress him? I was told that in mychildhood, and I believed it gladly, for they told me what was already in mysoul. But who discovered it? Not reason. Reason discovered the struggle forexistence, and the law that requires us to oppress all who hinder thesatisfaction of our desires. That is the deduction of reason. But lovingone’s neighbor reason could never discover, because it’sirrational.”Chapter 13And Levin remembered a scene he had lately witnessed between Dolly and herchildren. The children, left to themselves, had begun cooking raspberries overthe candles and squirting milk into each other’s mouths with a syringe.Their mother, catching them at these pranks, began reminding them inLevin’s presence of the trouble their mischief gave to the grown-uppeople, and that this trouble was all for their sake, and that if they smashedthe cups they would have nothing to drink their tea out of, and that if theywasted the milk, they would have nothing to eat, and die of hunger.And Levin had been struck by the passive, weary incredulity with which thechildren heard what their mother said to them. They were simply annoyed thattheir amusing play had been interrupted, and did not believe a word of whattheir mother was saying. They could not believe it indeed, for they could nottake in the immensity of all they habitually enjoyed, and so could not conceivethat what they were destroying was the very thing they lived by.“That all comes of itself,” they thought, “and there’snothing interesting or important about it because it has always been so, andalways will be so. And it’s all always the same. We’ve no need tothink about that, it’s all ready. But we want to invent something of ourown, and new. So we thought of putting raspberries in a cup, and cooking themover a candle, and squirting milk straight into each other’s mouths.That’s fun, and something new, and not a bit worse than drinking out ofcups.”“Isn’t it just the same that we do, that I did, searching by theaid of reason for the significance of the forces of nature and the meaning ofthe life of man?” he thought.“And don’t all the theories of philosophy do the same, trying bythe path of thought, which is strange and not natural to man, to bring him to aknowledge of what he has known long ago, and knows so certainly that he couldnot live at all without it? Isn’t it distinctly to be seen in thedevelopment of each philosopher’s theory, that he knows what is the chiefsignificance of life beforehand, just as positively as the peasant Fyodor, andnot a bit more clearly than he, and is simply trying by a dubious intellectualpath to come back to what everyone knows?“Now then, leave the children to themselves to get things alone and maketheir crockery, get the milk from the cows, and so on. Would they be naughtythen? Why, they’d die of hunger! Well, then, leave us with our passionsand thoughts, without any idea of the one God, of the Creator, or without anyidea of what is right, without any idea of moral evil.“Just try and build up anything without those ideas!“We only try to destroy them, because we’re spiritually providedfor. Exactly like the children!“Whence have I that joyful knowledge, shared with the peasant, that alonegives peace to my soul? Whence did I get it?“Brought up with an idea of God, a Christian, my whole life filled withthe spiritual blessings Christianity has given me, full of them, and living onthose blessings, like the children I did not understand them, and destroy, thatis try to destroy, what I live by. And as soon as an important moment of lifecomes, like the children when they are cold and hungry, I turn to Him, and evenless than the children when their mother scolds them for their childishmischief, do I feel that my childish efforts at wanton madness are reckonedagainst me.“Yes, what I know, I know not by reason, but it has been given to me,revealed to me, and I know it with my heart, by faith in the chief thing taughtby the church.“The church! the church!” Levin repeated to himself. He turned overon the other side, and leaning on his elbow, fell to gazing into the distanceat a herd of cattle crossing over to the river.“But can I believe in all the church teaches?” he thought, tryinghimself, and thinking of everything that could destroy his present peace ofmind. Intentionally he recalled all those doctrines of the church which hadalways seemed most strange and had always been a stumbling block to him.“The Creation? But how did I explain existence? By existence? By nothing?The devil and sin. But how do I explain evil?... The atonement?...“But I know nothing, nothing, and I can know nothing but what has beentold to me and all men.”And it seemed to him that there was not a single article of faith of the churchwhich could destroy the chief thing—faith in God, in goodness, as the onegoal of man’s destiny.Under every article of faith of the church could be put the faith in theservice of truth instead of one’s desires. And each doctrine did notsimply leave that faith unshaken, each doctrine seemed essential to completethat great miracle, continually manifest upon earth, that made it possible foreach man and millions of different sorts of men, wise men and imbeciles, oldmen and children—all men, peasants, Lvov, Kitty, beggars and kings tounderstand perfectly the same one thing, and to build up thereby that life ofthe soul which alone is worth living, and which alone is precious to us.Lying on his back, he gazed up now into the high, cloudless sky. “Do Inot know that that is infinite space, and that it is not a round arch? But,however I screw up my eyes and strain my sight, I cannot see it not round andnot bounded, and in spite of my knowing about infinite space, I amincontestably right when I see a solid blue dome, and more right than when Istrain my eyes to see beyond it.”Levin ceased thinking, and only, as it were, listened to mysterious voices thatseemed talking joyfully and earnestly within him.“Can this be faith?” he thought, afraid to believe in hishappiness. “My God, I thank Thee!” he said, gulping down his sobs,and with both hands brushing away the tears that filled his eyes.Chapter 14Levin looked before him and saw a herd of cattle, then he caught sight of histrap with Raven in the shafts, and the coachman, who, driving up to the herd,said something to the herdsman. Then he heard the rattle of the wheels and thesnort of the sleek horse close by him. But he was so buried in his thoughtsthat he did not even wonder why the coachman had come for him.He only thought of that when the coachman had driven quite up to him andshouted to him. “The mistress sent me. Your brother has come, and somegentleman with him.”Levin got into the trap and took the reins. As though just roused out of sleep,for a long while Levin could not collect his faculties. He stared at the sleekhorse flecked with lather between his haunches and on his neck, where theharness rubbed, stared at Ivan the coachman sitting beside him, and rememberedthat he was expecting his brother, thought that his wife was most likely uneasyat his long absence, and tried to guess who was the visitor who had come withhis brother. And his brother and his wife and the unknown guest seemed to himnow quite different from before. He fancied that now his relations with all menwould be different.“With my brother there will be none of that aloofness there always usedto be between us, there will be no disputes; with Kitty there shall never bequarrels; with the visitor, whoever he may be, I will be friendly and nice;with the servants, with Ivan, it will all be different.”Pulling the stiff rein and holding in the good horse that snorted withimpatience and seemed begging to be let go, Levin looked round at Ivan sittingbeside him, not knowing what to do with his unoccupied hand, continuallypressing down his shirt as it puffed out, and he tried to find something tostart a conversation about with him. He would have said that Ivan had pulledthe saddle-girth up too high, but that was like blame, and he longed forfriendly, warm talk. Nothing else occurred to him.“Your honor must keep to the right and mind that stump,” said thecoachman, pulling the rein Levin held.“Please don’t touch and don’t teach me!” said Levin,angered by this interference. Now, as always, interference made him angry, andhe felt sorrowfully at once how mistaken had been his supposition that hisspiritual condition could immediately change him in contact with reality.He was not a quarter of a mile from home when he saw Grisha and Tanya runningto meet him.“Uncle Kostya! mamma’s coming, and grandfather, and SergeyIvanovitch, and someone else,” they said, clambering up into the trap.“Who is he?”“An awfully terrible person! And he does like this with his arms,”said Tanya, getting up in the trap and mimicking Katavasov.“Old or young?” asked Levin, laughing, reminded of someone, he didnot know whom, by Tanya’s performance.“Oh, I hope it’s not a tiresome person!” thought Levin.As soon as he turned, at a bend in the road, and saw the party coming, Levinrecognized Katavasov in a straw hat, walking along swinging his arms just asTanya had shown him. Katavasov was very fond of discussing metaphysics, havingderived his notions from natural science writers who had never studiedmetaphysics, and in Moscow Levin had had many arguments with him of late.And one of these arguments, in which Katavasov had obviously considered that hecame off victorious, was the first thing Levin thought of as he recognized him.“No, whatever I do, I won’t argue and give utterance to my ideaslightly,” he thought.Getting out of the trap and greeting his brother and Katavasov, Levin askedabout his wife.“She has taken Mitya to Kolok” (a copse near the house). “Shemeant to have him out there because it’s so hot indoors,” saidDolly. Levin had always advised his wife not to take the baby to the wood,thinking it unsafe, and he was not pleased to hear this.“She rushes about from place to place with him,” said the prince,smiling. “I advised her to try putting him in the ice cellar.”“She meant to come to the bee-house. She thought you would be there. Weare going there,” said Dolly.“Well, and what are you doing?” said Sergey Ivanovitch, fallingback from the rest and walking beside him.“Oh, nothing special. Busy as usual with the land,” answered Levin.“Well, and what about you? Come for long? We have been expecting you forsuch a long time.”“Only for a fortnight. I’ve a great deal to do in Moscow.”At these words the brothers’ eyes met, and Levin, in spite of the desirehe always had, stronger than ever just now, to be on affectionate and stillmore open terms with his brother, felt an awkwardness in looking at him. Hedropped his eyes and did not know what to say.Casting over the subjects of conversation that would be pleasant to SergeyIvanovitch, and would keep him off the subject of the Servian war and theSlavonic question, at which he had hinted by the allusion to what he had to doin Moscow, Levin began to talk of Sergey Ivanovitch’s book.“Well, have there been reviews of your book?” he asked.Sergey Ivanovitch smiled at the intentional character of the question.“No one is interested in that now, and I less than anyone,” hesaid. “Just look, Darya Alexandrovna, we shall have a shower,” headded, pointing with a sunshade at the white rain clouds that showed above theaspen tree-tops.And these words were enough to re-establish again between the brothers thattone—hardly hostile, but chilly—which Levin had been so longing toavoid.Levin went up to Katavasov.“It was jolly of you to make up your mind to come,” he said to him.“I’ve been meaning to a long while. Now we shall have somediscussion, we’ll see to that. Have you been reading Spencer?”“No, I’ve not finished reading him,” said Levin. “But Idon’t need him now.”“How’s that? that’s interesting. Why so?”“I mean that I’m fully convinced that the solution of the problemsthat interest me I shall never find in him and his like. Now....”But Katavasov’s serene and good-humored expression suddenly struck him,and he felt such tenderness for his own happy mood, which he was unmistakablydisturbing by this conversation, that he remembered his resolution and stoppedshort.“But we’ll talk later on,” he added. “If we’regoing to the bee-house, it’s this way, along this little path,” hesaid, addressing them all.Going along the narrow path to a little uncut meadow covered on one side withthick clumps of brilliant heart’s-ease among which stood up here andthere tall, dark green tufts of hellebore, Levin settled his guests in thedense, cool shade of the young aspens on a bench and some stumps purposely putthere for visitors to the bee-house who might be afraid of the bees, and hewent off himself to the hut to get bread, cucumbers, and fresh honey, to regalethem with.Trying to make his movements as deliberate as possible, and listening to thebees that buzzed more and more frequently past him, he walked along the littlepath to the hut. In the very entry one bee hummed angrily, caught in his beard,but he carefully extricated it. Going into the shady outer room, he took downfrom the wall his veil, that hung on a peg, and putting it on, and thrustinghis hands into his pockets, he went into the fenced-in bee-garden, where therestood in the midst of a closely mown space in regular rows, fastened with baston posts, all the hives he knew so well, the old stocks, each with its ownhistory, and along the fences the younger swarms hived that year. In front ofthe openings of the hives, it made his eyes giddy to watch the bees and droneswhirling round and round about the same spot, while among them the working beesflew in and out with spoils or in search of them, always in the same directioninto the wood to the flowering lime trees and back to the hives.His ears were filled with the incessant hum in various notes, now the busy humof the working bee flying quickly off, then the blaring of the lazy drone, andthe excited buzz of the bees on guard protecting their property from the enemyand preparing to sting. On the farther side of the fence the old bee-keeper wasshaving a hoop for a tub, and he did not see Levin. Levin stood still in themidst of the beehives and did not call him.He was glad of a chance to be alone to recover from the influence of ordinaryactual life, which had already depressed his happy mood. He thought that he hadalready had time to lose his temper with Ivan, to show coolness to his brother,and to talk flippantly with Katavasov.“Can it have been only a momentary mood, and will it pass and leave notrace?” he thought. But the same instant, going back to his mood, he feltwith delight that something new and important had happened to him. Real lifehad only for a time overcast the spiritual peace he had found, but it was stilluntouched within him.Just as the bees, whirling round him, now menacing him and distracting hisattention, prevented him from enjoying complete physical peace, forced him torestrain his movements to avoid them, so had the petty cares that had swarmedabout him from the moment he got into the trap restricted his spiritualfreedom; but that lasted only so long as he was among them. Just as his bodilystrength was still unaffected, in spite of the bees, so too was the spiritualstrength that he had just become aware of.Chapter 15“Do you know, Kostya, with whom Sergey Ivanovitch traveled on his wayhere?” said Dolly, doling out cucumbers and honey to the children;“with Vronsky! He’s going to Servia.”“And not alone; he’s taking a squadron out with him at his ownexpense,” said Katavasov.“That’s the right thing for him,” said Levin. “Arevolunteers still going out then?” he added, glancing at SergeyIvanovitch.Sergey Ivanovitch did not answer. He was carefully with a blunt knife getting alive bee covered with sticky honey out of a cup full of white honeycomb.“I should think so! You should have seen what was going on at the stationyesterday!” said Katavasov, biting with a juicy sound into a cucumber.“Well, what is one to make of it? For mercy’s sake, do explain tome, Sergey Ivanovitch, where are all those volunteers going, whom are theyfighting with?” asked the old prince, unmistakably taking up aconversation that had sprung up in Levin’s absence.“With the Turks,” Sergey Ivanovitch answered, smiling serenely, ashe extricated the bee, dark with honey and helplessly kicking, and put it withthe knife on a stout aspen leaf.“But who has declared war on the Turks?—Ivan Ivanovitch Ragozov andCountess Lidia Ivanovna, assisted by Madame Stahl?”“No one has declared war, but people sympathize with theirneighbors’ sufferings and are eager to help them,” said SergeyIvanovitch.“But the prince is not speaking of help,” said Levin, coming to theassistance of his father-in-law, “but of war. The prince says thatprivate persons cannot take part in war without the permission of thegovernment.”“Kostya, mind, that’s a bee! Really, they’ll sting us!”said Dolly, waving away a wasp.“But that’s not a bee, it’s a wasp,” said Levin.“Well now, well, what’s your own theory?” Katavasov said toLevin with a smile, distinctly challenging him to a discussion. “Why havenot private persons the right to do so?”“Oh, my theory’s this: war is on one side such a beastly, cruel,and awful thing, that no one man, not to speak of a Christian, can individuallytake upon himself the responsibility of beginning wars; that can only be doneby a government, which is called upon to do this, and is driven inevitably intowar. On the other hand, both political science and common sense teach us thatin matters of state, and especially in the matter of war, private citizens mustforego their personal individual will.”Sergey Ivanovitch and Katavasov had their replies ready, and both beganspeaking at the same time.“But the point is, my dear fellow, that there may be cases when thegovernment does not carry out the will of the citizens and then the publicasserts its will,” said Katavasov.But evidently Sergey Ivanovitch did not approve of this answer. His browscontracted at Katavasov’s words and he said something else.“You don’t put the matter in its true light. There is no questionhere of a declaration of war, but simply the expression of a human Christianfeeling. Our brothers, one with us in religion and in race, are beingmassacred. Even supposing they were not our brothers nor fellow-Christians, butsimply children, women, old people, feeling is aroused and Russians go eagerlyto help in stopping these atrocities. Fancy, if you were going along the streetand saw drunken men beating a woman or a child—I imagine you would notstop to inquire whether war had been declared on the men, but would throwyourself on them, and protect the victim.”“But I should not kill them,” said Levin.“Yes, you would kill them.”“I don’t know. If I saw that, I might give way to my impulse of themoment, but I can’t say beforehand. And such a momentary impulse there isnot, and there cannot be, in the case of the oppression of the Slavonicpeoples.”“Possibly for you there is not; but for others there is,” saidSergey Ivanovitch, frowning with displeasure. “There are traditions stillextant among the people of Slavs of the true faith suffering under the yoke ofthe ‘unclean sons of Hagar.’ The people have heard of thesufferings of their brethren and have spoken.”“Perhaps so,” said Levin evasively; “but I don’t seeit. I’m one of the people myself, and I don’t feel it.”“Here am I too,” said the old prince. “I’ve beenstaying abroad and reading the papers, and I must own, up to the time of theBulgarian atrocities, I couldn’t make out why it was all the Russianswere all of a sudden so fond of their Slavonic brethren, while I didn’tfeel the slightest affection for them. I was very much upset, thought I was amonster, or that it was the influence of Carlsbad on me. But since I have beenhere, my mind’s been set at rest. I see that there are people besides mewho’re only interested in Russia, and not in their Slavonic brethren.Here’s Konstantin too.”“Personal opinions mean nothing in such a case,” said SergeyIvanovitch; “it’s not a matter of personal opinions when allRussia—the whole people—has expressed its will.”“But excuse me, I don’t see that. The people don’t knowanything about it, if you come to that,” said the old prince.“Oh, papa!... how can you say that? And last Sunday in church?”said Dolly, listening to the conversation. “Please give me acloth,” she said to the old man, who was looking at the children with asmile. “Why, it’s not possible that all....”“But what was it in church on Sunday? The priest had been told to readthat. He read it. They didn’t understand a word of it. Then they weretold that there was to be a collection for a pious object in church; well, theypulled out their halfpence and gave them, but what for they couldn’tsay.”“The people cannot help knowing; the sense of their own destinies isalways in the people, and at such moments as the present that sense findsutterance,” said Sergey Ivanovitch with conviction, glancing at the oldbee-keeper.The handsome old man, with black grizzled beard and thick silvery hair, stoodmotionless, holding a cup of honey, looking down from the height of his tallfigure with friendly serenity at the gentlefolk, obviously understandingnothing of their conversation and not caring to understand it.“That’s so, no doubt,” he said, with a significant shake ofhis head at Sergey Ivanovitch’s words.“Here, then, ask him. He knows nothing about it and thinksnothing,” said Levin. “Have you heard about the war,Mihalitch?” he said, turning to him. “What they read in the church?What do you think about it? Ought we to fight for the Christians?”“What should we think? Alexander Nikolaevitch our Emperor has thought forus; he thinks for us indeed in all things. It’s clearer for him to see.Shall I bring a bit more bread? Give the little lad some more?” he saidaddressing Darya Alexandrovna and pointing to Grisha, who had finished hiscrust.“I don’t need to ask,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, “we haveseen and are seeing hundreds and hundreds of people who give up everything toserve a just cause, come from every part of Russia, and directly and clearlyexpress their thought and aim. They bring their halfpence or go themselves andsay directly what for. What does it mean?”“It means, to my thinking,” said Levin, who was beginning to getwarm, “that among eighty millions of people there can always be found nothundreds, as now, but tens of thousands of people who have lost caste,ne’er-do-wells, who are always ready to go anywhere—toPogatchev’s bands, to Khiva, to Servia....”“I tell you that it’s not a case of hundreds or ofne’er-do-wells, but the best representatives of the people!” saidSergey Ivanovitch, with as much irritation as if he were defending the lastpenny of his fortune. “And what of the subscriptions? In this case it isa whole people directly expressing their will.”“That word ‘people’ is so vague,” said Levin.“Parish clerks, teachers, and one in a thousand of the peasants, maybe,know what it’s all about. The rest of the eighty millions, likeMihalitch, far from expressing their will, haven’t the faintest idea whatthere is for them to express their will about. What right have we to say thatthis is the people’s will?”Chapter 16Sergey Ivanovitch, being practiced in argument, did not reply, but at onceturned the conversation to another aspect of the subject.“Oh, if you want to learn the spirit of the people by arithmeticalcomputation, of course it’s very difficult to arrive at it. And votinghas not been introduced among us and cannot be introduced, for it does notexpress the will of the people; but there are other ways of reaching that. Itis felt in the air, it is felt by the heart. I won’t speak of those deepcurrents which are astir in the still ocean of the people, and which areevident to every unprejudiced man; let us look at society in the narrow sense.All the most diverse sections of the educated public, hostile before, aremerged in one. Every division is at an end, all the public organs say the samething over and over again, all feel the mighty torrent that has overtaken themand is carrying them in one direction.”“Yes, all the newspapers do say the same thing,” said the prince.“That’s true. But so it is the same thing that all the frogs croakbefore a storm. One can hear nothing for them.”“Frogs or no frogs, I’m not the editor of a paper and I don’twant to defend them; but I am speaking of the unanimity in the intellectualworld,” said Sergey Ivanovitch, addressing his brother. Levin would haveanswered, but the old prince interrupted him.“Well, about that unanimity, that’s another thing, one maysay,” said the prince. “There’s my son-in-law, StepanArkadyevitch, you know him. He’s got a place now on the committee of acommission and something or other, I don’t remember. Only there’snothing to do in it—why, Dolly, it’s no secret!—and a salaryof eight thousand. You try asking him whether his post is of use, he’llprove to you that it’s most necessary. And he’s a truthful man too,but there’s no refusing to believe in the utility of eight thousandroubles.”“Yes, he asked me to give a message to Darya Alexandrovna about thepost,” said Sergey Ivanovitch reluctantly, feeling the prince’sremark to be ill-timed.“So it is with the unanimity of the press. That’s been explained tome: as soon as there’s war their incomes are doubled. How can they helpbelieving in the destinies of the people and the Slavonic races ... and allthat?”“I don’t care for many of the papers, but that’sunjust,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.“I would only make one condition,” pursued the old prince.“Alphonse Karr said a capital thing before the war with Prussia:‘You consider war to be inevitable? Very good. Let everyone who advocateswar be enrolled in a special regiment of advance-guards, for the front of everystorm, of every attack, to lead them all!’”“A nice lot the editors would make!” said Katavasov, with a loudroar, as he pictured the editors he knew in this picked legion.“But they’d run,” said Dolly, “they’d only be inthe way.”“Oh, if they ran away, then we’d have grape-shot or Cossacks withwhips behind them,” said the prince.“But that’s a joke, and a poor one too, if you’ll excuse mysaying so, prince,” said Sergey Ivanovitch.“I don’t see that it was a joke, that....” Levin wasbeginning, but Sergey Ivanovitch interrupted him.“Every member of society is called upon to do his own specialwork,” said he. “And men of thought are doing their work when theyexpress public opinion. And the single-hearted and full expression of publicopinion is the service of the press and a phenomenon to rejoice us at the sametime. Twenty years ago we should have been silent, but now we have heard thevoice of the Russian people, which is ready to rise as one man and ready tosacrifice itself for its oppressed brethren; that is a great step and a proofof strength.”“But it’s not only making a sacrifice, but killing Turks,”said Levin timidly. “The people make sacrifices and are ready to makesacrifices for their soul, but not for murder,” he added, instinctivelyconnecting the conversation with the ideas that had been absorbing his mind.“For their soul? That’s a most puzzling expression for a naturalscience man, do you understand? What sort of thing is the soul?” saidKatavasov, smiling.“Oh, you know!”“No, by God, I haven’t the faintest idea!” said Katavasovwith a loud roar of laughter.“‘I bring not peace, but a sword,’ says Christ,” SergeyIvanovitch rejoined for his part, quoting as simply as though it were theeasiest thing to understand the very passage that had always puzzled Levinmost.“That’s so, no doubt,” the old man repeated again. He wasstanding near them and responded to a chance glance turned in his direction.“Ah, my dear fellow, you’re defeated, utterly defeated!”cried Katavasov good-humoredly.Levin reddened with vexation, not at being defeated, but at having failed tocontrol himself and being drawn into argument.“No, I can’t argue with them,” he thought; “they wearimpenetrable armor, while I’m naked.”He saw that it was impossible to convince his brother and Katavasov, and he saweven less possibility of himself agreeing with them. What they advocated wasthe very pride of intellect that had almost been his ruin. He could not admitthat some dozens of men, among them his brother, had the right, on the groundof what they were told by some hundreds of glib volunteers swarming to thecapital, to say that they and the newspapers were expressing the will andfeeling of the people, and a feeling which was expressed in vengeance andmurder. He could not admit this, because he neither saw the expression of suchfeelings in the people among whom he was living, nor found them in himself (andhe could not but consider himself one of the persons making up the Russianpeople), and most of all because he, like the people, did not know and couldnot know what is for the general good, though he knew beyond a doubt that thisgeneral good could be attained only by the strict observance of that law ofright and wrong which has been revealed to every man, and therefore he couldnot wish for war or advocate war for any general objects whatever. He said asMihalitch did and the people, who had expressed their feeling in thetraditional invitations of the Varyagi: “Be princes and rule over us.Gladly we promise complete submission. All the labor, all humiliations, allsacrifices we take upon ourselves; but we will not judge and decide.” Andnow, according to Sergey Ivanovitch’s account, the people had foregonethis privilege they had bought at such a costly price.He wanted to say too that if public opinion were an infallible guide, then whywere not revolutions and the commune as lawful as the movement in favor of theSlavonic peoples? But these were merely thoughts that could settle nothing. Onething could be seen beyond doubt—that was that at the actual moment thediscussion was irritating Sergey Ivanovitch, and so it was wrong to continueit. And Levin ceased speaking and then called the attention of his guests tothe fact that the storm clouds were gathering, and that they had better begoing home before it rained.Chapter 17The old prince and Sergey Ivanovitch got into the trap and drove off; the restof the party hastened homewards on foot.But the storm-clouds, turning white and then black, moved down so quickly thatthey had to quicken their pace to get home before the rain. The foremostclouds, lowering and black as soot-laden smoke, rushed with extraordinaryswiftness over the sky. They were still two hundred paces from home and a gustof wind had already blown up, and every second the downpour might be lookedfor.The children ran ahead with frightened and gleeful shrieks. Darya Alexandrovna,struggling painfully with her skirts that clung round her legs, was notwalking, but running, her eyes fixed on the children. The men of the party,holding their hats on, strode with long steps beside her. They were just at thesteps when a big drop fell splashing on the edge of the iron guttering. Thechildren and their elders after them ran into the shelter of the house, talkingmerrily.“Katerina Alexandrovna?” Levin asked of Agafea Mihalovna, who metthem with kerchiefs and rugs in the hall.“We thought she was with you,” she said.“And Mitya?”“In the copse, he must be, and the nurse with him.”Levin snatched up the rugs and ran towards the copse.In that brief interval of time the storm clouds had moved on, covering the sunso completely that it was dark as an eclipse. Stubbornly, as though insistingon its rights, the wind stopped Levin, and tearing the leaves and flowers offthe lime trees and stripping the white birch branches into strange unseemlynakedness, it twisted everything on one side—acacias, flowers, burdocks,long grass, and tall tree-tops. The peasant girls working in the garden ranshrieking into shelter in the servants’ quarters. The streaming rain hadalready flung its white veil over all the distant forest and half the fieldsclose by, and was rapidly swooping down upon the copse. The wet of the rainspurting up in tiny drops could be smelt in the air.Holding his head bent down before him, and struggling with the wind that stroveto tear the wraps away from him, Levin was moving up to the copse and had justcaught sight of something white behind the oak tree, when there was a suddenflash, the whole earth seemed on fire, and the vault of heaven seemed crashingoverhead. Opening his blinded eyes, Levin gazed through the thick veil of rainthat separated him now from the copse, and to his horror the first thing he sawwas the green crest of the familiar oak-tree in the middle of the copseuncannily changing its position. “Can it have been struck?” Levinhardly had time to think when, moving more and more rapidly, the oak treevanished behind the other trees, and he heard the crash of the great treefalling upon the others.The flash of lightning, the crash of thunder, and the instantaneous chill thatran through him were all merged for Levin in one sense of terror.“My God! my God! not on them!” he said.And though he thought at once how senseless was his prayer that they should nothave been killed by the oak which had fallen now, he repeated it, knowing thathe could do nothing better than utter this senseless prayer.Running up to the place where they usually went, he did not find them there.They were at the other end of the copse under an old lime-tree; they werecalling him. Two figures in dark dresses (they had been light summer dresseswhen they started out) were standing bending over something. It was Kitty withthe nurse. The rain was already ceasing, and it was beginning to get light whenLevin reached them. The nurse was not wet on the lower part of her dress, butKitty was drenched through, and her soaked clothes clung to her. Though therain was over, they still stood in the same position in which they had beenstanding when the storm broke. Both stood bending over a perambulator with agreen umbrella.“Alive? Unhurt? Thank God!” he said, splashing with his soakedboots through the standing water and running up to them.Kitty’s rosy wet face was turned towards him, and she smiled timidlyunder her shapeless sopped hat.“Aren’t you ashamed of yourself? I can’t think how you can beso reckless!” he said angrily to his wife.“It wasn’t my fault, really. We were just meaning to go, when hemade such a to-do that we had to change him. We were just....” Kitty begandefending herself.Mitya was unharmed, dry, and still fast asleep.“Well, thank God! I don’t know what I’m saying!”They gathered up the baby’s wet belongings; the nurse picked up the babyand carried it. Levin walked beside his wife, and, penitent for having beenangry, he squeezed her hand when the nurse was not looking.Chapter 18During the whole of that day, in the extremely different conversations in whichhe took part, only as it were with the top layer of his mind, in spite of thedisappointment of not finding the change he expected in himself, Levin had beenall the while joyfully conscious of the fulness of his heart.After the rain it was too wet to go for a walk; besides, the storm clouds stillhung about the horizon, and gathered here and there, black and thundery, on therim of the sky. The whole party spent the rest of the day in the house.No more discussions sprang up; on the contrary, after dinner everyone was inthe most amiable frame of mind.At first Katavasov amused the ladies by his original jokes, which alwayspleased people on their first acquaintance with him. Then Sergey Ivanovitchinduced him to tell them about the very interesting observations he had made onthe habits and characteristics of common houseflies, and their life. SergeyIvanovitch, too, was in good spirits, and at tea his brother drew him on toexplain his views of the future of the Eastern question, and he spoke so simplyand so well, that everyone listened eagerly.Kitty was the only one who did not hear it all—she was summoned to giveMitya his bath.A few minutes after Kitty had left the room she sent for Levin to come to thenursery.Leaving his tea, and regretfully interrupting the interesting conversation, andat the same time uneasily wondering why he had been sent for, as this onlyhappened on important occasions, Levin went to the nursery.Although he had been much interested by Sergey Ivanovitch’s views of thenew epoch in history that would be created by the emancipation of fortymillions of men of Slavonic race acting with Russia, a conception quite new tohim, and although he was disturbed by uneasy wonder at being sent for by Kitty,as soon as he came out of the drawing-room and was alone, his mind reverted atonce to the thoughts of the morning. And all the theories of the significanceof the Slav element in the history of the world seemed to him so trivialcompared with what was passing in his own soul, that he instantly forgot it alland dropped back into the same frame of mind that he had been in that morning.He did not, as he had done at other times, recall the whole train ofthought—that he did not need. He fell back at once into the feeling whichhad guided him, which was connected with those thoughts, and he found thatfeeling in his soul even stronger and more definite than before. He did not, ashe had had to do with previous attempts to find comforting arguments, need torevive a whole chain of thought to find the feeling. Now, on the contrary, thefeeling of joy and peace was keener than ever, and thought could not keep pacewith feeling.He walked across the terrace and looked at two stars that had come out in thedarkening sky, and suddenly he remembered. “Yes, looking at the sky, Ithought that the dome that I see is not a deception, and then I thoughtsomething, I shirked facing something,” he mused. “But whatever itwas, there can be no disproving it! I have but to think, and all will comeclear!”Just as he was going into the nursery he remembered what it was he had shirkedfacing. It was that if the chief proof of the Divinity was His revelation ofwhat is right, how is it this revelation is confined to the Christian churchalone? What relation to this revelation have the beliefs of the Buddhists,Mohammedans, who preached and did good too?It seemed to him that he had an answer to this question; but he had not time toformulate it to himself before he went into the nursery.Kitty was standing with her sleeves tucked up over the baby in the bath.Hearing her husband’s footstep, she turned towards him, summoning him toher with her smile. With one hand she was supporting the fat baby that layfloating and sprawling on its back, while with the other she squeezed thesponge over him.“Come, look, look!” she said, when her husband came up to her.“Agafea Mihalovna’s right. He knows us!”Mitya had on that day given unmistakable, incontestable signs of recognizingall his friends.As soon as Levin approached the bath, the experiment was tried, and it wascompletely successful. The cook, sent for with this object, bent over the baby.He frowned and shook his head disapprovingly. Kitty bent down to him, he gaveher a beaming smile, propped his little hands on the sponge and chirruped,making such a queer little contented sound with his lips, that Kitty and thenurse were not alone in their admiration. Levin, too, was surprised anddelighted.The baby was taken out of the bath, drenched with water, wrapped in towels,dried, and after a piercing scream, handed to his mother.“Well, I am glad you are beginning to love him,” said Kitty to herhusband, when she had settled herself comfortably in her usual place, with thebaby at her breast. “I am so glad! It had begun to distress me. You saidyou had no feeling for him.”“No; did I say that? I only said I was disappointed.”“What! disappointed in him?”“Not disappointed in him, but in my own feeling; I had expected more. Ihad expected a rush of new delightful emotion to come as a surprise. And theninstead of that—disgust, pity....”She listened attentively, looking at him over the baby, while she put back onher slender fingers the rings she had taken off while giving Mitya his bath.“And most of all, at there being far more apprehension and pity thanpleasure. Today, after that fright during the storm, I understand how I lovehim.”Kitty’s smile was radiant.“Were you very much frightened?” she said. “So was I too, butI feel it more now that it’s over. I’m going to look at the oak.How nice Katavasov is! And what a happy day we’ve had altogether. Andyou’re so nice with Sergey Ivanovitch, when you care to be.... Well, goback to them. It’s always so hot and steamy here after the bath.”Chapter 19Going out of the nursery and being again alone, Levin went back at once to thethought, in which there was something not clear.Instead of going into the drawing-room, where he heard voices, he stopped onthe terrace, and leaning his elbows on the parapet, he gazed up at the sky.It was quite dark now, and in the south, where he was looking, there were noclouds. The storm had drifted on to the opposite side of the sky, and therewere flashes of lightning and distant thunder from that quarter. Levin listenedto the monotonous drip from the lime trees in the garden, and looked at thetriangle of stars he knew so well, and the Milky Way with its branches that ranthrough its midst. At each flash of lightning the Milky Way, and even thebright stars, vanished, but as soon as the lightning died away, they reappearedin their places as though some hand had flung them back with careful aim.“Well, what is it perplexes me?” Levin said to himself, feelingbeforehand that the solution of his difficulties was ready in his soul, thoughhe did not know it yet. “Yes, the one unmistakable, incontestablemanifestation of the Divinity is the law of right and wrong, which has comeinto the world by revelation, and which I feel in myself, and in therecognition of which—I don’t make myself, but whether I will ornot—I am made one with other men in one body of believers, which iscalled the church. Well, but the Jews, the Mohammedans, the Confucians, theBuddhists—what of them?” he put to himself the question he hadfeared to face. “Can these hundreds of millions of men be deprived ofthat highest blessing without which life has no meaning?” He pondered amoment, but immediately corrected himself. “But what am Iquestioning?” he said to himself. “I am questioning the relation toDivinity of all the different religions of all mankind. I am questioning theuniversal manifestation of God to all the world with all those misty blurs.What am I about? To me individually, to my heart has been revealed a knowledgebeyond all doubt, and unattainable by reason, and here I am obstinately tryingto express that knowledge in reason and words.“Don’t I know that the stars don’t move?” he askedhimself, gazing at the bright planet which had shifted its position up to thetopmost twig of the birch-tree. “But looking at the movements of thestars, I can’t picture to myself the rotation of the earth, and I’mright in saying that the stars move.“And could the astronomers have understood and calculated anything, ifthey had taken into account all the complicated and varied motions of theearth? All the marvelous conclusions they have reached about the distances,weights, movements, and deflections of the heavenly bodies are only founded onthe apparent motions of the heavenly bodies about a stationary earth, on thatvery motion I see before me now, which has been so for millions of men duringlong ages, and was and will be always alike, and can always be trusted. Andjust as the conclusions of the astronomers would have been vain and uncertainif not founded on observations of the seen heavens, in relation to a singlemeridian and a single horizon, so would my conclusions be vain and uncertain ifnot founded on that conception of right, which has been and will be alwaysalike for all men, which has been revealed to me as a Christian, and which canalways be trusted in my soul. The question of other religions and theirrelations to Divinity I have no right to decide, and no possibility ofdeciding.”“Oh, you haven’t gone in then?” he heard Kitty’s voiceall at once, as she came by the same way to the drawing-room.“What is it? you’re not worried about anything?” she said,looking intently at his face in the starlight.But she could not have seen his face if a flash of lightning had not hidden thestars and revealed it. In that flash she saw his face distinctly, and seeinghim calm and happy, she smiled at him.“She understands,” he thought; “she knows what I’mthinking about. Shall I tell her or not? Yes, I’ll tell her.” Butat the moment he was about to speak, she began speaking.“Kostya! do something for me,” she said; “go into the cornerroom and see if they’ve made it all right for Sergey Ivanovitch. Ican’t very well. See if they’ve put the new wash stand init.”“Very well, I’ll go directly,” said Levin, standing up andkissing her.“No, I’d better not speak of it,” he thought, when she hadgone in before him. “It is a secret for me alone, of vital importance forme, and not to be put into words.“This new feeling has not changed me, has not made me happy andenlightened all of a sudden, as I had dreamed, just like the feeling for mychild. There was no surprise in this either. Faith—or not faith—Idon’t know what it is—but this feeling has come just asimperceptibly through suffering, and has taken firm root in my soul.“I shall go on in the same way, losing my temper with Ivan the coachman,falling into angry discussions, expressing my opinions tactlessly; there willbe still the same wall between the holy of holies of my soul and other people,even my wife; I shall still go on scolding her for my own terror, and beingremorseful for it; I shall still be as unable to understand with my reason whyI pray, and I shall still go on praying; but my life now, my whole life apartfrom anything that can happen to me, every minute of it is no more meaningless,as it was before, but it has the positive meaning of goodness, which I have thepower to put into it.”*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANNA KARENINA ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.