START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEOWULF ***BEOWULFAN ANGLO-SAXON EPIC POEM  TRANSLATEDFROM THE HEYNE-SOCIN TEXTBYJNO: LESSLIE HALL, Ph. D. (J.H.U.)Professor of English and History in The College of William and MaryD.C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERSBOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGOEntered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1892, byJNO: LESSLIE HALL,in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.TOMy Wife[v]CONTENTS.pagePreface viiBibliography of Translations xiGlossary of Proper Names xiiiList of Words and Phrases not in General Use xviiiThe Life and Death of Scyld  (I.)1Scyld’s Successors  (II.)3Hrothgar’s Great Mead-HallGrendel, the Murderer  (III.)5Beowulf Goes to Hrothgar’s Assistance  (IV.)8The Geats Reach Heorot  (V.)10Beowulf Introduces Himself at the Palace  (VI.)12Hrothgar and Beowulf  (VII.)14Hrothgar and Beowulf (continued)  (VIII.)17Unferth Taunts Beowulf  (IX.)19Beowulf Silences Unferth  (X.)21Glee is HighAll Sleep save One  (XI.)24Grendel and Beowulf  (XII.)26Grendel is Vanquished  (XIII.)28Rejoicing of the Danes  (XIV.)30Hrothgar’s Gratitude  (XV.)33Hrothgar Lavishes Gifts upon his Deliverer  (XVI.)35Banquet (continued)  (XVII.)37The Scop’s Song of Finn and HnæfThe Finn Episode (continued)  (XVIII.)39The Banquet ContinuesBeowulf Receives Further Honor  (XIX.)41The Mother of Grendel  (XX.)44Hrothgar’s Account of the Monsters  (XXI.)46Beowulf Seeks Grendel’s Mother  (XXII.)48Beowulf’s Fight with Grendel’s Mother  (XXIII.)51Beowulf is Double-Conqueror  (XXIV.)53[vi]Beowulf Brings his Trophies  (XXV.)57Hrothgar’s GratitudeHrothgar Moralizes  (XXVI.)60Rest after LaborSorrow at Parting  (XXVII.)62The Homeward Journey  (XXVIII.)64The Two QueensBeowulf and Higelac  (XXIX.)67Beowulf Narrates his Adventures to Higelac  (XXX.)69Gift-Giving is Mutual  (XXXI.)73The Hoard and the Dragon  (XXXII.)75Brave Though Aged  (XXXIII.)78ReminiscencesBeowulf Seeks the Dragon  (XXXIV.)81Beowulf’s ReminiscencesReminiscences (continued)  (XXXV.)83Beowulf’s Last BattleWiglaf the Trusty  (XXXVI.)88Beowulf is Deserted by Friends and by SwordThe Fatal Struggle  (XXXVII.)91Beowulf’s Last MomentsWiglaf Plunders the Dragon’s Den  (XXXVIII.)93Beowulf’s DeathThe Dead Foes  (XXXIX.)95Wiglaf’s Bitter TauntsThe Messenger of Death  (XL.)97The Messenger’s Retrospect  (XLI.)99Wiglaf’s Sad Story  (XLII.)103The Hoard Carried OffThe Burning of Beowulf  (XLIII.)106Addenda 109[vii]PREFACE.The present work is a modest effort to reproduce approximately, in modernmeasures, the venerable epic, Beowulf. Approximately, I repeat; for a veryclose reproduction of Anglo-Saxon verse would, to a large extent, be prose toa modern ear.The Heyne-Socin text and glossary have been closely followed. Occasionallya deviation has been made, but always for what seemed good and sufficientreason. The translator does not aim to be an editor. Once in a while, however,he has added a conjecture of his own to the emendations quoted fromthe criticisms of other students of the poem.This work is addressed to two classes of readers. From both of these alikethe translator begs sympathy and co-operation. The Anglo-Saxon scholar hehopes to please by adhering faithfully to the original. The student of Englishliterature he aims to interest by giving him, in modern garb, the most ancientepic of our race. This is a bold and venturesome undertaking; and yet theremust be some students of the Teutonic past willing to follow even a daringguide, if they may read in modern phrases of the sorrows of Hrothgar, of theprowess of Beowulf, and of the feelings that stirred the hearts of our forefathersin their primeval homes.In order to please the larger class of readers, a regular cadence has beenused, a measure which, while retaining the essential characteristics of the original,permits the reader to see ahead of him in reading.Perhaps every Anglo-Saxon scholar has his own theory as to how Beowulfshould be translated. Some have given us prose versions of what we believeto be a great poem. Is it any reflection on our honored Kemble and Arnoldto say that their translations fail to show a layman that Beowulf is justly calledour first epic? Of those translators who have used verse, several have written[viii]from what would seem a mistaken point of view. Is it proper, for instance,that the grave and solemn speeches of Beowulf and Hrothgar be put in balladmeasures, tripping lightly and airily along? Or, again, is it fitting that therough martial music of Anglo-Saxon verse be interpreted to us in the smoothmeasures of modern blank verse? Do we hear what has been beautifully called“the clanging tread of a warrior in mail”?Of all English translations of Beowulf, that of Professor Garnett alonegives any adequate idea of the chief characteristics of this great Teutonicepic.The measure used in the present translation is believed to be as near areproduction of the original as modern English affords. The cadences closelyresemble those used by Browning in some of his most striking poems. Thefour stresses of the Anglo-Saxon verse are retained, and as much thesis andanacrusis is allowed as is consistent with a regular cadence. Alliteration hasbeen used to a large extent; but it was thought that modern ears would hardlytolerate it on every line. End-rhyme has been used occasionally; internalrhyme, sporadically. Both have some warrant in Anglo-Saxon poetry. (Forend-rhyme, see 1 53, 1 54; for internal rhyme, 2 21, 6 40.)What Gummere1 calls the “rime-giver” has been studiously kept; viz., thefirst accented syllable in the second half-verse always carries the alliteration;and the last accented syllable alliterates only sporadically. Alternate alliterationis occasionally used as in the original. (See 7 61, 8 5.)No two accented syllables have been brought together, except occasionallyafter a cæsural pause. (See 2 19 and 12 1.)Or, scientifically speaking, Sievers’sC type has been avoided as not consonant with the plan of translation. Severalof his types, however, constantly occur; e.g. A and a variant(/ x | / x) (/ x x | / x);B and a variant (x / | x / ) (x x / | x / ); a variant of D (/ x | / x x);E (/ x x | / ). Anacrusis gives further variety to the types used in the translation.The parallelisms of the original have been faithfully preserved. (E.g., 1 16and 1 17: “Lord” and “Wielder of Glory”; 1 30, 1 31, 1 32; 2 12 and 2 13;2 27 and 2 28; 3 5 and 3 6.) Occasionally, some loss has been sustained; but,on the other hand, a gain has here and there been made.The effort has been made to give a decided flavor of archaism to the translation.All words not in keeping with the spirit of the poem have been[ix]avoided. Again, though many archaic words have been used, there are none,it is believed, which are not found in standard modern poetry.With these preliminary remarks, it will not be amiss to give an outline ofthe story of the poem.THE STORY.Hrothgar, king of the Danes, or Scyldings, builds a great mead-hall, orpalace, in which he hopes to feast his liegemen and to give them presents. Thejoy of king and retainers is, however, of short duration. Grendel, the monster,is seized with hateful jealousy. He cannot brook the sounds of joyance thatreach him down in his fen-dwelling near the hall. Oft and anon he goes tothe joyous building, bent on direful mischief. Thane after thane is ruthlesslycarried off and devoured, while no one is found strong enough and bold enoughto cope with the monster. For twelve years he persecutes Hrothgar and hisvassals.Over sea, a day’s voyage off, Beowulf, of the Geats, nephew of Higelac,king of the Geats, hears of Grendel’s doings and of Hrothgar’s misery. Heresolves to crush the fell monster and relieve the aged king. With fourteenchosen companions, he sets sail for Dane-land. Reaching that country, he soonpersuades Hrothgar of his ability to help him. The hours that elapse beforenight are spent in beer-drinking and conversation. When Hrothgar’s bedtimecomes he leaves the hall in charge of Beowulf, telling him that never before hashe given to another the absolute wardship of his palace. All retire to rest,Beowulf, as it were, sleeping upon his arms.Grendel comes, the great march-stepper, bearing God’s anger. He seizesand kills one of the sleeping warriors. Then he advances towards Beowulf.A fierce and desperate hand-to-hand struggle ensues. No arms are used, bothcombatants trusting to strength and hand-grip. Beowulf tears Grendel’sshoulder from its socket, and the monster retreats to his den, howling andyelling with agony and fury. The wound is fatal.The next morning, at early dawn, warriors in numbers flock to the hallHeorot, to hear the news. Joy is boundless. Glee runs high. Hrothgar andhis retainers are lavish of gratitude and of gifts.Grendel’s mother, however, comes the next night to avenge his death. Sheis furious and raging. While Beowulf is sleeping in a room somewhat apart[x]from the quarters of the other warriors, she seizes one of Hrothgar’s favoritecounsellors, and carries him off and devours him. Beowulf is called. Determinedto leave Heorot entirely purified, he arms himself, and goes down to lookfor the female monster. After traveling through the waters many hours, hemeets her near the sea-bottom. She drags him to her den. There he seesGrendel lying dead. After a desperate and almost fatal struggle with thewoman, he slays her, and swims upward in triumph, taking with him Grendel’shead.Joy is renewed at Heorot. Congratulations crowd upon the victor.Hrothgar literally pours treasures into the lap of Beowulf; and it is agreedamong the vassals of the king that Beowulf will be their next liegelord.Beowulf leaves Dane-land. Hrothgar weeps and laments at his departure.When the hero arrives in his own land, Higelac treats him as a distinguishedguest. He is the hero of the hour.Beowulf subsequently becomes king of his own people, the Geats. After hehas been ruling for fifty years, his own neighborhood is wofully harried by afire-spewing dragon. Beowulf determines to kill him. In the ensuing struggleboth Beowulf and the dragon are slain. The grief of the Geats is inexpressible.They determine, however, to leave nothing undone to honor the memoryof their lord. A great funeral-pyre is built, and his body is burnt. Then amemorial-barrow is made, visible from a great distance, that sailors afar maybe constantly reminded of the prowess of the national hero of Geatland.The poem closes with a glowing tribute to his bravery, his gentleness, hisgoodness of heart, and his generosity.It is the devout desire of this translator to hasten the day when the storyof Beowulf shall be as familiar to English-speaking peoples as that of the Iliad.Beowulf is our first great epic. It is an epitomized history of the life of theTeutonic races. It brings vividly before us our forefathers of pre-Alfredianeras, in their love of war, of sea, and of adventure.My special thanks are due to Professors Francis A. March and James A.Harrison, for advice, sympathy, and assistance.J.L. HALL.[1] Handbook of Poetics, page 175, 1st edition.[xi]ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE NOTES.B. = Bugge. C. = Cosijn. Gr. = Grein. Grdvtg. = Grundtvig. H. = Heyne. H. andS. = Harrison and Sharp. H.-So. = Heyne-Socin. K.= Kemble. Kl. = Kluge. M.=Müllenhoff. R. = Rieger. S. = Sievers. Sw. = Sweet. t.B. = ten Brink. Th. = Thorpe.W. = Wülcker.BIBLIOGRAPHY OF TRANSLATIONS.Arnold, Thomas.—Beowulf. A heroic poem of the eighth century. London, 1876.With English translation. Prose.Botkine, L.—Beowulf. Epopée Anglo-Saxonne. Havre, 1877. First French translation.Passages occasionally omitted.Conybeare, J.J.—Illustrations of Anglo-Saxon Poetry. London, 1826. Full Latintranslation, and some passages translated into English blank-verse.Ettmuller, L.—Beowulf, stabreimend übersetzt. Zürich, 1840.Garnett, J.M.—Beowulf: an Anglo-Saxon Poem, and the Fight at Finnsburg. Boston,1882. An accurate line-for-line translation, using alliteration occasionally, and sometimesassuming a metrical cadence.Grein, C.W.M.—Dichtungen der Angelsachsen, stabreimend übersetzt. 2 Bde.Göttingen, 1857-59.Grion, Giusto.—Beovulf, poema epico anglo-sassone del VII. secolo, tradotto e illustrato.Lucca, 1883. First Italian translation.Grundtvig, N.F.S.—Bjowulfs Drape. Copenhagen, 1820.Heyne, M.—A translation in iambic measures. Paderborn, 1863.Kemble, J.M.—The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Traveller’s Song, and theBattle of Finnsburg. London, 1833. The second edition contains a prose translation ofBeowulf.Leo, H.—Ueber Beowulf. Halle, 1839. Translations of extracts.[xii]Lumsden, H.W.—Beowulf, translated into modern rhymes. London, 1881. Balladmeasures. Passages occasionally omitted.Sandras, G.S.—De carminibus Cædmoni adjudicatis. Paris, 1859. An extract fromBeowulf, with Latin translation.Schaldmose, F.—Beowulf og Scopes Widsith, to Angelsaxiske Digte. Copenhagen,1847.Simrock, K.—Beowulf. Uebersetzt und erläutert. Stuttgart und Augsburg, 1859.Alliterative measures.Thorkelin, G.J.—De Danorum rebus gestis secul. III. et IV. poema Danicum dialectoAnglosaxonica. Havniæ, 1815. Latin translation.Thorpe, B.—The Anglo-Saxon Poems of Beowulf, the Scôp or Gleeman’s Tale, andthe Fight at Finnsburg. Oxford, 1855. English translation in short lines, generally containingtwo stresses.Wackerbarth, A.D.—Beowulf, translated into English verse. London, 1849.Wickberg, R.—Beowulf, en fornengelsk hjeltedikt, öfersatt. Westervik. First Swedishtranslation.von Wolzogen, H.—Beowulf, in alliterative measures. Leipzig.Zinsser, G.—Der Kampf Beowulfs mit Grendel. Jahresbericht of the Realschule atForbach, 1881.[xiii]GLOSSARY OF PROPER NAMES.[The figures refer to the divisions of the poem in which the respective names occur. The large figures referto fitts, the small, to lines in the fitts.]Ælfhere.—A kinsman of Wiglaf.—36 3.Æschere.—Confidential friend of King Hrothgar. Elder brother of Yrmenlaf. Killed byGrendel.—21 3; 30 89.Beanstan.—Father of Breca.—9 26.Beowulf.—Son of Scyld, the founder of the dynasty of Scyldings. Father of Healfdene,and grandfather of Hrothgar.—1 18; 2 1.Beowulf.—The hero of the poem. Sprung from the stock of Geats, son of Ecgtheow.Brought up by his maternal grandfather Hrethel, and figuring in manhood as adevoted liegeman of his uncle Higelac. A hero from his youth. Has the strengthof thirty men. Engages in a swimming-match with Breca. Goes to the help ofHrothgar against the monster Grendel. Vanquishes Grendel and his mother.Afterwards becomes king of the Geats. Late in life attempts to kill a fire-spewingdragon, and is slain. Is buried with great honors. His memorial mound.—6 26;7 2; 7 9; 9 3; 9 8; 12 28; 12 43; 23 1, etc.Breca.—Beowulf’s opponent in the famous swimming-match.—9 8; 9 19; 9 21; 9 22.Brondings.—A people ruled by Breca.—9 23.Brosinga mene.—A famous collar once owned by the Brosings.—19 7.Cain.—Progenitor of Grendel and other monsters.—2 56; 20 11.Dæghrefn.—A warrior of the Hugs, killed by Beowulf.—35 40.Danes.—Subjects of Scyld and his descendants, and hence often called Scyldings. Othernames for them are Victory-Scyldings, Honor-Scyldings, Armor-Danes, Bright-Danes,East-Danes, West-Danes, North-Danes, South-Danes, Ingwins, Hrethmen.—1 1;2 1; 3 2; 5 14; 7 1, etc.Ecglaf.—Father of Unferth, who taunts Beowulf.—9 1.Ecgtheow.—Father of Beowulf, the hero of the poem. A widely-known Wægmundingwarrior. Marries Hrethel’s daughter. After slaying Heatholaf, a Wylfing, he fleeshis country.—7 3; 5 6; 8 4.Ecgwela.—A king of the Danes before Scyld.—25 60.[xiv]Elan.—Sister of Hrothgar, and probably wife of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes.—2 10.Eagle Cape.—A promontory in Geat-land, under which took place Beowulf’s last encounter.—41 87.Eadgils.—Son of Ohthere and brother of Eanmund.—34 2.Eanmund.—Son of Ohthere and brother of Eadgils. The reference to these brothers isvague, and variously understood. Heyne supposes as follows: Raising a revoltagainst their father, they are obliged to leave Sweden. They go to the land of theGeats; with what intention, is not known, but probably to conquer and plunder.The Geatish king, Heardred, is slain by one of the brothers, probably Eanmund.—36 10; 31 54 to 31 60; 33 66 to 34 6.Eofor.—A Geatish hero who slays Ongentheow in war, and is rewarded by Hygelac withthe hand of his only daughter.—41 18; 41 48.Eormenric.—A Gothic king, from whom Hama took away the famous Brosinga mene.—19 9.Eomær.—Son of Offa and Thrytho, king and queen of the Angles.—28 69.Finn.—King of the North-Frisians and the Jutes. Marries Hildeburg. At his court takesplace the horrible slaughter in which the Danish general, Hnæf, fell. Later on, Finnhimself is slain by Danish warriors.—17 18; 17 30; 17 44; 18 4; 18 23.Fin-land.—The country to which Beowulf was driven by the currents in his swimming-match.—10 22.Fitela.—Son and nephew of King Sigemund, whose praises are sung in XIV.—14 42; 14 53.Folcwalda.—Father of Finn.—17 38.Franks.—Introduced occasionally in referring to the death of Higelac.—19 19; 40 21;40 24.Frisians.—A part of them are ruled by Finn. Some of them were engaged in the strugglein which Higelac was slain.—17 20; 17 42; 17 52; 40 21.Freaware.—Daughter of King Hrothgar. Married to Ingeld, a Heathobard prince.—29 60; 30 32.Froda.—King of the Heathobards, and father of Ingeld.—29 62.Garmund.—Father of Offa.—28 71.Geats, Geatmen.—The race to which the hero of the poem belongs. Also called Weder-Geats,or Weders, War-Geats, Sea-Geats. They are ruled by Hrethel, Hæthcyn,Higelac, and Beowulf.—4 7; 7 4; 10 45; 11 8; 27 14; 28 8.Gepids.—Named in connection with the Danes and Swedes.—35 34.Grendel.—A monster of the race of Cain. Dwells in the fens and moors. Is furiouslyenvious when he hears sounds of joy in Hrothgar’s palace. Causes the king untoldagony for years. Is finally conquered by Beowulf, and dies of his wound. His handand arm are hung up in Hrothgar’s hall Heorot. His head is cut off by Beowulfwhen he goes down to fight with Grendel’s mother.—2 50; 3 1; 3 13; 8 19; 11 17;12 2; 13 27; 15 3.Guthlaf.—A Dane of Hnæf’s party.—18 24.Half-Danes.—Branch of the Danes to which Hnæf belonged.—17 19.[xv]Halga.—Surnamed the Good. Younger brother of Hrothgar.—2 9.Hama.—Takes the Brosinga mene from Eormenric.—19 7.Hæreth.—Father of Higelac’s queen, Hygd.—28 39; 29 18.Hæthcyn.—Son of Hrethel and brother of Higelac. Kills his brother Herebeald accidentally.Is slain at Ravenswood, fighting against Ongentheow.—34 43; 35 23;40 32.Helmings.—The race to which Queen Wealhtheow belonged.—10 63.Heming.—A kinsman of Garmund, perhaps nephew.—28 54; 28 70.Hengest.—A Danish leader. Takes command on the fall of Hnæf.—17 33; 17 41.Herebeald.—Eldest son of Hrethel, the Geatish king, and brother of Higelac. Killed byhis younger brother Hæthcyn.—34 43; 34 47.Heremod.—A Danish king of a dynasty before the Scylding line. Was a source of greatsorrow to his people.—14 64; 25 59.Hereric.—Referred to as uncle of Heardred, but otherwise unknown.—31 60.Hetwars.—Another name for the Franks.—33 51.Healfdene.—Grandson of Scyld and father of Hrothgar. Ruled the Danes long and well.—2 5;4 1; 8 14.Heardred.—Son of Higelac and Hygd, king and queen of the Geats. Succeeds his father,with Beowulf as regent. Is slain by the sons of Ohthere.—31 56; 33 63; 33 75.Heathobards.—Race of Lombards, of which Froda is king. After Froda falls in battlewith the Danes, Ingeld, his son, marries Hrothgar’s daughter, Freaware, in order toheal the feud.—30 1; 30 6.Heatholaf.—A Wylfing warrior slain by Beowulf’s father.—8 5.Heathoremes.—The people on whose shores Breca is cast by the waves during his contestwith Beowulf.—9 21.Heorogar.—Elder brother of Hrothgar, and surnamed ‘Weoroda Ræswa,’ Prince of theTroopers.—2 9; 8 12.Hereward.—Son of the above.—31 17.Heort, Heorot.—The great mead-hall which King Hrothgar builds. It is invaded byGrendel for twelve years. Finally cleansed by Beowulf, the Geat. It is calledHeort on account of the hart-antlers which decorate it.—2 25; 3 32; 3 52.Hildeburg.—Wife of Finn, daughter of Hoce, and related to Hnæf,—probably his sister.—17 21;18 34.Hnæf.—Leader of a branch of the Danes called Half-Danes. Killed in the struggle atFinn’s castle.—17 19; 17 61.Hondscio.—One of Beowulf’s companions. Killed by Grendel just before Beowulf grappledwith that monster.—30 43.Hoce.—Father of Hildeburg and probably of Hnæf.—17 26.Hrethel.—King of the Geats, father of Higelac, and grandfather of Beowulf.—7 4; 34 39.Hrethla.—Once used for Hrethel.—7 82.Hrethmen.—Another name for the Danes.—7 73.Hrethric.—Son of Hrothgar.—18 65; 27 19.[xvi]Hreosna-beorh.—A promontory in Geat-land, near which Ohthere’s sons made plunderingraids.—35 18.Hrothgar.—The Danish king who built the hall Heort, but was long unable to enjoy it onaccount of Grendel’s persecutions. Marries Wealhtheow, a Helming lady. Hastwo sons and a daughter. Is a typical Teutonic king, lavish of gifts. A devotedliegelord, as his lamentations over slain liegemen prove. Also very appreciative ofkindness, as is shown by his loving gratitude to Beowulf.—2 9; 2 12; 4 1; 8 10;15 1; etc., etc.Hrothmund.—Son of Hrothgar.—18 65.Hrothulf.—Probably a son of Halga, younger brother of Hrothgar. Certainly on terms ofclose intimacy in Hrothgar’s palace.—16 26; 18 57.Hrunting.—Unferth’s sword, lent to Beowulf.—22 71; 25 9.Hugs.—A race in alliance with the Franks and Frisians at the time of Higelac’s fall.—35 41.Hun.—A Frisian warrior, probably general of the Hetwars. Gives Hengest a beautifulsword.—18 19.Hunferth.—Sometimes used for Unferth.Hygelac, Higelac.—King of the Geats, uncle and liegelord of Beowulf, the hero of thepoem.—His second wife is the lovely Hygd, daughter of Hæreth. The son of theirunion is Heardred. Is slain in a war with the Hugs, Franks, and Frisians combined.Beowulf is regent, and afterwards king of the Geats.—4 6; 5 4; 28 34; 29 9;29 21; 31 56.Hygd.—Wife of Higelac, and daughter of Hæreth. There are some indications that shemarried Beowulf after she became a widow.—28 37.Ingeld.—Son of the Heathobard king, Froda. Marries Hrothgar’s daughter, Freaware,in order to reconcile the two peoples.—29 62; 30 32.Ingwins.—Another name for the Danes.—16 52; 20 69.Jutes.—Name sometimes applied to Finn’s people.—17 22; 17 38; 18 17.Lafing.—Name of a famous sword presented to Hengest by Hun.—18 19.Merewing.—A Frankish king, probably engaged in the war in which Higelac was slain.—40 29.Nægling.—Beowulf’s sword.—36 76.Offa.—King of the Angles, and son of Garmund. Marries the terrible Thrytho who is sostrongly contrasted with Hygd.—28 59; 28 66.Ohthere.—Son of Ongentheow, king of the Swedes. He is father of Eanmund andEadgils.—40 35; 40 39.Onela.—Brother of Ohthere.—36 15; 40 39.Ongentheow.—King of Sweden, of the Scylfing dynasty. Married, perhaps, Elan, daughterof Healfdene.—35 26; 41 16.Oslaf.—A Dane of Hnæf’s party.—18 24.Ravenswood.—The forest near which Hæthcyn was slain.—40 31; 40 41.Scefing.—Applied (1 4) to Scyld, and meaning ‘son of Scef.’[xvii]Scyld.—Founder of the dynasty to which Hrothgar, his father, and grandfather belonged.He dies, and his body is put on a vessel, and set adrift. He goes from Danelandjust as he had come to it—in a bark.—1 4; 1 19; 1 27.Scyldings.—The descendants of Scyld. They are also called Honor-Scyldings, Victory-Scyldings,War-Scyldings, etc. (See ‘Danes,’  above.)—2 1; 7 1; 8 1.Scylfings.—A Swedish royal line to which Wiglaf belonged.—36 2.Sigemund.—Son of Wæls, and uncle and father of Fitela. His struggle with a dragon isrelated in connection with Beowulf’s deeds of prowess.—14 38; 14 47.Swerting.—Grandfather of Higelac, and father of Hrethel.—19 11.Swedes.—People of Sweden, ruled by the Scylfings.—35 13.Thrytho.—Wife of Offa, king of the Angles. Known for her fierce and unwomanly disposition.She is introduced as a contrast to the gentle Hygd, queen of Higelac.—28 42;28 56.Unferth.—Son of Ecglaf, and seemingly a confidential courtier of Hrothgar. TauntsBeowulf for having taken part in the swimming-match. Lends Beowulf his swordwhen he goes to look for Grendel’s mother. In the MS. sometimes written Hunferth. 9 1;18 41.Wæls.—Father of Sigemund.—14 60.Wægmunding.—A name occasionally applied to Wiglaf and Beowulf, and perhaps derivedfrom a common ancestor, Wægmund.—36 6; 38 61.Weders.—Another name for Geats or Wedergeats.Wayland.—A fabulous smith mentioned in this poem and in other old Teutonic literature.—7 83.Wendels.—The people of Wulfgar, Hrothgar’s messenger and retainer. (Perhaps = Vandals.)—6 30.Wealhtheow.—Wife of Hrothgar. Her queenly courtesy is well shown in the poem.—10 55.Weohstan, or Wihstan.—A Wægmunding, and father of Wiglaf.—36 1.Whale’s Ness.—A prominent promontory, on which Beowulf’s mound was built.—38 52;42 76.Wiglaf.—Son of Wihstan, and related to Beowulf. He remains faithful to Beowulf in thefatal struggle with the fire-drake. Would rather die than leave his lord in his direemergency.—36 1; 36 3; 36 28.Wonred.—Father of Wulf and Eofor.—41 20; 41 26.Wulf.—Son of Wonred. Engaged in the battle between Higelac’s and Ongentheow’sforces, and had a hand-to-hand fight with Ongentheow himself. Ongentheow disableshim, and is thereupon slain by Eofor.—41 19; 41 29.Wulfgar.—Lord of the Wendels, and retainer of Hrothgar.—6 18; 6 30.Wylfings.—A people to whom belonged Heatholaf, who was slain by Ecgtheow.—8 6; 8 16.Yrmenlaf.—Younger brother of Æschere, the hero whose death grieved Hrothgar sodeeply.—21 4.[xviii]LIST OF WORDS AND PHRASESNOT IN GENERAL USE.ATHELING.—Prince, nobleman.BAIRN.—Son, child.BARROW.—Mound, rounded hill, funeral-mound.BATTLE-SARK.—Armor.BEAKER.—Cup, drinking-vessel.BEGEAR.—Prepare.BIGHT.—Bay, sea.BILL.—Sword.BOSS.—Ornamental projection.BRACTEATE.—A round ornament on a necklace.BRAND.—Sword.BURN.—Stream.BURNIE.—Armor.CARLE.—Man, hero.EARL.—Nobleman, any brave man.EKE.—Also.EMPRISE.—Enterprise, undertaking.ERST.—Formerly.ERST-WORTHY.—Worthy for a long time past.FAIN.—Glad.FERRY.—Bear, carry.FEY.—Fated, doomed.FLOAT.—Vessel, ship.FOIN.—To lunge (Shaks.).GLORY OF KINGS.—God.GREWSOME.—Cruel, fierce.HEFT.—Handle, hilt; used by synecdoche for ‘sword.’HELM.—Helmet, protector.HENCHMAN.—Retainer, vassal.HIGHT.—Am (was) named.HOLM.—Ocean, curved surface of the sea.HIMSEEMED.—(It) seemed to him.LIEF.—Dear, valued.MERE.—Sea; in compounds, ‘mere-ways,’  ‘mere-currents,’  etc.MICKLE.—Much.NATHLESS.—Nevertheless.NAZE.—Edge (nose).NESS.—Edge.NICKER.—Sea-beast.QUIT, QUITE.—Requite.RATHE.—Quickly.REAVE.—Bereave, deprive.SAIL-ROAD.—Sea.SETTLE.—Seat, bench.SKINKER.—One who pours.SOOTHLY.—Truly.SWINGE.—Stroke, blow.TARGE, TARGET.—Shield.THROUGHLY.—Thoroughly.TOLD.—Counted.UNCANNY.—Ill-featured, grizzly.UNNETHE.—Difficult.WAR-SPEED.—Success in war.WEB.—Tapestry (that which is ‘woven’).WEEDED.—Clad (cf. widow’s weeds).WEEN.—Suppose, imagine.WEIRD.—Fate, Providence.WHILOM.—At times, formerly, often.WIELDER.—Ruler. Often used of God; also in compounds, as ‘Wielder of Glory,’  ‘Wielder of Worship.’WIGHT.—Creature.WOLD.—Plane, extended surface.WOT.—Knows.YOUNKER.—Youth.[1]BEOWULF.I.THE LIFE AND DEATH OF SCYLD.The famous race ofSpear-Danes.Lo! the Spear-Danes’ glory through splendid achievementsThe folk-kings’ former fame we have heard of,How princes displayed then their prowess-in-battle.Scyld, their mightyking, in honor ofwhom they areoften called Scyldings.He is thegreat-grandfatherof Hrothgar, soprominent in thepoem.Oft Scyld the Scefing from scathers in numbers5From many a people their mead-benches tore.Since first he found him friendless and wretched,The earl had had terror: comfort he got for it,Waxed ’neath the welkin, world-honor gained,Till all his neighbors o’er sea were compelled to10Bow to his bidding and bring him their tribute:An excellent atheling! After was borne himA son is born tohim, who receivesthe name ofBeowulf—a nameafterwards made sofamous by the heroof the poem.A son and heir, young in his dwelling,Whom God-Father sent to solace the people.He had marked the misery malice had caused them,151That reaved of their rulers they wretched had erstwhile2Long been afflicted. The Lord, in requital,Wielder of Glory, with world-honor blessed him.Famed was Beowulf, far spread the gloryOf Scyld’s great son in the lands of the Danemen.[2]The ideal Teutonicking lavishes giftson his vassals.20So the carle that is young, by kindnesses renderedThe friends of his father, with fees in abundanceMust be able to earn that when age approachethEager companions aid him requitingly,When war assaults him serve him as liegemen:25By praise-worthy actions must honor be got’Mong all of the races. At the hour that was fatedScyld dies at thehour appointed byFate.Scyld then departed to the All-Father’s keepingWarlike to wend him; away then they bare himTo the flood of the current, his fond-loving comrades,30As himself he had bidden, while the friend of the ScyldingsWord-sway wielded, and the well-lovèd land-princeLong did rule them.3 The ring-stemmèd vessel,Bark of the atheling, lay there at anchor,Icy in glimmer and eager for sailing;By his own request,his body islaid on a vesseland wafted seaward.35The belovèd leader laid they down there,Giver of rings, on the breast of the vessel,The famed by the mainmast. A many of jewels,Of fretted embossings, from far-lands brought over,Was placed near at hand then; and heard I not ever40That a folk ever furnished a float more superblyWith weapons of warfare, weeds for the battle,Bills and burnies; on his bosom sparkledMany a jewel that with him must travelOn the flush of the flood afar on the current.45And favors no fewer they furnished him soothly,Excellent folk-gems, than others had given himHe leaves Danelandon the breastof a bark.Who when first he was born outward did send himLone on the main, the merest of infants:And a gold-fashioned standard they stretched under heaven[3]50High o’er his head, let the holm-currents bear him,Seaward consigned him: sad was their spirit,Their mood very mournful. Men are not ableNo one knowswhither the boatdrifted.Soothly to tell us, they in halls who reside,4Heroes under heaven, to what haven he hied.[1] For the ‘Þæt’  of verse 15, Sievers suggests ‘Þá’  (= which). If this beaccepted, the sentence ‘He had … afflicted’  will read: He (i.e. God) hadperceived the malice-caused sorrow which they, lordless, had formerly longendured.[2] For ‘aldor-léase’  (15) Gr. suggested ‘aldor-ceare’: He perceived theirdistress, that they formerly had suffered life-sorrow a long while.[3] A very difficult passage. ‘Áhte’ (31) has no object. H. supplies ‘geweald’from the context; and our translation is based upon this assumption,though it is far from satisfactory. Kl. suggests ‘lændagas’  for ‘lange’: Andthe beloved land-prince enjoyed (had) his transitory days (i.e. lived). B. suggestsa dislocation; but this is a dangerous doctrine, pushed rather far by thateminent scholar.[4] The reading of the H.-So. text has been quite closely followed; but someeminent scholars read ‘séle-rædenne’  for ‘sele-rædende.’  If that be adopted,the passage will read: Men cannot tell us, indeed, the order of Fate, etc.‘Sele-rædende’  has two things to support it: (1) v. 1347; (2) it affords aparallel to ‘men’  in v. 50.II.SCYLD’S SUCCESSORS.—HROTHGAR’S GREAT MEAD-HALL.Beowulf succeedshis father ScyldIn the boroughs then Beowulf, bairn of the Scyldings,Belovèd land-prince, for long-lasting seasonWas famed mid the folk (his father departed,The prince from his dwelling), till afterward sprang5Great-minded Healfdene; the Danes in his lifetimeHe graciously governed, grim-mooded, agèd.Healfdene’s birth.Four bairns of his body born in successionWoke in the world, war-troopers’ leaderHeorogar, Hrothgar, and Halga the good;10Heard I that Elan was Ongentheow’s consort,He has three sons—one  of them,  Hrothgar—and a  daughter named  Elan. Hrothgar  becomes a mighty  king.The well-beloved bedmate of the War-Scylfing leader.Then glory in battle to Hrothgar was given,Waxing of war-fame, that willingly kinsmenObeyed his bidding, till the boys grew to manhood,15A numerous band.  It burned in his spiritTo urge his folk to found a great building,A mead-hall grander than men of the eraHe is eager to  build a great hall  in which he may  feast his retainersEver had heard of, and in it to shareWith young and old all of the blessings20The Lord had allowed him, save life and retainers.Then the work I find afar was assigned[4]To many races in middle-earth’s regions,To adorn the great folk-hall. In due time it happenedEarly ’mong men, that ’twas finished entirely,25The greatest of hall-buildings; Heorot he named itThe hall is completed,  and is called Heort, or  Heorot.Who wide-reaching word-sway wielded ’mong earlmen.His promise he brake not, rings he lavished,Treasure at banquet.  Towered the hall upHigh and horn-crested, huge between antlers:30It battle-waves bided, the blasting fire-demon;Ere long then from hottest hatred must sword-wrathArise for a woman’s husband and father.Then the mighty war-spirit1 endured for a season,The Monster Grendel  is madly envious  of the Danemen’s  joy.Bore it bitterly, he who bided in darkness,35That light-hearted laughter loud in the buildingGreeted him daily; there was dulcet harp-music,Clear song of the singer.  He said that was able[The course of the  story is interrupted  by a short reference  to some old account of the  creation.]To tell from of old earthmen’s beginnings,That Father Almighty earth had created,40The winsome wold that the water encircleth,Set exultingly the sun’s and the moon’s beamsTo lavish their lustre on land-folk and races,And earth He embellished in all her regionsWith limbs and leaves; life He bestowed too45On all the kindreds that live under heaven.The glee of the  warriors is overcast  by a horrible  dread.So blessed with abundance, brimming with joyance,The warriors abided, till a certain one gan toDog them with deeds of direfullest malice,A foe in the hall-building: this horrible stranger250Was Grendel entitled, the march-stepper famousWho3 dwelt in the moor-fens, the marsh and the fastness;The wan-mooded being abode for a season[5]In the land of the giants, when the Lord and CreatorHad banned him and branded. For that bitter murder,55The killing of Abel, all-ruling FatherCain is referred toas a progenitor ofGrendel, and ofmonsters in general.The kindred of Cain crushed with His vengeance;In the feud He rejoiced not, but far away drove himFrom kindred and kind, that crime to atone for,Meter of Justice. Thence ill-favored creatures,60Elves and giants, monsters of ocean,Came into being, and the giants that longtimeGrappled with God; He gave them requital.[1] R. and t. B. prefer ‘ellor-gæst’  to ‘ellen-gæst’  (86): Then the strangerfrom afar endured, etc.[2] Some authorities would translate ‘demon’  instead of ‘stranger.’[3] Some authorities arrange differently, and render: Who dwelt in the moor-fens,the marsh and the fastness, the land of the giant-race.III.GRENDEL THE MURDERER.Grendel attacks thesleeping heroesWhen the sun was sunken, he set out to visitThe lofty hall-building, how the Ring-Danes had used itFor beds and benches when the banquet was over.Then he found there reposing many a noble5Asleep after supper; sorrow the heroes,1Misery knew not. The monster of evilGreedy and cruel tarried but little,He drags off thirtyof them, and devoursthemFell and frantic, and forced from their slumbersThirty of thanemen; thence he departed10Leaping and laughing, his lair to return to,With surfeit of slaughter sallying homeward.In the dusk of the dawning, as the day was just breaking,Was Grendel’s prowess revealed to the warriors:A cry of agonygoes up, whenGrendel’s horribledeed is fully realized.Then, his meal-taking finished, a moan was uplifted,15Morning-cry mighty. The man-ruler famous,The long-worthy atheling, sat very woful,Suffered great sorrow, sighed for his liegemen,[6]When they had seen the track of the hateful pursuer,The spirit accursèd: too crushing that sorrow,The monster returnsthe nextnight.20Too loathsome and lasting. Not longer he tarried,But one night after continued his slaughterShameless and shocking, shrinking but littleFrom malice and murder; they mastered him fully.He was easy to find then who otherwhere looked for25A pleasanter place of repose in the lodges,A bed in the bowers. Then was brought to his noticeTold him truly by token apparentThe hall-thane’s hatred: he held himself afterFurther and faster who the foeman did baffle.302So ruled he and strongly strove against justiceLone against all men, till empty uptoweredKing Hrothgar’sagony and suspenselast twelveyears.The choicest of houses. Long was the season:Twelve-winters’ time torture sufferedThe friend of the Scyldings, every affliction,35Endless agony; hence it after3 becameCertainly known to the children of menSadly in measures, that long against HrothgarGrendel struggled:—his grudges he cherished,Murderous malice, many a winter,40Strife unremitting, and peacefully wished he4Life-woe to lift from no liegeman at all ofThe men of the Dane-folk, for money to settle,No counsellor needed count for a moment[7]On handsome amends at the hands of the murderer;Grendel is unremittingin his persecutions.45The monster of evil fiercely did harass,The ill-planning death-shade, both elder and younger,Trapping and tricking them. He trod every night thenThe mist-covered moor-fens; men do not know whereWitches and wizards wander and ramble.50So the foe of mankind many of evilsGrievous injuries, often accomplished,Horrible hermit; Heort he frequented,Gem-bedecked palace, when night-shades had fallenGod is against themonster.(Since God did oppose him, not the throne could he touch,555The light-flashing jewel, love of Him knew not).’Twas a fearful affliction to the friend of the ScyldingsThe king and hiscouncil deliberatein vain.Soul-crushing sorrow. Not seldom in privateSat the king in his council; conference held theyWhat the braves should determine ’gainst terrors unlooked for.They invoke theaid of their gods.60At the shrines of their idols often they promisedGifts and offerings, earnestly prayed theyThe devil from hell would help them to lightenTheir people’s oppression. Such practice they used then,Hope of the heathen; hell they remembered65In innermost spirit, God they knew not,The true God theydo not know.Judge of their actions, All-wielding Ruler,No praise could they give the Guardian of Heaven,The Wielder of Glory. Woe will be his whoThrough furious hatred his spirit shall drive to70The clutch of the fire, no comfort shall look for,Wax no wiser; well for the man who,Living his life-days, his Lord may faceAnd find defence in his Father’s embrace![1] The translation is based on ‘weras,’  adopted by H.-So.—K. and Th.read ‘wera’  and, arranging differently, render 119(2)-120: They knew notsorrow, the wretchedness of man, aught of misfortune.—For ‘unhælo’  (120)R. suggests ‘unfælo’: The uncanny creature, greedy and cruel, etc.[2] S. rearranges and translates: So he ruled and struggled unjustly, one againstall, till the noblest of buildings stood useless (it was a long while) twelve years’time: the friend of the Scyldings suffered distress, every woe, great sorrows, etc.[3] For ‘syððan,’  B. suggests ‘sárcwidum’: Hence in mournful words it becamewell known, etc. Various other words beginning with ‘s’ have beenconjectured.[4] The H.-So. glossary is very inconsistent in referring to this passage.—‘Sibbe’(154), which H.-So. regards as an instr., B. takes as accus., obj. of‘wolde.’  Putting a comma after Deniga, he renders: He did not desirepeace with any of the Danes, nor did he wish to remove their life-woe, nor tosettle for money.[5] Of this difficult passage the following interpretations among others aregiven: (1) Though Grendel has frequented Heorot as a demon, he could notbecome ruler of the Danes, on account of his hostility to God. (2) Hrothgarwas much grieved that Grendel had not appeared before his throne to receivepresents. (3) He was not permitted to devastate the hall, on account of theCreator; i.e. God wished to make his visit fatal to him.—Ne … wisse (169)W. renders: Nor had he any desire to do so; ‘his’  being obj. gen. = danach.[8]IV.BEOWULF GOES TO HROTHGAR’S ASSISTANCE.Hrothgar sees noway of escape fromthe persecutions ofGrendel.So Healfdene’s kinsman constantly mused onHis long-lasting sorrow; the battle-thane cleverWas not anywise able evils to ’scape from:Too crushing the sorrow that came to the people,5Loathsome and lasting the life-grinding torture,Beowulf, the Geat,hero of the poem,hears of Hrothgar’ssorrow, and resolvesto go to hisassistance.Greatest of night-woes. So Higelac’s liegeman,Good amid Geatmen, of Grendel’s achievementsHeard in his home:1 of heroes then livingHe was stoutest and strongest, sturdy and noble.10He bade them prepare him a bark that was trusty;He said he the war-king would seek o’er the ocean,The folk-leader noble, since he needed retainers.For the perilous project prudent companionsChided him little, though loving him dearly;15They egged the brave atheling, augured him glory.With fourteen carefullychosen companions,he sets outfor Dane-land.The excellent knight from the folk of the GeatmenHad liegemen selected, likest to prove themTrustworthy warriors; with fourteen companionsThe vessel he looked for; a liegeman then showed them,20A sea-crafty man, the bounds of the country.Fast the days fleeted; the float was a-water,The craft by the cliff. Clomb to the prow thenWell-equipped warriors: the wave-currents twistedThe sea on the sand; soldiers then carried25On the breast of the vessel bright-shining jewels,Handsome war-armor; heroes outshoved then,Warmen the wood-ship, on its wished-for adventure.[9]The vessel sailslike a birdThe foamy-necked floater fanned by the breeze,Likest a bird, glided the waters,In twenty fourhours they reachthe shores ofHrothgar’s dominions30Till twenty and four hours thereafterThe twist-stemmed vessel had traveled such distanceThat the sailing-men saw the sloping embankments,The sea cliffs gleaming, precipitous mountains,Nesses enormous: they were nearing the limits35At the end of the ocean.2 Up thence quicklyThe men of the Weders clomb to the mainland,Fastened their vessel (battle weeds rattled,War burnies clattered), the Wielder they thankedThat the ways o’er the waters had waxen so gentle.They are hailed bythe Danish coastguard40Then well from the cliff edge the guard of the ScyldingsWho the sea-cliffs should see to, saw o’er the gangwayBrave ones bearing beauteous targets,Armor all ready, anxiously thought he,Musing and wondering what men were approaching.45High on his horse then Hrothgar’s retainerTurned him to coastward, mightily brandishedHis lance in his hands, questioned with boldness.His challenge“Who are ye men here, mail-covered warriorsClad in your corslets, come thus a-driving50A high riding ship o’er the shoals of the waters,3And hither ’neath helmets have hied o’er the ocean?[10]I have been strand-guard, standing as warden,Lest enemies ever anywise ravageDanish dominions with army of war-ships.55More boldly never have warriors venturedHither to come; of kinsmen’s approval,Word-leave of warriors, I ween that ye surelyHe is struck byBeowulf’s appearance.Nothing have known. Never a greater oneOf earls o’er the earth have I had a sight of60Than is one of your number, a hero in armor;No low-ranking fellow4 adorned with his weapons,But launching them little, unless looks are deceiving,And striking appearance. Ere ye pass on your journeyAs treacherous spies to the land of the Scyldings65And farther fare, I fully must know nowWhat race ye belong to. Ye far-away dwellers,Sea-faring sailors, my simple opinionHear ye and hearken: haste is most fittingPlainly to tell me what place ye are come from.”[1] ‘From hám’  (194) is much disputed. One rendering is: Beowulf, beingaway from home, heard of Hrothgar’s troubles, etc. Another, that adopted byS. and endorsed in the H.-So. notes, is: B. heard from his neighborhood (neighbors),i.e. in his home, etc. A third is: B., being at home, heard this asoccurring away from home. The H.-So. glossary and notes conflict.[2] ‘Eoletes’ (224) is marked with a (?) by H.-So.; our rendering simplyfollows his conjecture.—Other conjectures as to ‘eolet’ are: (1) voyage,(2) toil, labor, (3) hasty journey.[3] The lacuna of the MS at this point has been supplied by various conjectures.The reading adopted by H.-So. has been rendered in the above translation.W., like H.-So., makes ‘ic’ the beginning of a new sentence, but, for ‘helmasbæron,’ he reads ‘hringed stefnan.’ This has the advantage of giving aparallel to ‘brontne ceol’ instead of a kenning for ‘go.’—B puts the (?)after ‘holmas’, and begins a new sentence at the middle of the line. Translate:What warriors are ye, clad in armor, who have thus come bringing thefoaming vessel over the water way, hither over the seas? For some time onthe wall I have been coast guard, etc. S. endorses most of what B. says, butleaves out ‘on the wall’ in the last sentence. If W.’s ‘hringed stefnan’ beaccepted, change line 51 above to, A ring-stemmed vessel hither o’ersea.[4] ‘Seld-guma’ (249) is variously rendered: (1) housecarle; (2) home-stayer;(3) common man. Dr. H. Wood suggests a man-at-arms in another’s house.V.THE GEATS REACH HEOROT.Beowulf courteouslyreplies.The chief of the strangers rendered him answer,War-troopers’ leader, and word-treasure opened:We are Geats.“We are sprung from the lineage of the people of Geatland,And Higelac’s hearth-friends. To heroes unnumberedMy father Ecgtheowwas well-knownin his day.5My father was known, a noble head-warriorEcgtheow titled; many a winterHe lived with the people, ere he passed on his journey,Old from his dwelling; each of the counsellorsWidely mid world-folk well remembers him.Our intentionstowards KingHrothgar are of thekindest.10We, kindly of spirit, the lord of thy people,The son of King Healfdene, have come here to visit,[11]Folk-troop’s defender: be free in thy counsels!To the noble one bear we a weighty commission,The helm of the Danemen; we shall hide, I ween,Is it true that amonster is slayingDanish heroes?15Naught of our message. Thou know’st if it happen,As we soothly heard say, that some savage despoiler,Some hidden pursuer, on nights that are murkyBy deeds very direful ’mid the Danemen exhibitsHatred unheard of, horrid destruction20And the falling of dead. From feelings least selfishI can help yourking to free himselffrom this horriblecreature.I am able to render counsel to Hrothgar,How he, wise and worthy, may worst the destroyer,If the anguish of sorrow should ever be lessened,1Comfort come to him, and care-waves grow cooler,25Or ever hereafter he agony sufferAnd troublous distress, while towereth upwardThe handsomest of houses high on the summit.”The coast-guardreminds Beowulfthat it is easier tosay than to do.Bestriding his stallion, the strand-watchman answered,The doughty retainer: “The difference surely30’Twixt words and works, the warlike shield-bearerWho judgeth wisely well shall determine.This band, I hear, beareth no maliceI am satisfied ofyour good intentions,and shall leadyou to the palace.To the prince of the Scyldings. Pass ye then onwardWith weapons and armor. I shall lead you in person;35To my war-trusty vassals command I shall issueTo keep from all injury your excellent vessel,Your boat shall bewell cared for duringyour stay here.Your fresh-tarred craft, ’gainst every opposerClose by the sea-shore, till the curved-neckèd bark shallWaft back again the well-beloved hero40O’er the way of the water to Weder dominions.He again complimentsBeowulf.To warrior so great ’twill be granted sureIn the storm of strife to stand secure.”Onward they fared then (the vessel lay quiet,The broad-bosomed bark was bound by its cable,[12]45Firmly at anchor); the boar-signs glistened2Bright on the visors vivid with gilding,Blaze-hardened, brilliant; the boar acted warden.The heroes hastened, hurried the liegemen,The land is perhapsrolling.Descended together, till they saw the great palace,50The well-fashioned wassail-hall wondrous and gleaming:Heorot flashes ontheir view.’Mid world-folk and kindreds that was widest reputedOf halls under heaven which the hero abode in;Its lustre enlightened lands without number.Then the battle-brave hero showed them the glittering55Court of the bold ones, that they easily thitherMight fare on their journey; the aforementioned warriorTurning his courser, quoth as he left them:The coast-guard,having dischargedhis duty, bids themGod-speed.“’Tis time I were faring; Father AlmightyGrant you His grace, and give you to journey60Safe on your mission! To the sea I will get me’Gainst hostile warriors as warden to stand.”[1] ‘Edwendan’ (280) B. takes to be the subs. ‘edwenden’ (cf. 1775); and‘bisigu’ he takes as gen. sing., limiting ‘edwenden’: If reparation forsorrows is ever to come. This is supported by t.B.[2] Combining the emendations of B. and t.B., we may read: The boar-imagesglistened … brilliant, protected the life of the war-mooded man. Theyread ‘ferh-wearde’ (305) and ‘gúðmódgum men’ (306).VI.BEOWULF INTRODUCES HIMSELF AT THE PALACE.The highway glistened with many-hued pebble,A by-path led the liegemen together.1Firm and hand-locked the war-burnie glistened,The ring-sword radiant rang ’mid the armor5As the party was approaching the palace togetherThey set theirarms and armoragainst the wall.In warlike equipments. ’Gainst the wall of the buildingTheir wide-fashioned war-shields they weary did set then,[13]Battle-shields sturdy; benchward they turned then;Their battle-sarks rattled, the gear of the heroes;10The lances stood up then, all in a cluster,The arms of the seamen, ashen-shafts mountedWith edges of iron: the armor-clad troopersA Danish heroasks them whenceand why they arecome.Were decked with weapons. Then a proud-mooded heroAsked of the champions questions of lineage:15“From what borders bear ye your battle-shields plated,Gilded and gleaming, your gray-colored burnies,Helmets with visors and heap of war-lances?—To Hrothgar the king I am servant and liegeman.’Mong folk from far-lands found I have neverHe expresses nolittle admirationfor the strangers.20Men so many of mien more courageous.I ween that from valor, nowise as outlaws,But from greatness of soul ye sought for King Hrothgar.”Beowulf replies.Then the strength-famous earlman answer rendered,The proud-mooded Wederchief replied to his question,We are Higelac’stable-companions,and bear an importantcommission toyour prince.25Hardy ’neath helmet: “Higelac’s mates are we;Beowulf hight I. To the bairn of Healfdene,The famous folk-leader, I freely will tellTo thy prince my commission, if pleasantly hearingHe’ll grant we may greet him so gracious to all men.”30Wulfgar replied then (he was prince of the Wendels,His boldness of spirit was known unto many,His prowess and prudence): “The prince of the Scyldings,Wulfgar, thethane, says thathe will go and askHrothgar whetherhe will see thestrangers.The friend-lord of Danemen, I will ask of thy journey,The giver of rings, as thou urgest me do it,35The folk-chief famous, and inform thee earlyWhat answer the good one mindeth to render me.”He turned then hurriedly where Hrothgar was sitting,2Old and hoary, his earlmen attending him;The strength-famous went till he stood at the shoulder40Of the lord of the Danemen, of courteous thanemenThe custom he minded. Wulfgar addressed thenHis friendly liegelord: “Folk of the Geatmen[14]He thereuponurges his liegelordto receive the visitorscourteously.O’er the way of the waters are wafted hither,Faring from far-lands: the foremost in rank45The battle-champions Beowulf title.They make this petition: with thee, O my chieftain,To be granted a conference; O gracious King Hrothgar,Friendly answer refuse not to give them!Hrothgar, too, isstruck with Beowulf’sappearance.In war-trappings weeded worthy they seem50Of earls to be honored; sure the atheling is doughtyWho headed the heroes hitherward coming.”[1] Instead of the punctuation given by H.-So, S. proposed to insert a commaafter ‘scír’ (322), and to take ‘hring-íren’ as meaning ‘ring-mail’ and asparallel with ‘gúð-byrne.’ The passage would then read: The firm andhand-locked war-burnie shone, bright ring-mail, rang ’mid the armor, etc.[2] Gr. and others translate ‘unhár’ by ‘bald’; old and bald.VII.HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.Hrothgar remembersBeowulf as ayouth, and alsoremembers hisfather.Hrothgar answered, helm of the Scyldings:“I remember this man as the merest of striplings.His father long dead now was Ecgtheow titled,Him Hrethel the Geatman granted at home his5One only daughter; his battle-brave sonIs come but now, sought a trustworthy friend.Seafaring sailors asserted it then,Beowulf is reportedto have thestrength of thirtymen.Who valuable gift-gems of the Geatmen1 carriedAs peace-offering thither, that he thirty men’s grapple10Has in his hand, the hero-in-battle.God hath sent himto our rescue.The holy Creator usward sent him,To West-Dane warriors, I ween, for to render’Gainst Grendel’s grimness gracious assistance:I shall give to the good one gift-gems for courage.15Hasten to bid them hither to speed them,2To see assembled this circle of kinsmen;Tell them expressly they’re welcome in sooth toThe men of the Danes.” To the door of the building[15]Wulfgar invites thestrangers in.Wulfgar went then, this word-message shouted:20“My victorious liegelord bade me to tell you,The East-Danes’ atheling, that your origin knows he,And o’er wave-billows wafted ye welcome are hither,Valiant of spirit. Ye straightway may enterClad in corslets, cased in your helmets,25To see King Hrothgar. Here let your battle-boards,Wood-spears and war-shafts, await your conferring.”The mighty one rose then, with many a liegeman,An excellent thane-group; some there did await them,And as bid of the brave one the battle-gear guarded.30Together they hied them, while the hero did guide them,’Neath Heorot’s roof; the high-minded went thenSturdy ’neath helmet till he stood in the building.Beowulf spake (his burnie did glisten,His armor seamed over by the art of the craftsman):Beowulf salutesHrothgar, andthen proceeds toboast of his youthfulachievements.35“Hail thou, Hrothgar! I am Higelac’s kinsmanAnd vassal forsooth; many a wonderI dared as a stripling. The doings of Grendel,In far-off fatherland I fully did know of:Sea-farers tell us, this hall-building standeth,40Excellent edifice, empty and uselessTo all the earlmen after evenlight’s glimmer’Neath heaven’s bright hues hath hidden its glory.This my earls then urged me, the most excellent of them,Carles very clever, to come and assist thee,45Folk-leader Hrothgar; fully they knew ofHis fight with thenickers.The strength of my body. Themselves they beheld meWhen I came from the contest, when covered with goreFoes I escaped from, where five3 I had bound,[16]The giant-race wasted, in the waters destroying50The nickers by night, bore numberless sorrows,The Weders avenged (woes had they suffered)Enemies ravaged; alone now with GrendelHe intends to fightGrendel unaided.I shall manage the matter, with the monster of evil,The giant, decide it. Thee I would therefore55Beg of thy bounty, Bright-Danish chieftain,Lord of the Scyldings, this single petition:Not to refuse me, defender of warriors,Friend-lord of folks, so far have I sought thee,That I may unaided, my earlmen assisting me,60This brave-mooded war-band, purify Heorot.I have heard on inquiry, the horrible creatureSince the monsteruses no weapons,From veriest rashness recks not for weapons;I this do scorn then, so be Higelac gracious,My liegelord belovèd, lenient of spirit,65To bear a blade or a broad-fashioned target,A shield to the onset; only with hand-gripI, too, shall disdainto use any.The foe I must grapple, fight for my life then,Foeman with foeman; he fain must rely onThe doom of the Lord whom death layeth hold of.Should he crushme, he will eat mycompanions as hehas eaten thythanes.70I ween he will wish, if he win in the struggle,To eat in the war-hall earls of the Geat-folk,Boldly to swallow4 them, as of yore he did oftenThe best of the Hrethmen! Thou needest not troubleA head-watch to give me;5 he will have me dripping[17]In case of my defeat,thou wilt nothave the trouble ofburying me.75And dreary with gore, if death overtake me,6Will bear me off bleeding, biting and mouthing me,The hermit will eat me, heedless of pity,Marking the moor-fens; no more wilt thou need thenShould I fall, sendmy armor to mylord, King Higelac.Find me my food.7 If I fall in the battle,80Send to Higelac the armor that servethTo shield my bosom, the best of equipments,Richest of ring-mails; ’tis the relic of Hrethla,Weird is supremeThe work of Wayland. Goes Weird as she must go!”[1] Some render ‘gif-sceattas’ by ‘tribute.’—‘Géata’ B. and Th. emended to‘Géatum.’ If this be accepted, change ‘of the Geatmen’ to ‘to the Geatmen.’[2] If t.B.’s emendation of vv. 386, 387 be accepted, the two lines, ‘Hasten… kinsmen’ will read: Hasten thou, bid the throng of kinsmen go into thehall together.[3] For 420 (b) and 421 (a), B. suggests: Þær ic (on) fífelgeban ýðdeeotena cyn = where I in the ocean destroyed the eoten-race.—t.B. accepts B.’s“brilliant” ‘fífelgeban,’ omits ‘on,’ emends ‘cyn’ to ‘hám,’ arranging: Þær icfífelgeban ýðde, eotena hám = where I desolated the ocean, the home of theeotens.—This would be better but for changing ‘cyn’ to ‘hám.’—I suggest:Þær ic fífelgeband (cf. nhd. Bande) ýðde, eotena cyn = where I conquered themonster band, the race of the eotens. This makes no change except to read‘fífel’ for ‘fífe.’[4] ‘Unforhte’ (444) is much disputed.—H.-So. wavers between adj. and adv.Gr. and B. take it as an adv. modifying etan: Will eat the Geats fearlessly.—Kl.considers this reading absurd, and proposes ‘anforhte’ = timid.—Understanding‘unforhte’ as an adj. has this advantage, viz. that it gives a parallelto ‘Geátena leóde’: but to take it as an adv. is more natural. Furthermore, tocall the Geats ‘brave’ might, at this point, seem like an implied thrust at theDanes, so long helpless; while to call his own men ‘timid’ would be befoulinghis own nest.[5] For ‘head-watch,’ cf. H.-So. notes and cf. v. 2910.—Th. translates: Thouwilt not need my head to hide (i.e., thou wilt have no occasion to bury me, asGrendel will devour me whole).—Simrock imagines a kind of dead-watch.—Dr. H. Woodsuggests: Thou wilt not have to bury so much as my head (forGrendel will be a thorough undertaker),—grim humor.[6] S. proposes a colon after ‘nimeð’ (l. 447). This would make no essentialchange in the translation.[7] Owing to the vagueness of ‘feorme’ (451), this passage is variously translated.In our translation, H.-So.’s glossary has been quite closely followed.This agrees substantially with B.’s translation (P. and B. XII. 87). R. translates:Thou needst not take care longer as to the consumption of my deadbody. ‘Líc’ is also a crux here, as it may mean living body or dead body.VIII.HROTHGAR AND BEOWULF.—Continued.Hrothgar responds.Hrothgar discoursed, helm of the Scyldings:“To defend our folk and to furnish assistance,1Thou soughtest us hither, good friend Beowulf.Reminiscences ofBeowulf’s father,Ecgtheow.The fiercest of feuds thy father engaged in,5Heatholaf killed he in hand-to-hand conflict’Mid Wilfingish warriors; then the Wederish peopleFor fear of a feud were forced to disown him.Thence flying he fled to the folk of the South-Danes,[18]The race of the Scyldings, o’er the roll of the waters;10I had lately begun then to govern the Danemen,The hoard-seat of heroes held in my youth,Rich in its jewels: dead was Heregar,My kinsman and elder had earth-joys forsaken,Healfdene his bairn. He was better than I am!15That feud thereafter for a fee I compounded;O’er the weltering waters to the Wilfings I sentOrnaments old; oaths did he swear me.Hrothgar recountsto Beowulf thehorrors of Grendel’spersecutions.It pains me in spirit to any to tell it,What grief in Heorot Grendel hath caused me,20What horror unlooked-for, by hatred unceasing.Waned is my war-band, wasted my hall-troop;Weird hath offcast them to the clutches of Grendel.God can easily hinder the scatherFrom deeds so direful. Oft drunken with beerMy thanes havemade many boasts,but have not executedthem.25O’er the ale-vessel promised warriors in armorThey would willingly wait on the wassailing-benchesA grapple with Grendel, with grimmest of edges.Then this mead-hall at morning with murder was reeking,The building was bloody at breaking of daylight,30The bench-deals all flooded, dripping and bloodied,The folk-hall was gory: I had fewer retainers,Dear-beloved warriors, whom death had laid hold of.Sit down to thefeast, and give uscomfort.Sit at the feast now, thy intents unto heroes,2Thy victor-fame show, as thy spirit doth urge thee!”A bench is madeready for Beowulfand his party.35For the men of the Geats then together assembled,In the beer-hall blithesome a bench was made ready;There warlike in spirit they went to be seated,Proud and exultant. A liegeman did service,[19]Who a beaker embellished bore with decorum,The gleeman sings40And gleaming-drink poured. The gleeman sang whilomThe heroes all rejoicetogether.Hearty in Heorot; there was heroes’ rejoicing,A numerous war-band of Weders and Danemen.[1] B. and S. reject the reading given in H.-So., and suggested by Grtvg. B.suggests for 457-458: wáere-ryhtum Þú, wine mín Béowulf, and for ár-stafum úsic sóhtest.This means: From the obligations of clientage, my friend Beowulf, and forassistance thou hast sought us.—This gives coherence to Hrothgar’s openingremarks in VIII., and also introduces a new motive for Beowulf’s coming toHrothgar’s aid.[2] Sit now at the feast, and disclose thy purposes to the victorious heroes, asthy spirit urges.—Kl. reaches the above translation by erasing the commaafter ‘meoto’ and reading ‘sige-hrèðsecgum.’—There are other and bolderemendations and suggestions. Of these the boldest is to regard ‘meoto’ as averb (imperative), and read ‘on sæl’: Think upon gayety, etc.—All the renderingsare unsatisfactory, the one given in our translation involving a zeugma.IX.UNFERTH TAUNTS BEOWULF.Unferth, a thaneof Hrothgar, isjealous of Beowulf,and undertakes totwit him.Unferth spoke up, Ecglaf his son,Who sat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings,Opened the jousting (the journey1 of Beowulf,Sea-farer doughty, gave sorrow to Unferth5And greatest chagrin, too, for granted he neverThat any man else on earth should attain to,Gain under heaven, more glory than he):Did you take partin a swimming-matchwith Breca?“Art thou that Beowulf with Breca did struggle,On the wide sea-currents at swimming contended,10Where to humor your pride the ocean ye tried,’Twas mere follythat actuated youboth to risk yourlives on the ocean.From vainest vaunting adventured your bodiesIn care of the waters? And no one was ableNor lief nor loth one, in the least to dissuade youYour difficult voyage; then ye ventured a-swimming,15Where your arms outstretching the streams ye did cover,The mere-ways measured, mixing and stirring them,Glided the ocean; angry the waves were,With the weltering of winter. In the water’s possession,Ye toiled for a seven-night; he at swimming outdid thee,20In strength excelled thee. Then early at morningOn the Heathoremes’ shore the holm-currents tossed him,Sought he thenceward the home of his fathers,Beloved of his liegemen, the land of the Brondings,The peace-castle pleasant, where a people he wielded,[20]25Had borough and jewels. The pledge that he made theeBreca outdid youentirely.The son of Beanstan hath soothly accomplished.Then I ween thou wilt find thee less fortunate issue,Much more willGrendel outdo you,if you vie with himin prowess.Though ever triumphant in onset of battle,A grim grappling, if Grendel thou darest30For the space of a night near-by to wait for!”Beowulf retaliates.Beowulf answered, offspring of Ecgtheow:“My good friend Unferth, sure freely and wildly,O friend Unferth,you are fuddledwith beer, and cannottalk coherently.Thou fuddled with beer of Breca hast spoken,Hast told of his journey! A fact I allege it,35That greater strength in the waters I had then,Ills in the ocean, than any man else had.We made agreement as the merest of striplingsPromised each other (both of us then wereWe simply kept anengagement madein early life.Younkers in years) that we yet would adventure40Out on the ocean; it all we accomplished.While swimming the sea-floods, sword-blade unscabbardedBoldly we brandished, our bodies expectedTo shield from the sharks. He sure was unableHe could not excelme, and I wouldnot excel him.To swim on the waters further than I could,45More swift on the waves, nor would I from him go.Then we two companions stayed in the oceanAfter five days thecurrents separatedus.Five nights together, till the currents did part us,The weltering waters, weathers the bleakest,And nethermost night, and the north-wind whistled50Fierce in our faces; fell were the billows.The mere fishes’ mood was mightily ruffled:And there against foemen my firm-knotted corslet,Hand-jointed, hardy, help did afford me;My battle-sark braided, brilliantly gilded,A horrible sea-beastattacked me,but I slew him.55Lay on my bosom. To the bottom then dragged me,A hateful fiend-scather, seized me and held me,Grim in his grapple: ’twas granted me, nathless,To pierce the monster with the point of my weapon,My obedient blade; battle offcarried60The mighty mere-creature by means of my hand-blow.[1] It has been plausibly suggested that ‘síð’ (in 501 and in 353) means‘arrival.’ If so, translate the bracket: (the arrival of Beowulf, the braveseafarer, was a source of great chagrin to Unferth, etc.).[21]X.BEOWULF SILENCES UNFERTH.—GLEE IS HIGH.“So ill-meaning enemies often did cause meSorrow the sorest. I served them, in quittance,My dear swordalways served mefaithfully.With my dear-lovèd sword, as in sooth it was fitting;They missed the pleasure of feasting abundantly,5Ill-doers evil, of eating my body,Of surrounding the banquet deep in the ocean;But wounded with edges early at morningThey were stretched a-high on the strand of the ocean,I put a stop to theoutrages of the sea-monsters.Put to sleep with the sword, that sea-going travelers10No longer thereafter were hindered from sailingThe foam-dashing currents. Came a light from the east,God’s beautiful beacon; the billows subsided,That well I could see the nesses projecting,Fortune helps thebrave earl.The blustering crags. Weird often saveth15The undoomed hero if doughty his valor!But me did it fortune1 to fell with my weaponNine of the nickers. Of night-struggle harder’Neath dome of the heaven heard I but rarely,Nor of wight more woful in the waves of the ocean;20Yet I ’scaped with my life the grip of the monsters,After that escape Idrifted to Finland.Weary from travel. Then the waters bare meTo the land of the Finns, the flood with the current,I have never heardof your doing anysuch bold deeds.The weltering waves. Not a word hath been told meOf deeds so daring done by thee, Unferth,25And of sword-terror none; never hath BrecaAt the play of the battle, nor either of you two,Feat so fearless performèd with weaponsGlinting and gleaming . . . . . . . . . . . .[22]. . . . . . . . . . . . I utter no boasting;You are a slayer ofbrothers, and willsuffer damnation,wise as you maybe.30Though with cold-blooded cruelty thou killedst thy brothers,Thy nearest of kin; thou needs must in hell getDireful damnation, though doughty thy wisdom.I tell thee in earnest, offspring of Ecglaf,Never had Grendel such numberless horrors,35The direful demon, done to thy liegelord,Harrying in Heorot, if thy heart were as sturdy,Had your acts beenas brave as yourwords, Grendel hadnot ravaged yourland so long.Thy mood as ferocious as thou dost describe them.He hath found out fully that the fierce-burning hatred,The edge-battle eager, of all of your kindred,40Of the Victory-Scyldings, need little dismay him:Oaths he exacteth, not any he sparesThe monster is notafraid of the Danes,Of the folk of the Danemen, but fighteth with pleasure,Killeth and feasteth, no contest expectethbut he will soonlearn to dread theGeats.From Spear-Danish people. But the prowess and valor45Of the earls of the Geatmen early shall ventureTo give him a grapple. He shall go who is ableBravely to banquet, when the bright-light of morningOn the second day,any warrior maygo unmolested tothe mead-banquet.Which the second day bringeth, the sun in its ether-robes,O’er children of men shines from the southward!”50Then the gray-haired, war-famed giver of treasureHrothgar’s spiritsare revived.Was blithesome and joyous, the Bright-Danish rulerExpected assistance; the people’s protectorThe old king trustsBeowulf.The heroes arejoyful.Heard from Beowulf his bold resolution.There was laughter of heroes; loud was the clatter,55The words were winsome. Wealhtheow advanced then,Queen Wealhtheowplays thehostess.Consort of Hrothgar, of courtesy mindful,Gold-decked saluted the men in the building,And the freeborn woman the beaker presentedShe offers the cupto her husbandfirst.To the lord of the kingdom, first of the East-Danes,60Bade him be blithesome when beer was a-flowing,Lief to his liegemen; he lustily tastedOf banquet and beaker, battle-famed ruler.The Helmingish lady then graciously circled’Mid all the liegemen lesser and greater:[23]She gives presentsto the heroes.65Treasure-cups tendered, till time was affordedThat the decorous-mooded, diademed folk-queenThen she offers thecup to Beowulf,thanking God thataid has come.Might bear to Beowulf the bumper o’errunning;She greeted the Geat-prince, God she did thank,Most wise in her words, that her wish was accomplished,70That in any of earlmen she ever should look forSolace in sorrow. He accepted the beaker,Battle-bold warrior, at Wealhtheow’s giving,Beowulf states tothe queen the objectof his visit.Then equipped for combat quoth he in measures,Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:75“I purposed in spirit when I mounted the ocean,I determined to door die.When I boarded my boat with a band of my liegemen,I would work to the fullest the will of your peopleOr in foe’s-clutches fastened fall in the battle.Deeds I shall do of daring and prowess,80Or the last of my life-days live in this mead-hall.”These words to the lady were welcome and pleasing,The boast of the Geatman; with gold trappings broideredWent the freeborn folk-queen her fond-lord to sit by.Glee is high.Then again as of yore was heard in the building85Courtly discussion, conquerors’ shouting,Heroes were happy, till Healfdene’s son wouldGo to his slumber to seek for refreshing;For the horrid hell-monster in the hall-building knew heA fight was determined,2 since the light of the sun they90No longer could see, and lowering darknessO’er all had descended, and dark under heavenShadowy shapes came shying around them.Hrothgar retires,leaving Beowulf incharge of the hall.The liegemen all rose then. One saluted the other,Hrothgar Beowulf, in rhythmical measures,95Wishing him well, and, the wassail-hall givingTo his care and keeping, quoth he departing:[24]“Not to any one else have I ever entrusted,But thee and thee only, the hall of the Danemen,Since high I could heave my hand and my buckler.100Take thou in charge now the noblest of houses;Be mindful of honor, exhibiting prowess,Watch ’gainst the foeman! Thou shalt want no enjoyments,Survive thou safely adventure so glorious!”[1] The repetition of ‘hwæðere’ (574 and 578) is regarded by some scholarsas a defect. B. suggests ‘swá Þær’ for the first: So there it befell me, etc.Another suggestion is to change the second ‘hwæðere’ into ‘swá Þær’: Sothere I escaped with my life, etc.[2] Kl. suggests a period after ‘determined.’ This would give the passageas follows: Since they no longer could see the light of the sun, and loweringdarkness was down over all, dire under the heavens shadowy beings came goingaround them.XI.ALL SLEEP SAVE ONE.Hrothgar retires.Then Hrothgar departed, his earl-throng attending him,Folk-lord of Scyldings, forth from the building;The war-chieftain wished then Wealhtheow to look for,The queen for a bedmate. To keep away GrendelGod has provideda watch for thehall.5The Glory of Kings had given a hall-watch,As men heard recounted: for the king of the DanemenHe did special service, gave the giant a watcher:And the prince of the Geatmen implicitly trustedBeowulf is self-confidentHis warlike strength and the Wielder’s protection.He prepares forrest.10His armor of iron off him he did then,His helmet from his head, to his henchman committedHis chased-handled chain-sword, choicest of weapons,And bade him bide with his battle-equipments.The good one then uttered words of defiance,15Beowulf Geatman, ere his bed he upmounted:Beowulf boasts ofhis ability to copewith Grendel.“I hold me no meaner in matters of prowess,In warlike achievements, than Grendel does himself;Hence I seek not with sword-edge to sooth him to slumber,Of life to bereave him, though well I am able.We will fight withnature’s weaponsonly.20No battle-skill1 has he, that blows he should strike me,To shatter my shield, though sure he is mighty[25]In strife and destruction; but struggling by night weShall do without edges, dare he to look forWeaponless warfare, and wise-mooded Father25The glory apportion, God ever-holy,God may decidewho shall conquerOn which hand soever to him seemeth proper.”Then the brave-mooded hero bent to his slumber,The pillow received the cheek of the noble;The Geatish warriorslie down.And many a martial mere-thane attending30Sank to his slumber. Seemed it unlikelyThey thought itvery unlikely thatthey should eversee their homesagain.That ever thereafter any should hope toBe happy at home, hero-friends visitOr the lordly troop-castle where he lived from his childhood;They had heard how slaughter had snatched from the wine-hall,35Had recently ravished, of the race of the ScyldingsBut God raised upa deliverer.Too many by far. But the Lord to them grantedThe weaving of war-speed, to Wederish heroesAid and comfort, that every opponentBy one man’s war-might they worsted and vanquished,God rules theworld.40By the might of himself; the truth is establishedThat God Almighty hath governed for agesKindreds and nations. A night very luridGrendel comes toHeorot.The trav’ler-at-twilight came tramping and striding.The warriors were sleeping who should watch the horned-building,Only one warrioris awake.45One only excepted. ’Mid earthmen ’twas ’stablished,Th’ implacable foeman was powerless to hurl themTo the land of shadows, if the Lord were unwilling;But serving as warder, in terror to foemen,He angrily bided the issue of battle.2[1] Gr. understood ‘gódra’ as meaning ‘advantages in battle.’ This renderingH.-So. rejects. The latter takes the passage as meaning that Grendel,though mighty and formidable, has no skill in the art of war.[2] B. in his masterly articles on Beowulf (P. and B. XII.) rejects the divisionusually made at this point, ‘Þá.’ (711), usually rendered ‘then,’ he translates‘when,’ and connects its clause with the foregoing sentence. These changeshe makes to reduce the number of ‘cóm’s’ as principal verbs. (Cf. 703, 711,721.) With all deference to this acute scholar, I must say that it seems to methat the poet is exhausting his resources to bring out clearly the supreme eventon which the whole subsequent action turns. First, he (Grendel) came inthe wan night; second, he came from the moor; third, he came to the hall.Time, place from which, place to which, are all given.[26]XII.GRENDEL AND BEOWULF.Grendel comesfrom the fens.’Neath the cloudy cliffs came from the moor thenGrendel going, God’s anger bare he.The monster intended some one of earthmenIn the hall-building grand to entrap and make way with:He goes towardsthe joyous building.5He went under welkin where well he knew ofThe wine-joyous building, brilliant with plating,Gold-hall of earthmen. Not the earliest occasionThis was not hisfirst visit there.He the home and manor of Hrothgar had sought:Ne’er found he in life-days later nor earlier10Hardier hero, hall-thanes1 more sturdy!Then came to the building the warrior marching,His horrid fingerstear the door open.Bereft of his joyance. The door quickly openedOn fire-hinges fastened, when his fingers had touched it;The fell one had flung then—his fury so bitter—15Open the entrance. Early thereafterThe foeman trod the shining hall-pavement,He strides furiouslyinto the hall.Strode he angrily; from the eyes of him glimmeredA lustre unlovely likest to fire.He beheld in the hall the heroes in numbers,20A circle of kinsmen sleeping together,He exults over hissupposed prey.A throng of thanemen: then his thoughts were exultant,He minded to sunder from each of the thanemenThe life from his body, horrible demon,Ere morning came, since fate had allowed himFate has decreedthat he shall devourno more heroes.Beowulf suffersfrom suspense.25The prospect of plenty. Providence willed notTo permit him any more of men under heavenTo eat in the night-time. Higelac’s kinsmanGreat sorrow endured how the dire-mooded creature[27]In unlooked-for assaults were likely to bear him.30No thought had the monster of deferring the matter,Grendel immediatelyseizes asleeping warrior,and devours him.But on earliest occasion he quickly laid hold ofA soldier asleep, suddenly tore him,Bit his bone-prison, the blood drank in currents,Swallowed in mouthfuls: he soon had the dead man’s35Feet and hands, too, eaten entirely.Nearer he strode then, the stout-hearted warriorBeowulf and Grendelgrapple.Snatched as he slumbered, seizing with hand-grip,Forward the foeman foined with his hand;Caught he quickly the cunning deviser,40On his elbow he rested. This early discoveredThe master of malice, that in middle-earth’s regions,’Neath the whole of the heavens, no hand-grapple greaterThe monster isamazed at Beowulf’sstrength.In any man else had he ever encountered:Fearful in spirit, faint-mooded waxed he,45Not off could betake him; death he was pondering,He is anxious toflee.Would fly to his covert, seek the devils’ assembly:His calling no more was the same he had followedLong in his lifetime. The liege-kinsman worthyBeowulf recalls hisboast of the evening,and determinesto fulfil it.Of Higelac minded his speech of the evening,50Stood he up straight and stoutly did seize him.His fingers crackled; the giant was outward,The earl stepped farther. The famous one mindedTo flee away farther, if he found an occasion,And off and away, avoiding delay,55To fly to the fen-moors; he fully was ware ofThe strength of his grapple in the grip of the foeman.’Twas a lucklessday for Grendel.’Twas an ill-taken journey that the injury-bringing,Harrying harmer to Heorot wandered:The hall groans.The palace re-echoed; to all of the Danemen,60Dwellers in castles, to each of the bold ones,Earlmen, was terror. Angry they both were,Archwarders raging.2 Rattled the building;[28]’Twas a marvellous wonder that the wine-hall withstood thenThe bold-in-battle, bent not to earthward,65Excellent earth-hall; but within and without itWas fastened so firmly in fetters of iron,By the art of the armorer. Off from the sill thereBent mead-benches many, as men have informed me,Adorned with gold-work, where the grim ones did struggle.70The Scylding wise men weened ne’er beforeThat by might and main-strength a man under heavenMight break it in pieces, bone-decked, resplendent,Crush it by cunning, unless clutch of the fireIn smoke should consume it. The sound mounted upwardGrendel’s cries terrifythe Danes.75Novel enough; on the North Danes fastenedA terror of anguish, on all of the men thereWho heard from the wall the weeping and plaining,The song of defeat from the foeman of heaven,Heard him hymns of horror howl, and his sorrow80Hell-bound bewailing. He held him too firmlyWho was strongest of main-strength of men of that era.[1] B. and t.B. emend so as to make lines 9 and 10 read: Never in his life,earlier or later, had he, the hell-thane, found a braver hero.—They arguethat Beowulf’s companions had done nothing to merit such encomiums as theusual readings allow them.[2] For ‘réðe rén-weardas’ (771), t.B. suggests ‘réðe, rénhearde.’ Translate:They were both angry, raging and mighty.XIII.GRENDEL IS VANQUISHED.Beowulf has noidea of lettingGrendel live.For no cause whatever would the earlmen’s defenderLeave in life-joys the loathsome newcomer,He deemed his existence utterly uselessTo men under heaven. Many a noble5Of Beowulf brandished his battle-sword old,Would guard the life of his lord and protector,The far-famous chieftain, if able to do so;While waging the warfare, this wist they but little,Brave battle-thanes, while his body intendingNo weapon wouldharm Grendel; hebore a charmedlife.10To slit into slivers, and seeking his spirit:That the relentless foeman nor finest of weaponsOf all on the earth, nor any of war-bills[29]Was willing to injure; but weapons of victorySwords and suchlike he had sworn to dispense with.15His death at that time must prove to be wretched,And the far-away spirit widely should journeyInto enemies’ power. This plainly he saw thenWho with mirth1 of mood malice no littleHad wrought in the past on the race of the earthmen20(To God he was hostile), that his body would fail him,But Higelac’s hardy henchman and kinsmanHeld him by the hand; hateful to otherGrendel is sorelywounded.Was each one if living. A body-wound sufferedThe direful demon, damage incurableHis body bursts.25Was seen on his shoulder, his sinews were shivered,His body did burst. To Beowulf was givenGlory in battle; Grendel from thencewardMust flee and hide him in the fen-cliffs and marshes,Sick unto death, his dwelling must look for30Unwinsome and woful; he wist the more fullyThe monster fleesaway to hide inthe moors.The end of his earthly existence was nearing,His life-days’ limits. At last for the Danemen,When the slaughter was over, their wish was accomplished.The comer-from-far-land had cleansed then of evil,35Wise and valiant, the war-hall of Hrothgar,Saved it from violence. He joyed in the night-work,In repute for prowess; the prince of the GeatmenFor the East-Danish people his boast had accomplished,Bettered their burdensome bale-sorrows fully,40The craft-begot evil they erstwhile had sufferedAnd were forced to endure from crushing oppression,Their manifold misery. ’Twas a manifest token,Beowulf suspendsGrendel’s hand andarm in Heorot.When the hero-in-battle the hand suspended,The arm and the shoulder (there was all of the claw45Of Grendel together) ’neath great-stretching hall-roof.[1] It has been proposed to translate ‘myrðe’ by with sorrow; but thereseems no authority for such a rendering. To the present translator, the phrase‘módes myrðe’ seems a mere padding for gladly; i.e., he who gladlyharassed mankind.[30]XIV.REJOICING OF THE DANES.At early dawn,warriors from farand near come togetherto hear ofthe night’s adventures.In the mist of the morning many a warriorStood round the gift-hall, as the story is told me:Folk-princes fared then from far and from nearThrough long-stretching journeys to look at the wonder,5The footprints of the foeman. Few of the warriorsFew warriors lamentedGrendel’sdestruction.Who gazed on the foot-tracks of the inglorious creatureHis parting from life pained very deeply,How, weary in spirit, off from those regionsIn combats conquered he carried his traces,10Fated and flying, to the flood of the nickers.Grendel’s blooddyes the waters.There in bloody billows bubbled the currents,The angry eddy was everywhere mingledAnd seething with gore, welling with sword-blood;1He death-doomed had hid him, when reaved of his joyance15He laid down his life in the lair he had fled to,His heathenish spirit, where hell did receive him.Thence the friends from of old backward turned them,And many a younker from merry adventure,Striding their stallions, stout from the seaward,20Heroes on horses. There were heard very oftenBeowulf is the heroof the hour.Beowulf’s praises; many often assertedThat neither south nor north, in the circuit of waters,He is regarded as aprobable successorto Hrothgar.O’er outstretching earth-plain, none other was better’Mid bearers of war-shields, more worthy to govern,25’Neath the arch of the ether. Not any, however,’Gainst the friend-lord muttered, mocking-words utteredBut no word isuttered to derogatefrom the old kingOf Hrothgar the gracious (a good king he).Oft the famed ones permitted their fallow-skinned horses[31]To run in rivalry, racing and chasing,30Where the fieldways appeared to them fair and inviting,Known for their excellence; oft a thane of the folk-lord,2The gleeman singsthe deeds of heroes.3A man of celebrity, mindful of rhythms,Who ancient traditions treasured in memory,New word-groups found properly bound:35The bard after ’gan then Beowulf’s ventureHe sings in alliterativemeasures ofBeowulf’s prowess.Wisely to tell of, and words that were cleverTo utter skilfully, earnestly speaking,Everything told he that he heard as to Sigmund’sAlso of Sigemund,who has slain agreat fire-dragon.Mighty achievements, many things hidden,40The strife of the Wælsing, the wide-going venturesThe children of men knew of but little,The feud and the fury, but Fitela with him,When suchlike matters he minded to speak of,Uncle to nephew, as in every contention45Each to other was ever devoted:A numerous host of the race of the scathersThey had slain with the sword-edge. To Sigmund accrued thenNo little of glory, when his life-days were over,Since he sturdy in struggle had destroyed the great dragon,50The hoard-treasure’s keeper; ’neath the hoar-grayish stone he,The son of the atheling, unaided adventuredThe perilous project; not present was Fitela,Yet the fortune befell him of forcing his weaponThrough the marvellous dragon, that it stood in the wall,55Well-honored weapon; the worm was slaughtered.The great one had gained then by his glorious achievementTo reap from the ring-hoard richest enjoyment,[32]As best it did please him: his vessel he loaded,Shining ornaments on the ship’s bosom carried,60Kinsman of Wæls: the drake in heat melted.Sigemund waswidely famed.He was farthest famed of fugitive pilgrims,Mid wide-scattered world-folk, for works of great prowess,War-troopers’ shelter: hence waxed he in honor.4Heremod, an unfortunateDanishking, is introducedby way of contrast.Afterward Heremod’s hero-strength failed him,65His vigor and valor. ’Mid venomous hatersTo the hands of foemen he was foully delivered,Offdriven early. Agony-billowsUnlike Sigemundand Beowulf, Heremodwas a burdento his people.Oppressed him too long, to his people he became then,To all the athelings, an ever-great burden;70And the daring one’s journey in days of yoreMany wise men were wont to deplore,Such as hoped he would bring them help in their sorrow,That the son of their ruler should rise into power,Holding the headship held by his fathers,75Should govern the people, the gold-hoard and borough,The kingdom of heroes, the realm of the Scyldings.Beowulf is anhonor to his race.He to all men became then far more beloved,Higelac’s kinsman, to kindreds and races,To his friends much dearer; him malice assaulted.—The story is resumed.80Oft running and racing on roadsters they measuredThe dun-colored highways. Then the light of the morningWas hurried and hastened. Went henchmen in numbersTo the beautiful building, bold ones in spirit,To look at the wonder; the liegelord himself then85From his wife-bower wending, warden of treasures,Glorious trod with troopers unnumbered,Famed for his virtues, and with him the queen-wifeMeasured the mead-ways, with maidens attending.[1] S. emends, suggesting ‘déop’ for ‘déog,’ and removing semicolon after‘wéol.’ The two half-lines ‘welling … hid him’ would then read: Thebloody deep welled with sword-gore. B. accepts ‘déop’ for ‘déog,’ but reads‘déað-fæges’: The deep boiled with the sword-gore of the death-doomed one.[2] Another and quite different rendering of this passage is as follows: Ofta liegeman of the king, a fame-covered man mindful of songs, who very manyancient traditions remembered (he found other word-groups accurately boundtogether) began afterward to tell of Beowulf’s adventure, skilfully to narrateit, etc.[3] Might ‘guma gilp-hladen’ mean ‘a man laden with boasts of the deedsof others’?[4] t.B. accepts B.’s ‘hé þæs áron þáh’ as given by H.-So., but puts a commaafter ‘þáh,’ and takes ‘siððan’ as introducing a dependent clause: He throvein honor since Heremod’s strength … had decreased.[33]XV.HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.Hrothgar discoursed (to the hall-building went he,He stood by the pillar,1 saw the steep-rising hall-roofGleaming with gold-gems, and Grendel his hand there):Hrothgar givesthanks for theoverthrow of themonster.“For the sight we behold now, thanks to the Wielder5Early be offered! Much evil I bided,Snaring from Grendel:2 God can e’er ’complishWonder on wonder, Wielder of Glory!I had given up allhope, when thisbrave liegemancame to our aid.But lately I reckoned ne’er under heavenComfort to gain me for any of sorrows,10While the handsomest of houses horrid with bloodstainGory uptowered; grief had offfrightened3Each of the wise ones who weened not that everThe folk-troop’s defences ’gainst foes they should strengthen,’Gainst sprites and monsters. Through the might of the Wielder15A doughty retainer hath a deed now accomplishedWhich erstwhile we all with our excellent wisdomIf his mother yetliveth, well mayshe thank God forthis son.Failed to perform. May affirm very trulyWhat woman soever in all of the nationsGave birth to the child, if yet she surviveth,20That the long-ruling Lord was lavish to herwardIn the birth of the bairn. Now, Beowulf dear,Hereafter, Beowulf,thou shalt bemy son.Most excellent hero, I’ll love thee in spiritAs bairn of my body; bear well henceforwardThe relationship new. No lack shall befall thee25Of earth-joys any I ever can give thee.Full often for lesser service I’ve given[34]Hero less hardy hoard-treasure precious,Thou hast won immortaldistinction.To a weaker in war-strife. By works of distinctionThou hast gained for thyself now that thy glory shall flourish30Forever and ever. The All-Ruler quite theeWith good from His hand as He hitherto did thee!”Beowulf replies:I was most happyto render thee thisservice.Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s offspring:“That labor of glory most gladly achieved we,The combat accomplished, unquailing we ventured35The enemy’s grapple; I would grant it much ratherThou wert able to look at the creature in person,Faint unto falling, the foe in his trappings!On murder-bed quickly I minded to bind him,With firm-holding fetters, that forced by my grapple40Low he should lie in life-and-death struggle’Less his body escape; I was wholly unable,I could not keepthe monster fromescaping, as Goddid not will that Ishould.Since God did not will it, to keep him from going,Not held him that firmly, hated opposer;Too swift was the foeman. Yet safety regarding45He suffered his hand behind him to linger,His arm and shoulder, to act as watcher;He left his handand arm behind.No shadow of solace the woe-begone creatureFound him there nathless: the hated destroyerLiveth no longer, lashed for his evils,50But sorrow hath seized him, in snare-meshes hath himClose in its clutches, keepeth him writhingIn baleful bonds: there banished for evilThe man shall wait for the mighty tribunal,God will give himhis deserts.How the God of glory shall give him his earnings.”55Then the soldier kept silent, son of old Ecglaf,Unferth has nothingmore to say,for Beowulf’s actionsspeak louderthan words.From boasting and bragging of battle-achievements,Since the princes beheld there the hand that depended’Neath the lofty hall-timbers by the might of the nobleman,Each one before him, the enemy’s fingers;60Each finger-nail strong steel most resembled,The heathen one’s hand-spur, the hero-in-battle’sClaw most uncanny; quoth they agreeing,[35]No sword willharm the monster.That not any excellent edges of brave onesWas willing to touch him, the terrible creature’s65Battle-hand bloody to bear away from him.[1] B. and t.B. read ‘staþole,’ and translate stood on the floor.[2] For ‘snaring from Grendel,’ ‘sorrows at Grendel’s hands’ has been suggested.This gives a parallel to ‘láðes.’ ‘Grynna’ may well be gen. pl. of‘gyrn,’ by a scribal slip.[3] The H.-So punctuation has been followed; but B. has been followed inunderstanding ‘gehwylcne’ as object of ‘wíd-scofen (hæfde).’ Gr. construes‘wéa’ as nom abs.XVI.HROTHGAR LAVISHES GIFTS UPON HIS DELIVERER.Heorot is adornedwith hands.Then straight was ordered that Heorot inside1With hands be embellished: a host of them gathered,Of men and women, who the wassailing-buildingThe guest-hall begeared. Gold-flashing sparkled5Webs on the walls then, of wonders a manyTo each of the heroes that look on such objects.The hall is defaced,however.The beautiful building was broken to piecesWhich all within with irons was fastened,Its hinges torn off: only the roof was10Whole and uninjured when the horrible creatureOutlawed for evil off had betaken him,Hopeless of living. ’Tis hard to avoid it[A vague passageof five verses.](Whoever will do it!); but he doubtless must come to2The place awaiting, as Wyrd hath appointed,15Soul-bearers, earth-dwellers, earls under heaven,Where bound on its bed his body shall slumberHrothgar goes tothe banquet.When feasting is finished. Full was the time thenThat the son of Healfdene went to the building;[36]The excellent atheling would eat of the banquet.20Ne’er heard I that people with hero-band largerBare them better tow’rds their bracelet-bestower.The laden-with-glory stooped to the bench then(Their kinsmen-companions in plenty were joyful,Many a cupful quaffing complaisantly),25Doughty of spirit in the high-tow’ring palace,Hrothgar’snephew, Hrothulf,is present.Hrothgar and Hrothulf. Heorot then insideWas filled with friendly ones; falsehood and treacheryThe Folk-Scyldings now nowise did practise.Hrothgar lavishesgifts upon Beowulf.Then the offspring of Healfdene offered to Beowulf30A golden standard, as reward for the victory,A banner embossed, burnie and helmet;Many men saw then a song-famous weaponBorne ’fore the hero. Beowulf drank ofThe cup in the building; that treasure-bestowing35He needed not blush for in battle-men’s presence.Four handsomergifts were neverpresented.Ne’er heard I that many men on the ale-benchIn friendlier fashion to their fellows presentedFour bright jewels with gold-work embellished.’Round the roof of the helmet a head-guarder outside40Braided with wires, with bosses was furnished,That swords-for-the-battle fight-hardened might failBoldly to harm him, when the hero proceededHrothgar commandsthat eightfinely caparisonedsteeds be broughtto Beowulf.Forth against foemen. The defender of earls thenCommanded that eight steeds with bridles45Gold-plated, gleaming, be guided to hallward,Inside the building; on one of them stood thenAn art-broidered saddle embellished with jewels;’Twas the sovereign’s seat, when the son of King HealfdeneWas pleased to take part in the play of the edges;50The famous one’s valor ne’er failed at the front whenSlain ones were bowing. And to Beowulf grantedThe prince of the Ingwins, power over both,O’er war-steeds and weapons; bade him well to enjoy them.In so manly a manner the mighty-famed chieftain,[37]55Hoard-ward of heroes, with horses and jewelsWar-storms requited, that none e’er condemnethWho willeth to tell truth with full justice.[1] Kl. suggests ‘hroden’ for ‘háten,’ and renders: Then quickly wasHeorot adorned within, with hands bedecked.—B. suggests ‘gefrætwon’ insteadof ‘gefrætwod,’ and renders: Then was it commanded to adorn Heorotwithin quickly with hands.—The former has the advantage of affording aparallel to ‘gefrætwod’: both have the disadvantage of altering the text.[2] The passage 1005-1009 seems to be hopeless. One difficult point is tofind a subject for ‘gesacan.’ Some say ‘he’; others supply ‘each,’ i.e., everysoul-bearer … must gain the inevitable place. The genitives in this case arepartitive.—If ‘he’ be subj., the genitives are dependent on ‘gearwe’ (= prepared).—The‘he’ itself is disputed, some referring it to Grendel; but B.takes it as involved in the parenthesis.XVII.BANQUET (continued).—THE SCOP’S SONG OF FINN AND HNÆF.Each of Beowulf’scompanions receivesa costly gift.And the atheling of earlmen to each of the heroesWho the ways of the waters went with Beowulf,A costly gift-token gave on the mead-bench,Offered an heirloom, and ordered that that manThe warrior killedby Grendel is to bepaid for in gold.5With gold should be paid for, whom Grendel had erstwhileWickedly slaughtered, as he more of them had doneHad far-seeing God and the mood of the heroThe fate not averted: the Father then governedAll of the earth-dwellers, as He ever is doing;10Hence insight for all men is everywhere fittest,Forethought of spirit! much he shall sufferOf lief and of loathsome who long in this presentUseth the world in this woful existence.There was music and merriment mingling togetherHrothgar’s scoprecalls events inthe reign of hislord’s father.15Touching Healfdene’s leader; the joy-wood was fingered,Measures recited, when the singer of HrothgarOn mead-bench should mention the merry hall-joyanceOf the kinsmen of Finn, when onset surprised them:Hnæf, the Danishgeneral, is treacherouslyattackedwhile staying atFinn’s castle.“The Half-Danish hero, Hnæf of the Scyldings,20On the field of the Frisians was fated to perish.Sure Hildeburg needed not mention approvingThe faith of the Jutemen: though blameless entirely,Queen Hildeburgis not only wife ofFinn, but a kinswomanof the murderedHnæf.When shields were shivered she was shorn of her darlings,Of bairns and brothers: they bent to their fate25With war-spear wounded; woe was that woman.Not causeless lamented the daughter of HoceThe decree of the Wielder when morning-light came andShe was able ’neath heaven to behold the destruction[38]Of brothers and bairns, where the brightest of earth-joysFinn’s force is almostexterminated.30She had hitherto had: all the henchmen of FinnWar had offtaken, save a handful remaining,That he nowise was able to offer resistance1Hengest succeedsHnæf as Danishgeneral.To the onset of Hengest in the parley of battle,Nor the wretched remnant to rescue in war from35The earl of the atheling; but they offered conditions,Compact betweenthe Frisians and theDanes.Another great building to fully make ready,A hall and a high-seat, that half they might rule withThe sons of the Jutemen, and that Folcwalda’s son wouldDay after day the Danemen honor40When gifts were giving, and grant of his ring-storeTo Hengest’s earl-troop ever so freely,Of his gold-plated jewels, as he encouraged the FrisiansEquality of giftsagreed on.On the bench of the beer-hall. On both sides they swore thenA fast-binding compact; Finn unto Hengest45With no thought of revoking vowed then most solemnlyThe woe-begone remnant well to take charge of,His Witan advising; the agreement should no oneBy words or works weaken and shatter,By artifice ever injure its value,50Though reaved of their ruler their ring-giver’s slayerThey followed as vassals, Fate so requiring:No one shall referto old grudges.Then if one of the Frisians the quarrel should speak ofIn tones that were taunting, terrible edgesShould cut in requital. Accomplished the oath was,55And treasure of gold from the hoard was uplifted.Danish warriorsare burned on afuneral-pyre.The best of the Scylding braves was then fullyPrepared for the pile; at the pyre was seen clearlyThe blood-gory burnie, the boar with his gilding,The iron-hard swine, athelings many60Fatally wounded; no few had been slaughtered.Hildeburg bade then, at the burning of Hnæf,[39]Queen Hildeburghas her son burntalong with Hnæf.The bairn of her bosom to bear to the fire,That his body be burned and borne to the pyre.The woe-stricken woman wept on his shoulder,265In measures lamented; upmounted the hero.3The greatest of dead-fires curled to the welkin,On the hill’s-front crackled; heads were a-melting,Wound-doors bursting, while the blood was a-coursingFrom body-bite fierce. The fire devoured them,70Greediest of spirits, whom war had offcarriedFrom both of the peoples; their bravest were fallen.[1] For 1084, R. suggests ‘wiht Hengeste wið gefeohtan.’—K. suggests ‘wiðHengeste wiht gefeohtan.’ Neither emendation would make any essentialchange in the translation.[2] The separation of adjective and noun by a phrase (cf. v. 1118) being veryunusual, some scholars have put ‘earme on eaxle’ with the foregoing lines,inserting a semicolon after ‘eaxle.’ In this case ‘on eaxe’ (i.e., on the ashes,cinders) is sometimes read, and this affords a parallel to ‘on bæl.’ Let us hopethat a satisfactory rendering shall yet be reached without resorting to any tamperingwith the text, such as Lichtenheld proposed: ‘earme ides on eaxle gnornode.’[3] For ‘gúð-rinc,’ ‘gúð-réc,’ battle-smoke, has been suggested.XVIII.THE FINN EPISODE (continued).—THE BANQUET CONTINUES.The survivors goto Friesland, thehome of Finn.“Then the warriors departed to go to their dwellings,Reaved of their friends, Friesland to visit,Their homes and high-city. Hengest continuedHengest remainsthere all winter,unable to get away.Biding with Finn the blood-tainted winter,5Wholly unsundered;1 of fatherland thought heThough unable to drive the ring-stemmèd vessel[40]O’er the ways of the waters; the wave-deeps were tossing,Fought with the wind; winter in ice-bondsClosed up the currents, till there came to the dwelling10A year in its course, as yet it revolveth,If season propitious one alway regardeth,World-cheering weathers. Then winter was gone,Earth’s bosom was lovely; the exile would get him,He devisesschemes of vengeance.The guest from the palace; on grewsomest vengeance15He brooded more eager than on oversea journeys,Whe’r onset-of-anger he were able to ’complish,The bairns of the Jutemen therein to remember.Nowise refused he the duties of liegemanWhen Hun of the Frisians the battle-sword Láfing,20Fairest of falchions, friendly did give him:Its edges were famous in folk-talk of Jutland.And savage sword-fury seized in its clutchesBold-mooded Finn where he bode in his palace,Guthlaf and Oslafrevenge Hnæf’sslaughter.When the grewsome grapple Guthlaf and Oslaf25Had mournfully mentioned, the mere-journey over,For sorrows half-blamed him; the flickering spiritCould not bide in his bosom. Then the building was covered2Finn is slain.With corpses of foemen, and Finn too was slaughtered,The king with his comrades, and the queen made a prisoner.The jewels of Finn,and his queen arecarried away bythe Danes.30The troops of the Scyldings bore to their vesselsAll that the land-king had in his palace,Such trinkets and treasures they took as, on searching,At Finn’s they could find. They ferried to DanelandThe excellent woman on oversea journey,The lay is concluded,and themain story is resumed.35Led her to their land-folk.” The lay was concluded,The gleeman’s recital. Shouts again rose then,Bench-glee resounded, bearers then offeredSkinkers carryround the beaker.Wine from wonder-vats. Wealhtheo advanced thenGoing ’neath gold-crown, where the good ones were seated[41]Queen WealhtheowgreetsHrothgar, as hesits beside Hrothulf,his nephew.40Uncle and nephew; their peace was yet mutual,True each to the other. And Unferth the spokesmanSat at the feet of the lord of the Scyldings:Each trusted his spirit that his mood was courageous,Though at fight he had failed in faith to his kinsmen.45Said the queen of the Scyldings: “My lord and protector,Treasure-bestower, take thou this beaker;Joyance attend thee, gold-friend of heroes,Be generous tothe Geats.And greet thou the Geatmen with gracious responses!So ought one to do. Be kind to the Geatmen,50In gifts not niggardly; anear and afar nowPeace thou enjoyest. Report hath informed meThou’lt have for a bairn the battle-brave hero.Now is Heorot cleansèd, ring-palace gleaming;Have as much joyas possible in thyhall, once morepurified.Give while thou mayest many rewards,55And bequeath to thy kinsmen kingdom and people,On wending thy way to the Wielder’s splendor.I know good Hrothulf, that the noble young troopersI know that Hrothulfwill prove faithfulif he survivethee.He’ll care for and honor, lord of the Scyldings,If earth-joys thou endest earlier than he doth;60I reckon that recompense he’ll render with kindnessOur offspring and issue, if that all he remember,What favors of yore, when he yet was an infant,We awarded to him for his worship and pleasure.”Then she turned by the bench where her sons were carousing,65Hrethric and Hrothmund, and the heroes’ offspring,Beowulf is sittingby the two royalsons.The war-youth together; there the good one was sitting’Twixt the brothers twain, Beowulf Geatman.[1] For 1130 (1) R. and Gr. suggest ‘elne unflitme’ as 1098 (1) reads. Thelatter verse is undisputed; and, for the former, ‘elne’ would be as possible as‘ealles,’ and ‘unflitme’ is well supported. Accepting ‘elne unflitme’ for both,I would suggest ‘very peaceably’ for both places: (1) Finn to Hengest verypeaceably vowed with oaths, etc. (2) Hengest then still the slaughter-stainedwinter remained there with Finn very peaceably. The two passages becomethus correlatives, the second a sequel of the first. ‘Elne,’ in the sense of very(swíðe), needs no argument; and ‘unflitme’ (from ‘flítan’) can, it seems tome, be more plausibly rendered ‘peaceful,’ ‘peaceable,’ than ‘contestable,’ or‘conquerable.’[2] Some scholars have proposed ‘roden’; the line would then read: Thenthe building was reddened, etc., instead of ‘covered.’ The ‘h’ may have beencarried over from the three alliterating ‘h’s.’XIX.BEOWULF RECEIVES FURTHER HONOR.More gifts are offeredBeowulf.A beaker was borne him, and bidding to quaff itGraciously given, and gold that was twistedPleasantly proffered, a pair of arm-jewels,[42]Rings and corslet, of collars the greatest5I’ve heard of ’neath heaven. Of heroes not anyMore splendid from jewels have I heard ’neath the welkin,A famous necklaceis referred to, incomparison withthe gems presentedto Beowulf.Since Hama off bore the Brosingmen’s necklace,The bracteates and jewels, from the bright-shining city,1Eormenric’s cunning craftiness fled from,10Chose gain everlasting. Geatish Higelac,Grandson of Swerting, last had this jewelWhen tramping ’neath banner the treasure he guarded,The field-spoil defended; Fate offcarried himWhen for deeds of daring he endured tribulation,15Hate from the Frisians; the ornaments bare heO’er the cup of the currents, costly gem-treasures,Mighty folk-leader, he fell ’neath his target;The2 corpse of the king then came into charge ofThe race of the Frankmen, the mail-shirt and collar:20Warmen less noble plundered the fallen,When the fight was finished; the folk of the GeatmenThe field of the dead held in possession.The choicest of mead-halls with cheering resounded.Wealhtheo discoursed, the war-troop addressed she:Queen WealhtheowmagnifiesBeowulf’s achievements.25“This collar enjoy thou, Beowulf worthy,Young man, in safety, and use thou this armor,Gems of the people, and prosper thou fully,Show thyself sturdy and be to these liegemenMild with instruction! I’ll mind thy requital.30Thou hast brought it to pass that far and nearForever and ever earthmen shall honor thee,Even so widely as ocean surroundethThe blustering bluffs. Be, while thou livest,[43]A wealth-blessèd atheling. I wish thee most trulyMay gifts neverfail thee.35Jewels and treasure. Be kind to my son, thouLiving in joyance! Here each of the noblesIs true unto other, gentle in spirit,Loyal to leader. The liegemen are peaceful,The war-troops ready: well-drunken heroes,340Do as I bid ye.” Then she went to the settle.There was choicest of banquets, wine drank the heroes:They little knowof the sorrow instore for them.Weird they knew not, destiny cruel,As to many an earlman early it happened,When evening had come and Hrothgar had parted45Off to his manor, the mighty to slumber.Warriors unnumbered warded the buildingAs erst they did often: the ale-settle bared they,’Twas covered all over with beds and pillows.A doomed thane isthere with them.Doomed unto death, down to his slumber50Bowed then a beer-thane. Their battle-shields placed they,Bright-shining targets, up by their heads then;O’er the atheling on ale-bench ’twas easy to see thereBattle-high helmet, burnie of ring-mail,They were alwaysready for battle.And mighty war-spear. ’Twas the wont of that people55To constantly keep them equipped for the battle,4At home or marching—in either condition—At seasons just such as necessity orderedAs best for their ruler; that people was worthy.[1] C. suggests a semicolon after ‘city,’ with ‘he’ as supplied subject of‘fled’ and ‘chose.’[2] For ‘feorh’ S. suggests ‘feoh’: ‘corpse’ in the translation would thenbe changed to ‘possessions,’ ‘belongings.’ This is a better reading than onejoining, in such intimate syntactical relations, things so unlike as ‘corpse’ and‘jewels.’[3] S. suggests ‘wine-joyous heroes,’ ‘warriors elated with wine.’[4] I believe this translation brings out the meaning of the poet, withoutdeparting seriously from the H.-So. text. ‘Oft’ frequently means ‘constantly,’‘continually,’ not always ‘often.’—Why ‘an (on) wíg gearwe’ should bewritten ‘ánwíg-gearwe’ (= ready for single combat), I cannot see. ‘Gearwe’occurs quite frequently with ‘on’; cf. B. 1110 (ready for the pyre), El. 222(ready for the glad journey). Moreover, what has the idea of single combatto do with B. 1247 ff.? The poet is giving an inventory of the arms andarmor which they lay aside on retiring, and he closes his narration by sayingthat they were always prepared for battle both at home and on the march.[44]XX.THE MOTHER OF GRENDEL.They sank then to slumber. With sorrow one paid forHis evening repose, as often betid themWhile Grendel was holding1 the gold-bedecked palace,Ill-deeds performing, till his end overtook him,5Death for his sins. ’Twas seen very clearly,Grendel’s motheris known to bethirsting for revenge.Known unto earth-folk, that still an avengerOutlived the loathed one, long since the sorrowCaused by the struggle; the mother of Grendel,Devil-shaped woman, her woe ever minded,10Who was held to inhabit the horrible waters,[Grendel’s progenitor,Cain, is againreferred to.]The cold-flowing currents, after Cain had become aSlayer-with-edges to his one only brother,The son of his sire; he set out then banished,Marked as a murderer, man-joys avoiding,15Lived in the desert. Thence demons unnumberedThe poet againmagnifies Beowulf’svalor.Fate-sent awoke; one of them Grendel,Sword-cursèd, hateful, who at Heorot met withA man that was watching, waiting the struggle,Where a horrid one held him with hand-grapple sturdy;20Nathless he minded the might of his body,The glorious gift God had allowed him,And folk-ruling Father’s favor relied on,His help and His comfort: so he conquered the foeman,The hell-spirit humbled: he unhappy departed then,25Reaved of his joyance, journeying to death-haunts,Foeman of man. His mother moreoverGrendel’s mothercomes to avengeher son.Eager and gloomy was anxious to go onHer mournful mission, mindful of vengeanceFor the death of her son. She came then to Heorot[45]30Where the Armor-Dane earlmen all through the buildingWere lying in slumber. Soon there became thenReturn2 to the nobles, when the mother of GrendelEntered the folk-hall; the fear was less grievousBy even so much as the vigor of maidens,35War-strength of women, by warrior is reckoned,When well-carved weapon, worked with the hammer,Blade very bloody, brave with its edges,Strikes down the boar-sign that stands on the helmet.Then the hard-edgèd weapon was heaved in the building,340The brand o’er the benches, broad-lindens manyHand-fast were lifted; for helmet he recked not,For armor-net broad, whom terror laid hold of.She went then hastily, outward would get herHer life for to save, when some one did spy her;She seizes a favoriteliegemen ofHrothgar’s.45Soon she had grappled one of the athelingsFast and firmly, when fenward she hied her;That one to Hrothgar was liefest of heroesIn rank of retainer where waters encircle,A mighty shield-warrior, whom she murdered at slumber,50A broadly-famed battle-knight. Beowulf was absent,Beowulf was asleepin another part ofthe palace.But another apartment was erstwhile devotedTo the glory-decked Geatman when gold was distributed.There was hubbub in Heorot. The hand that was famousShe grasped in its gore;4 grief was renewed then[46]55In homes and houses: ’twas no happy arrangementIn both of the quarters to barter and purchaseWith lives of their friends. Then the well-agèd ruler,The gray-headed war-thane, was woful in spirit,When his long-trusted liegeman lifeless he knew of,Beowulf is sentfor.60His dearest one gone. Quick from a room wasBeowulf brought, brave and triumphant.As day was dawning in the dusk of the morning,He comes atHrothgar’s summons.Went then that earlman, champion noble,Came with comrades, where the clever one bided65Whether God all gracious would grant him a respiteAfter the woe he had suffered. The war-worthy heroWith a troop of retainers trod then the pavement(The hall-building groaned), till he greeted the wise one,Beowulf inquireshow Hrothgar hadenjoyed his night’srest.The earl of the Ingwins;5 asked if the night had70Fully refreshed him, as fain he would have it.[1] Several eminent authorities either read or emend the MS. so as to makethis verse read, While Grendel was wasting the gold-bedecked palace. So 20 15below: ravaged the desert.[2] For ‘sóna’ (1281), t.B. suggests ‘sára,’ limiting ‘edhwyrft.’ Read then:Return of sorrows to the nobles, etc. This emendation supplies the syntacticalgap after ‘edhwyrft.’[3] Some authorities follow Grein’s lexicon in treating ‘heard ecg’ as an adj.limiting ‘sweord’: H.-So. renders it as a subst. (So v. 1491.) The sense ofthe translation would be the same.[4] B. suggests ‘under hróf genam’ (v. 1303). This emendation, as well asan emendation with (?) to v. 739, he offers, because ‘under’ baffles him inboth passages. All we need is to take ‘under’ in its secondary meaning of‘in,’ which, though not given by Grein, occurs in the literature. Cf. Chron.876 (March’s A.-S. Gram. § 355) and Oro. Amaz. I. 10, where ‘under’ = inthe midst of. Cf. modern Eng. ‘in such circumstances,’ which interchangesin good usage with ‘under such circumstances.’[5] For ‘néod-laðu’ (1321) C. suggests ‘néad-láðum,’ and translates: askedwhether the night had been pleasant to him after crushing-hostility.XXI.HROTHGAR’S ACCOUNT OF THE MONSTERS.Hrothgar lamentsthe death of Æschere,his shoulder-companion.Hrothgar rejoined, helm of the Scyldings:“Ask not of joyance! Grief is renewed toThe folk of the Danemen. Dead is Æschere,Yrmenlaf’s brother, older than he,5My true-hearted counsellor, trusty adviser,Shoulder-companion, when fighting in battleOur heads we protected, when troopers were clashing,He was my idealhero.And heroes were dashing; such an earl should be ever,An erst-worthy atheling, as Æschere proved him.10The flickering death-spirit became in HeorotHis hand-to-hand murderer; I can not tell whitherThe cruel one turned in the carcass exulting,[47]This horriblecreature came toavenge Grendel’sdeath.By cramming discovered.1 The quarrel she wreaked then,That last night igone Grendel thou killedst15In grewsomest manner, with grim-holding clutches,Since too long he had lessened my liege-troop and wastedMy folk-men so foully. He fell in the battleWith forfeit of life, and another has followed,A mighty crime-worker, her kinsman avenging,20And henceforth hath ‘stablished her hatred unyielding,2As it well may appear to many a liegeman,Who mourneth in spirit the treasure-bestower,Her heavy heart-sorrow; the hand is now lifelessWhich3 availed you in every wish that you cherished.I have heard myvassals speak ofthese two uncannymonsters who livedin the moors.25Land-people heard I, liegemen, this saying,Dwellers in halls, they had seen very oftenA pair of such mighty march-striding creatures,Far-dwelling spirits, holding the moorlands:One of them wore, as well they might notice,30The image of woman, the other one wretchedIn guise of a man wandered in exile,Except he was huger than any of earthmen;Earth-dwelling people entitled him GrendelIn days of yore: they know not their father,35Whe’r ill-going spirits any were borne himThe inhabit themost desolate andhorrible places.Ever before. They guard the wolf-coverts,Lands inaccessible, wind-beaten nesses,Fearfullest fen-deeps, where a flood from the mountains’Neath mists of the nesses netherward rattles,40The stream under earth: not far is it hencewardMeasured by mile-lengths that the mere-water standeth,Which forests hang over, with frost-whiting covered,4[48]A firm-rooted forest, the floods overshadow.There ever at night one an ill-meaning portent45A fire-flood may see; ’mong children of menNone liveth so wise that wot of the bottom;Though harassed by hounds the heath-stepper seek for,Even the houndeddeer will not seekrefuge in these uncannyregions.Fly to the forest, firm-antlered he-deer,Spurred from afar, his spirit he yieldeth,50His life on the shore, ere in he will ventureTo cover his head. Uncanny the place is:Thence upward ascendeth the surging of waters,Wan to the welkin, when the wind is stirringThe weathers unpleasing, till the air groweth gloomy,To thee only can Ilook for assistance.55And the heavens lower. Now is help to be gottenFrom thee and thee only! The abode thou know’st not,The dangerous place where thou’rt able to meet withThe sin-laden hero: seek if thou darest!For the feud I will fully fee thee with money,60With old-time treasure, as erstwhile I did thee,With well-twisted jewels, if away thou shalt get thee.”[1] For ‘gefrægnod’ (1334), K. and t.B. suggest ‘gefægnod,’ rendering‘rejoicing in her fill.’ This gives a parallel to ‘æse wlanc’ (1333).[2] The line ‘And … yielding,’ B. renders: And she has performed a deedof blood-vengeance whose effect is far-reaching.[3] ‘Sé Þe’ (1345) is an instance of masc. rel. with fem. antecedent. Sov. 1888, where ‘sé Þe’ refers to ‘yldo.’[4] For ‘hrímge’ in the H.-So. edition, Gr. and others read ‘hrínde’(=hrínende), and translate: which rustling forests overhang.XXII.BEOWULF SEEKS GRENDEL’S MOTHER.Beowulf answered, Ecgtheow’s son:Beowulf exhortsthe old king toarouse himself foraction.“Grieve not, O wise one! for each it is better,His friend to avenge than with vehemence wail him;Each of us must the end-day abide of5His earthly existence; who is able accomplishGlory ere death! To battle-thane nobleLifeless lying, ’tis at last most fitting.Arise, O king, quick let us hastenTo look at the footprint of the kinsman of Grendel!10I promise thee this now: to his place he’ll escape not,To embrace of the earth, nor to mountainous forest,Nor to depths of the ocean, wherever he wanders.[49]Practice thou now patient enduranceOf each of thy sorrows, as I hope for thee soothly!”Hrothgar rouseshimself. His horseis brought.15Then up sprang the old one, the All-Wielder thanked he,Ruler Almighty, that the man had outspoken.Then for Hrothgar a war-horse was decked with a bridle,Curly-maned courser. The clever folk-leaderThey start on thetrack of the femalemonster.Stately proceeded: stepped then an earl-troop20Of linden-wood bearers. Her footprints were seen thenWidely in wood-paths, her way o’er the bottoms,Where she faraway fared o’er fen-country murky,Bore away breathless the best of retainersWho pondered with Hrothgar the welfare of country.25The son of the athelings then went o’er the stony,Declivitous cliffs, the close-covered passes,Narrow passages, paths unfrequented,Nesses abrupt, nicker-haunts many;One of a few of wise-mooded heroes,30He onward advanced to view the surroundings,Till he found unawares woods of the mountainO’er hoar-stones hanging, holt-wood unjoyful;The water stood under, welling and gory.’Twas irksome in spirit to all of the Danemen,35Friends of the Scyldings, to many a liegemanThe sight ofÆschere’s headcauses them greatsorrow.Sad to be suffered, a sorrow unlittleTo each of the earlmen, when to Æschere’s head theyCame on the cliff. The current was seethingWith blood and with gore (the troopers gazed on it).40The horn anon sang the battle-song ready.The troop were all seated; they saw ’long the water thenThe water is filledwith serpents andsea-dragons.Many a serpent, mere-dragons wondrousTrying the waters, nickers a-lyingOn the cliffs of the nesses, which at noonday full often45Go on the sea-deeps their sorrowful journey,Wild-beasts and wormkind; away then they hastenedOne of them iskilled by Beowulf.Hot-mooded, hateful, they heard the great clamor,The war-trumpet winding. One did the Geat-prince[50]Sunder from earth-joys, with arrow from bowstring,50From his sea-struggle tore him, that the trusty war-missileThe dead beast is apoor swimmerPierced to his vitals; he proved in the currentsLess doughty at swimming whom death had offcarried.Soon in the waters the wonderful swimmerWas straitened most sorely with sword-pointed boar-spears,55Pressed in the battle and pulled to the cliff-edge;The liegemen then looked on the loath-fashioned stranger.Beowulf preparesfor a struggle withthe monster.Beowulf donned then his battle-equipments,Cared little for life; inlaid and most ample,The hand-woven corslet which could cover his body,60Must the wave-deeps explore, that war might be powerlessTo harm the great hero, and the hating one’s grasp mightNot peril his safety; his head was protectedBy the light-flashing helmet that should mix with the bottoms,Trying the eddies, treasure-emblazoned,65Encircled with jewels, as in seasons long pastThe weapon-smith worked it, wondrously made it,With swine-bodies fashioned it, that thenceforward no longerBrand might bite it, and battle-sword hurt it.And that was not least of helpers in prowessHe has Unferth’ssword in his hand.70That Hrothgar’s spokesman had lent him when straitened;And the hilted hand-sword was Hrunting entitled,Old and most excellent ’mong all of the treasures;Its blade was of iron, blotted with poison,Hardened with gore; it failed not in battle75Any hero under heaven in hand who it brandished,Who ventured to take the terrible journeys,The battle-field sought; not the earliest occasionThat deeds of daring ’twas destined to ’complish.Unferth has littleuse for swords.Ecglaf’s kinsman minded not soothly,80Exulting in strength, what erst he had spokenDrunken with wine, when the weapon he lent toA sword-hero bolder; himself did not venture’Neath the strife of the currents his life to endanger,[51]To fame-deeds perform; there he forfeited glory,85Repute for his strength. Not so with the otherWhen he clad in his corslet had equipped him for battle.XXIII.BEOWULF’S FIGHT WITH GRENDEL’S MOTHER.Beowulf makes aparting speech toHrothgar.Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:“Recall now, oh, famous kinsman of Healfdene,Prince very prudent, now to part I am ready,Gold-friend of earlmen, what erst we agreed on,If I fail, act as akind liegelord tomy thanes,5Should I lay down my life in lending thee assistance,When my earth-joys were over, thou wouldst evermore serve meIn stead of a father; my faithful thanemen,My trusty retainers, protect thou and care for,Fall I in battle: and, Hrothgar belovèd,and send Higelacthe jewels thouhast given me10Send unto Higelac the high-valued jewelsThou to me hast allotted. The lord of the GeatmenMay perceive from the gold, the Hrethling may see itI should like myking to know howgenerous a lord Ifound thee to be.When he looks on the jewels, that a gem-giver found IGood over-measure, enjoyed him while able.15And the ancient heirloom Unferth permit thou,The famed one to have, the heavy-sword splendid1The hard-edgèd weapon; with Hrunting to aid me,I shall gain me glory, or grim-death shall take me.”Beowulf is eagerfor the fray.The atheling of Geatmen uttered these words and20Heroic did hasten, not any rejoinderWas willing to wait for; the wave-current swallowedHe is a whole dayreaching the bottomof the sea.The doughty-in-battle. Then a day’s-length elapsed ereHe was able to see the sea at its bottom.Early she found then who fifty of winters25The course of the currents kept in her fury,Grisly and greedy, that the grim one’s dominion[52]Grendel’s motherknows that someone has reachedher domains.Some one of men from above was exploring.Forth did she grab them, grappled the warriorWith horrible clutches; yet no sooner she injured30His body unscathèd: the burnie out-guarded,That she proved but powerless to pierce through the armor,The limb-mail locked, with loath-grabbing fingers.The sea-wolf bare then, when bottomward came she,She grabs him,and bears him toher den.The ring-prince homeward, that he after was powerless35(He had daring to do it) to deal with his weapons,But many a mere-beast tormented him swimming,Sea-monsters biteand strike him.Flood-beasts no few with fierce-biting tusks didBreak through his burnie, the brave one pursued they.The earl then discovered he was down in some cavern40Where no water whatever anywise harmed him,And the clutch of the current could come not anear him,Since the roofed-hall prevented; brightness a-gleamingFire-light he saw, flashing resplendent.The good one saw then the sea-bottom’s monster,Beowulf attacksthe mother ofGrendel.45The mighty mere-woman; he made a great onsetWith weapon-of-battle, his hand not desistedFrom striking, that war-blade struck on her head thenA battle-song greedy. The stranger perceived thenThe sword will notbite.The sword would not bite, her life would not injure,50But the falchion failed the folk-prince when straitened:Erst had it often onsets encountered,Oft cloven the helmet, the fated one’s armor:’Twas the first time that ever the excellent jewelHad failed of its fame. Firm-mooded after,55Not heedless of valor, but mindful of glory,Was Higelac’s kinsman; the hero-chief angryCast then his carved-sword covered with jewelsThat it lay on the earth, hard and steel-pointed;The hero throwsdown all weapons,and again truststo his hand-grip.He hoped in his strength, his hand-grapple sturdy.60So any must act whenever he thinkethTo gain him in battle glory unending,And is reckless of living. The lord of the War-Geats[53](He shrank not from battle) seized by the shoulder2The mother of Grendel; then mighty in struggle65Swung he his enemy, since his anger was kindled,That she fell to the floor. With furious grappleBeowulf falls.She gave him requital3 early thereafter,And stretched out to grab him; the strongest of warriorsFaint-mooded stumbled, till he fell in his traces,The monster sitson him with drawnsword.70Foot-going champion. Then she sat on the hall-guestAnd wielded her war-knife wide-bladed, flashing,For her son would take vengeance, her one only bairn.His armor saveshis life.His breast-armor woven bode on his shoulder;It guarded his life, the entrance defended75’Gainst sword-point and edges. Ecgtheow’s son thereHad fatally journeyed, champion of Geatmen,In the arms of the ocean, had the armor not given,Close-woven corslet, comfort and succor,God arranged forhis escape.And had God most holy not awarded the victory,80All-knowing Lord; easily did heaven’sRuler most righteous arrange it with justice;4Uprose he erect ready for battle.[1] Kl. emends ‘wæl-sweord.’ The half-line would then read, ‘the battle-swordsplendid.’—For ‘heard-ecg’ in next half-verse, see note to 20 39 above.[2] Sw., R., and t.B. suggest ‘feaxe’ for ‘eaxle’ (1538) and render: Seizedby the hair.[3] If ‘hand-léan’ be accepted (as the MS. has it), the line will read: Shehand-reward gave him early thereafter.[4] Sw. and S. change H.-So.’s semicolon (v. 1557) to a comma, and translate:The Ruler of Heaven arranged it in justice easily, after he aroseagain.XXIV.BEOWULF IS DOUBLE-CONQUEROR.Beowulf grasps agiant-sword,Then he saw mid the war-gems a weapon of victory,An ancient giant-sword, of edges a-doughty,Glory of warriors: of weapons ’twas choicest,Only ’twas larger than any man else was[54]5Able to bear to the battle-encounter,The good and splendid work of the giants.He grasped then the sword-hilt, knight of the Scyldings,Bold and battle-grim, brandished his ring-sword,Hopeless of living, hotly he smote her,10That the fiend-woman’s neck firmly it grappled,and fells the femalemonster.Broke through her bone-joints, the bill fully pierced herFate-cursèd body, she fell to the ground then:The hand-sword was bloody, the hero exulted.The brand was brilliant, brightly it glimmered,15Just as from heaven gemlike shinethThe torch of the firmament. He glanced ’long the building,And turned by the wall then, Higelac’s vassalRaging and wrathful raised his battle-swordStrong by the handle. The edge was not useless20To the hero-in-battle, but he speedily wished toGive Grendel requital for the many assaults heHad worked on the West-Danes not once, but often,When he slew in slumber the subjects of Hrothgar,Swallowed down fifteen sleeping retainers25Of the folk of the Danemen, and fully as manyCarried away, a horrible prey.He gave him requital, grim-raging champion,Beowulf sees thebody of Grendel,and cuts off hishead.When he saw on his rest-place weary of conflictGrendel lying, of life-joys bereavèd,30As the battle at Heorot erstwhile had scathed him;His body far bounded, a blow when he suffered,Death having seized him, sword-smiting heavy,And he cut off his head then. Early this noticedThe clever carles who as comrades of HrothgarThe waters aregory.35Gazed on the sea-deeps, that the surging wave-currentsWere mightily mingled, the mere-flood was gory:Of the good one the gray-haired together held converse,Beowulf is givenup for dead.The hoary of head, that they hoped not to see againThe atheling ever, that exulting in victory40He’d return there to visit the distinguished folk-ruler:[55]Then many concluded the mere-wolf had killed him.1The ninth hour came then. From the ness-edge departedThe bold-mooded Scyldings; the gold-friend of heroesHomeward betook him. The strangers sat down then45Soul-sick, sorrowful, the sea-waves regarding:They wished and yet weened not their well-loved friend-lordThe giant-swordmelts.To see any more. The sword-blade began then,The blood having touched it, contracting and shrivelingWith battle-icicles; ’twas a wonderful marvel50That it melted entirely, likest to ice whenThe Father unbindeth the bond of the frost andUnwindeth the wave-bands, He who wieldeth dominionOf times and of tides: a truth-firm Creator.Nor took he of jewels more in the dwelling,55Lord of the Weders, though they lay all around him,Than the head and the handle handsome with jewels;[56]The brand early melted, burnt was the weapon:2So hot was the blood, the strange-spirit poisonousThe hero swimsback to the realmsof day.That in it did perish. He early swam off then60Who had bided in combat the carnage of haters,Went up through the ocean; the eddies were cleansèd,The spacious expanses, when the spirit from farlandHis life put aside and this short-lived existence.The seamen’s defender came swimming to land then65Doughty of spirit, rejoiced in his sea-gift,The bulky burden which he bore in his keeping.The excellent vassals advanced then to meet him,To God they were grateful, were glad in their chieftain,That to see him safe and sound was granted them.70From the high-minded hero, then, helmet and burnieWere speedily loosened: the ocean was putrid,The water ’neath welkin weltered with gore.Forth did they fare, then, their footsteps retracing,Merry and mirthful, measured the earth-way,75The highway familiar: men very daring3Bare then the head from the sea-cliff, burdeningEach of the earlmen, excellent-valiant.It takes four mento carry Grendel’shead on a spear.Four of them had to carry with laborThe head of Grendel to the high towering gold-hall80Upstuck on the spear, till fourteen most-valiantAnd battle-brave Geatmen came there goingStraight to the palace: the prince of the peopleMeasured the mead-ways, their mood-brave companion.The atheling of earlmen entered the building,85Deed-valiant man, adorned with distinction,Doughty shield-warrior, to address King Hrothgar:[57]Then hung by the hair, the head of GrendelWas borne to the building, where beer-thanes were drinking,Loth before earlmen and eke ’fore the lady:90The warriors beheld then a wonderful sight.[1] ‘Þæs monige gewearð’ (1599) and ‘hafað þæs geworden’ (2027).—In apaper published some years ago in one of the Johns Hopkins Universitycirculars, I tried to throw upon these two long-doubtful passages some lightderived from a study of like passages in Alfred’s prose.—The impersonal verb‘geweorðan,’ with an accus. of the person, and a þæt-clause is used severaltimes with the meaning ‘agree.’ See Orosius (Sweet’s ed.) 1787; 20434;20828; 21015; 28020. In the two Beowulf passages, the þæt-clause is anticipatedby ‘þæs,’ which is clearly a gen. of the thing agreed on.The first passage (v. 1599 (b)-1600) I translate literally: Then manyagreed upon this (namely), that the sea-wolf had killed him.The second passage (v. 2025 (b)-2027): She is promised …; to this thefriend of the Scyldings has agreed, etc. By emending ‘is’ instead of ‘wæs’(2025), the tenses will be brought into perfect harmony.In v. 1997 ff. this same idiom occurs, and was noticed in B.’s greatarticle on Beowulf, which appeared about the time I published my readingof 1599 and 2027. Translate 1997 then: Wouldst let the South-Danes themselvesdecide about their struggle with Grendel. Here ‘Súð-Dene’ is accus.of person, and ‘gúðe’ is gen. of thing agreed on.With such collateral support as that afforded by B. (P. and B. XII. 97), Ihave no hesitation in departing from H.-So., my usual guide.The idiom above treated runs through A.-S., Old Saxon, and other Teutoniclanguages, and should be noticed in the lexicons.[2] ‘Bróden-mæl’ is regarded by most scholars as meaning a damaskeenedsword. Translate: The damaskeened sword burned up. Cf. 25 16 and note.[3] ‘Cyning-balde’ (1635) is the much-disputed reading of K. and Th. Torender this, “nobly bold,” “excellently bold,” have been suggested. B. wouldread ‘cyning-holde’ (cf. 290), and render: Men well-disposed towards theking carried the head, etc. ‘Cynebealde,’ says t.B., endorsing Gr.XXV.BEOWULF BRINGS HIS TROPHIES.—HROTHGAR’S GRATITUDE.Beowulf relates hislast exploit.Beowulf spake, offspring of Ecgtheow:“Lo! we blithely have brought thee, bairn of Healfdene,Prince of the Scyldings, these presents from oceanWhich thine eye looketh on, for an emblem of glory.5I came off alive from this, narrowly ’scaping:In war ’neath the water the work with great pains IPerformed, and the fight had been finished quite nearly,Had God not defended me. I failed in the battleAught to accomplish, aided by Hrunting,10Though that weapon was worthy, but the Wielder of earth-folkGod was fightingwith me.Gave me willingly to see on the wall aHeavy old hand-sword hanging in splendor(He guided most often the lorn and the friendless),That I swung as a weapon. The wards of the house then15I killed in the conflict (when occasion was given me).Then the battle-sword burned, the brand that was lifted,1As the blood-current sprang, hottest of war-sweats;Seizing the hilt, from my foes I offbore it;I avenged as I ought to their acts of malignity,20The murder of Danemen. I then make thee this promise,Heorot is freedfrom monsters.Thou’lt be able in Heorot careless to slumberWith thy throng of heroes and the thanes of thy peopleEvery and each, of greater and lesser,And thou needest not fear for them from the selfsame direction25As thou formerly fearedst, oh, folk-lord of Scyldings,[58]End-day for earlmen.” To the age-hoary man then,The famous swordis presented toHrothgar.The gray-haired chieftain, the gold-fashioned sword-hilt,Old-work of giants, was thereupon given;Since the fall of the fiends, it fell to the keeping30Of the wielder of Danemen, the wonder-smith’s labor,And the bad-mooded being abandoned this world then,Opponent of God, victim of murder,And also his mother; it went to the keepingOf the best of the world-kings, where waters encircle,35Who the scot divided in Scylding dominion.Hrothgar looksclosely at the oldsword.Hrothgar discoursed, the hilt he regarded,The ancient heirloom where an old-time contention’sBeginning was graven: the gurgling currents,The flood slew thereafter the race of the giants,40They had proved themselves daring: that people was loth toIt had belonged toa race hateful toGod.The Lord everlasting, through lash of the billowsThe Father gave them final requital.So in letters of rune on the clasp of the handleGleaming and golden, ’twas graven exactly,45Set forth and said, whom that sword had been made for,Finest of irons, who first it was wrought for,Wreathed at its handle and gleaming with serpents.The wise one then said (silent they all were)Hrothgar praisesBeowulf.Son of old Healfdene: “He may say unrefuted50Who performs ’mid the folk-men fairness and truth(The hoary old ruler remembers the past),That better by birth is this bairn of the nobles!Thy fame is extended through far-away countries,Good friend Beowulf, o’er all of the races,55Thou holdest all firmly, hero-like strength withPrudence of spirit. I’ll prove myself gratefulAs before we agreed on; thou granted for long shaltBecome a great comfort to kinsmen and comrades,Heremod’s careeris again contrastedwith Beowulf’s.A help unto heroes. Heremod became not60Such to the Scyldings, successors of Ecgwela;He grew not to please them, but grievous destruction,[59]And diresome death-woes to Danemen attracted;He slew in anger his table-companions,Trustworthy counsellors, till he turned off lonely65From world-joys away, wide-famous ruler:Though high-ruling heaven in hero-strength raised him,In might exalted him, o’er men of all nationsMade him supreme, yet a murderous spiritGrew in his bosom: he gave then no ring-gemsA wretched failureof a king, to giveno jewels to hisretainers.70To the Danes after custom; endured he unjoyfulStanding the straits from strife that was raging,Longsome folk-sorrow. Learn then from this,Lay hold of virtue! Though laden with winters,I have sung thee these measures. ’Tis a marvel to tell it,Hrothgar moralizes.75How all-ruling God from greatness of spiritGiveth wisdom to children of men,Manor and earlship: all things He ruleth.He often permitteth the mood-thought of man ofThe illustrious lineage to lean to possessions,80Allows him earthly delights at his manor,A high-burg of heroes to hold in his keeping,Maketh portions of earth-folk hear him,And a wide-reaching kingdom so that, wisdom failing him,He himself is unable to reckon its boundaries;85He liveth in luxury, little debars him,Nor sickness nor age, no treachery-sorrowBecloudeth his spirit, conflict nowhere,No sword-hate, appeareth, but all of the world dothWend as he wisheth; the worse he knoweth not,90Till arrant arrogance inward pervading,Waxeth and springeth, when the warder is sleeping,The guard of the soul: with sorrows encompassed,Too sound is his slumber, the slayer is near him,Who with bow and arrow aimeth in malice.[60][1] Or rather, perhaps, ‘the inlaid, or damaskeened weapon.’ Cf. 24 57 andnote.XXVI.HROTHGAR MORALIZES.—REST AFTER LABOR.A wounded spirit.“Then bruised in his bosom he with bitter-toothed missileIs hurt ’neath his helmet: from harmful pollutionHe is powerless to shield him by the wonderful mandatesOf the loath-cursèd spirit; what too long he hath holden5Him seemeth too small, savage he hoardeth,Nor boastfully giveth gold-plated rings,1The fate of the future flouts and forgettethSince God had erst given him greatness no little,Wielder of Glory. His end-day anear,10It afterward happens that the bodily-dwellingFleetingly fadeth, falls into ruins;Another lays hold who doleth the ornaments,The nobleman’s jewels, nothing lamenting,Heedeth no terror. Oh, Beowulf dear,15Best of the heroes, from bale-strife defend thee,And choose thee the better, counsels eternal;Be not over proud:life is fleeting, andits strength soonwasteth away.Beware of arrogance, world-famous champion!But a little-while lasts thy life-vigor’s fulness;’Twill after hap early, that illness or sword-edge20Shall part thee from strength, or the grasp of the fire,Or the wave of the current, or clutch of the edges,Or flight of the war-spear, or age with its horrors,Or thine eyes’ bright flashing shall fade into darkness:’Twill happen full early, excellent hero,Hrothgar gives anaccount of hisreign.25That death shall subdue thee. So the Danes a half-centuryI held under heaven, helped them in struggles’Gainst many a race in middle-earth’s regions,With ash-wood and edges, that enemies noneOn earth molested me. Lo! offsetting change, now,[61]Sorrow after joy.30Came to my manor, grief after joyance,When Grendel became my constant visitor,Inveterate hater: I from that maliceContinually travailed with trouble no little.Thanks be to God that I gained in my lifetime,35To the Lord everlasting, to look on the goryHead with mine eyes, after long-lasting sorrow!Go to the bench now, battle-adornèdJoy in the feasting: of jewels in commonWe’ll meet with many when morning appeareth.”40The Geatman was gladsome, ganged he immediatelyTo go to the bench, as the clever one bade him.Then again as before were the famous-for-prowess,Hall-inhabiters, handsomely banqueted,Feasted anew. The night-veil fell then45Dark o’er the warriors. The courtiers rose then;The gray-haired was anxious to go to his slumbers,The hoary old Scylding. Hankered the Geatman,Beowulf is fagged,and seeks rest.The champion doughty, greatly, to rest him:An earlman early outward did lead him,50Fagged from his faring, from far-country springing,Who for etiquette’s sake all of a liegeman’sNeeds regarded, such as seamen at that timeWere bounden to feel. The big-hearted rested;The building uptowered, spacious and gilded,55The guest within slumbered, till the sable-clad ravenBlithely foreboded the beacon of heaven.Then the bright-shining sun o’er the bottoms came going;2The warriors hastened, the heads of the peoplesWere ready to go again to their peoples,The Geats prepareto leave Dane-land.60The high-mooded farer would faraway thencewardLook for his vessel. The valiant one bade then,3[62]Unferth asks Beowulfto accept hissword as a gift.Beowulf thankshim.Offspring of Ecglaf, off to bear Hrunting,To take his weapon, his well-beloved iron;He him thanked for the gift, saying good he accounted65The war-friend and mighty, nor chid he with words thenThe blade of the brand: ’twas a brave-mooded hero.When the warriors were ready, arrayed in their trappings,The atheling dear to the Danemen advanced thenOn to the dais, where the other was sitting,70Grim-mooded hero, greeted King Hrothgar.[1] K. says ‘proudly giveth.’—Gr. says, ‘And gives no gold-plated rings, inorder to incite the recipient to boastfulness.’—B. suggests ‘gyld’ for ‘gylp,’and renders: And gives no beaten rings for reward.[2] If S.’s emendation be accepted, v. 57 will read: Then came the light,going bright after darkness: the warriors, etc.[3] As the passage stands in H.-So., Unferth presents Beowulf with the swordHrunting, and B. thanks him for the gift. If, however, the suggestions of Grdtvg.and M. be accepted, the passage will read: Then the brave one (i.e. Beowulf)commanded that Hrunting be borne to the son of Ecglaf (Unferth), bade himtake his sword, his dear weapon; he (B.) thanked him (U.) for the loan, etc.XXVII.SORROW AT PARTING.Beowulf’s farewell.Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s offspring:“We men of the water wish to declare nowFared from far-lands, we’re firmly determinedTo seek King Higelac. Here have we fitly5Been welcomed and feasted, as heart would desire it;Good was the greeting. If greater affectionI am anywise able ever on earth toGain at thy hands, ruler of heroes,Than yet I have done, I shall quickly be readyI shall be everready to aid thee.10For combat and conflict. O’er the course of the watersLearn I that neighbors alarm thee with terror,As haters did whilom, I hither will bring theeFor help unto heroes henchmen by thousands.My liegelord willencourage me inaiding thee.I know as to Higelac, the lord of the Geatmen,15Though young in years, he yet will permit me,By words and by works, ward of the people,Fully to furnish thee forces and bear theeMy lance to relieve thee, if liegemen shall fail thee,And help of my hand-strength; if Hrethric be treating,[63]20Bairn of the king, at the court of the Geatmen,He thereat may find him friends in abundance:Faraway countries he were better to seek forWho trusts in himself.” Hrothgar discoursed then,Making rejoinder: “These words thou hast uttered25All-knowing God hath given thy spirit!O Beowulf, thouart wise beyondthy years.Ne’er heard I an earlman thus early in lifeMore clever in speaking: thou’rt cautious of spirit,Mighty of muscle, in mouth-answers prudent.I count on the hope that, happen it ever30That missile shall rob thee of Hrethel’s descendant,Edge-horrid battle, and illness or weaponDeprive thee of prince, of people’s protector,Should Higelacdie, the Geatscould find no bettersuccessor thanthou wouldst make.And life thou yet holdest, the Sea-Geats will neverFind a more fitting folk-lord to choose them,35Gem-ward of heroes, than thou mightest prove thee,If the kingdom of kinsmen thou carest to govern.Thy mood-spirit likes me the longer the better,Beowulf dear: thou hast brought it to pass thatTo both these peoples peace shall be common,Thou hast healedthe ancient breachbetween our races.40To Geat-folk and Danemen, the strife be suspended,The secret assailings they suffered in yore-days;And also that jewels be shared while I governThe wide-stretching kingdom, and that many shall visitOthers o’er the ocean with excellent gift-gems:45The ring-adorned bark shall bring o’er the currentsPresents and love-gifts. This people I knowTow’rd foeman and friend firmly established,1After ancient etiquette everywise blameless.”Then the warden of earlmen gave him still farther,Parting gifts50Kinsman of Healfdene, a dozen of jewels,Bade him safely seek with the presentsHis well-beloved people, early returning.[64]Hrothgar kissesBeowulf, andweeps.Then the noble-born king kissed the distinguished,Dear-lovèd liegeman, the Dane-prince saluted him,55And claspèd his neck; tears from him fell,From the gray-headed man: he two things expected,Agèd and reverend, but rather the second,2That bold in council they’d meet thereafter.The man was so dear that he failed to suppress the60Emotions that moved him, but in mood-fetters fastenedThe old king isdeeply grieved topart with his benefactor.The long-famous hero longeth in secretDeep in his spirit for the dear-beloved manThough not a blood-kinsman. Beowulf thenceward,Gold-splendid warrior, walked o’er the meadows65Exulting in treasure: the sea-going vesselRiding at anchor awaited its owner.As they pressed on their way then, the present of HrothgarGiving liberally isthe true proof ofkingship.Was frequently referred to: a folk-king indeed thatEveryway blameless, till age did debar him70The joys of his might, which hath many oft injured.[1] For ‘geworhte,’ the crux of this passage, B. proposes ‘geþóhte,’ rendering:I know this people with firm thought every way blameless towards foe andfriends.[2] S. and B. emend so as to negative the verb ‘meet.’ “Why shouldHrothgar weep if he expects to meet Beowulf again?” both these scholarsask. But the weeping is mentioned before the ‘expectations’: the tears mayhave been due to many emotions, especially gratitude, struggling for expression.XXVIII.THE HOMEWARD JOURNEY.—THE TWO QUEENS. Then the band of very valiant retainersCame to the current; they were clad all in armor,The coast-guardagain.In link-woven burnies. The land-warder noticedThe return of the earlmen, as he erstwhile had seen them;5Nowise with insult he greeted the strangersFrom the naze of the cliff, but rode on to meet them;Said the bright-armored visitors1 vesselward traveled[65]Welcome to Weders. The wide-bosomed craft thenLay on the sand, laden with armor,10With horses and jewels, the ring-stemmèd sailer:The mast uptowered o’er the treasure of Hrothgar.Beowulf gives theguard a handsomesword.To the boat-ward a gold-bound brand he presented,That he was afterwards honored on the ale-bench more highlyAs the heirloom’s owner. 2Set he out on his vessel,15To drive on the deep, Dane-country left he.Along by the mast then a sea-garment fluttered,A rope-fastened sail. The sea-boat resounded,The wind o’er the waters the wave-floater nowiseKept from its journey; the sea-goer traveled,20The foamy-necked floated forth o’er the currents,The well-fashioned vessel o’er the ways of the ocean,The Geats seetheir own landagain.Till they came within sight of the cliffs of the Geatmen,The well-known headlands. The wave-goer hastenedDriven by breezes, stood on the shore.The port-warden isanxiously lookingfor them.25Prompt at the ocean, the port-ward was ready,Who long in the past outlooked in the distance,3At water’s-edge waiting well-lovèd heroes;He bound to the bank then the broad-bosomed vesselFast in its fetters, lest the force of the waters30Should be able to injure the ocean-wood winsome.Bade he up then take the treasure of princes,Plate-gold and fretwork; not far was it thenceTo go off in search of the giver of jewels:[66]Hrethel’s son Higelac at home there remaineth,435Himself with his comrades close to the sea-coast.The building was splendid, the king heroic,Great in his hall, Hygd very young was,Hygd, the noblequeen of Higelac,lavish of gifts.Fine-mooded, clever, though few were the wintersThat the daughter of Hæreth had dwelt in the borough;40But she nowise was cringing nor niggard of presents,Of ornaments rare, to the race of the Geatmen.Offa’s consort,Thrytho, is contrastedwith Hygd.Thrytho nursed anger, excellent5 folk-queen,Hot-burning hatred: no hero whatever’Mong household companions, her husband exceptedShe is a terror toall save her husband.45Dared to adventure to look at the womanWith eyes in the daytime;6 but he knew that death-chainsHand-wreathed were wrought him: early thereafter,When the hand-strife was over, edges were ready,That fierce-raging sword-point had to force a decision,50Murder-bale show. Such no womanly customFor a lady to practise, though lovely her person,That a weaver-of-peace, on pretence of angerA belovèd liegeman of life should deprive.Soothly this hindered Heming’s kinsman;55Other ale-drinking earlmen assertedThat fearful folk-sorrows fewer she wrought them,Treacherous doings, since first she was givenAdorned with gold to the war-hero youthful,For her origin honored, when Offa’s great palace60O’er the fallow flood by her father’s instructionsShe sought on her journey, where she afterwards fully,Famed for her virtue, her fate on the king’s-seat[67]Enjoyed in her lifetime, love did she hold withThe ruler of heroes, the best, it is told me,65Of all of the earthmen that oceans encompass,Of earl-kindreds endless; hence Offa was famousFar and widely, by gifts and by battles,Spear-valiant hero; the home of his fathersHe governed with wisdom, whence Eomær did issue70For help unto heroes, Heming’s kinsman,Grandson of Garmund, great in encounters.[1] For ‘scawan’ (1896), ‘scaðan’ has been proposed. Accepting this, wemay render: He said the bright-armored warriors were going to their vessel,welcome, etc. (Cf. 1804.)[2] R. suggests, ‘Gewát him on naca,’ and renders: The vessel set out, todrive on the sea, the Dane-country left. ‘On’ bears the alliteration; cf. ‘onhafu’ (2524). This has some advantages over the H.-So. reading; viz.(1) It adds nothing to the text; (2) it makes ‘naca’ the subject, and thusbrings the passage into keeping with the context, where the poet has exhaustedhis vocabulary in detailing the actions of the vessel.—B.’s emendation(cf. P. and B. XII. 97) is violent.[3] B. translates: Who for a long time, ready at the coast, had looked out intothe distance eagerly for the dear men. This changes the syntax of ‘léoframanna.’[4] For ‘wunað’ (v. 1924) several eminent critics suggest ‘wunade’ (=remained).This makes the passage much clearer.[5] Why should such a woman be described as an ‘excellent’ queen? C.suggests ‘frécnu’ = dangerous, bold.[6] For ‘an dæges’ various readings have been offered. If ‘and-éges’ beaccepted, the sentence will read: No hero … dared look upon her, eye to eye.If ‘án-dæges’ be adopted, translate: Dared look upon her the whole day.XXIX.BEOWULF AND HIGELAC.Then the brave one departed, his band along with him,Beowulf and hisparty seek Higelac.Seeking the sea-shore, the sea-marches treading,The wide-stretching shores. The world-candle glimmered,The sun from the southward; they proceeded then onward,5Early arriving where they heard that the troop-lord,Ongentheow’s slayer, excellent, youthfulFolk-prince and warrior was distributing jewels,Close in his castle. The coming of BeowulfWas announced in a message quickly to Higelac,10That the folk-troop’s defender forth to the palaceThe linden-companion alive was advancing,Secure from the combat courtward a-going.The building was early inward made readyFor the foot-going guests as the good one had ordered.Beowulf sits by hisliegelord.15He sat by the man then who had lived through the struggle,Kinsman by kinsman, when the king of the peopleHad in lordly language saluted the dear one,Queen Hygd receivesthe heroes.In words that were formal. The daughter of HærethCoursed through the building, carrying mead-cups:1[68]20She loved the retainers, tendered the beakersTo the high-minded Geatmen. Higelac ’gan thenHigelac is greatlyinterested in Beowulf’sadventures.Pleasantly plying his companion with questionsIn the high-towering palace. A curious interestTormented his spirit, what meaning to see in25The Sea-Geats’ adventures: “Beowulf worthy,Give an account ofthy adventures,Beowulf dear.How throve your journeying, when thou thoughtest suddenlyFar o’er the salt-streams to seek an encounter,A battle at Heorot? Hast bettered for Hrothgar,The famous folk-leader, his far-published sorrows30Any at all? In agony-billowsMy suspense hasbeen great.I mused upon torture, distrusted the journeyOf the belovèd liegeman; I long time did pray theeBy no means to seek out the murderous spirit,To suffer the South-Danes themselves to decide on235Grappling with Grendel. To God I am thankfulTo be suffered to see thee safe from thy journey.”Beowulf narrateshis adventures.Beowulf answered, bairn of old Ecgtheow:“’Tis hidden by no means, Higelac chieftain,From many of men, the meeting so famous,40What mournful moments of me and of GrendelWere passed in the place where he pressing afflictionOn the Victory-Scyldings scathefully brought,Anguish forever; that all I avengèd,So that any under heaven of the kinsmen of GrendelGrendel’s kindredhave no cause toboast.45Needeth not boast of that cry-in-the-morning,Who longest liveth of the loth-going kindred,3Encompassed by moorland. I came in my journeyTo the royal ring-hall, Hrothgar to greet there:Hrothgar receivedme very cordially.Soon did the famous scion of Healfdene,50When he understood fully the spirit that led me,Assign me a seat with the son of his bosom.[69]The troop was in joyance; mead-glee greater’Neath arch of the ether not ever beheld IThe queen alsoshowed up no littlehonor.’Mid hall-building holders. The highly-famed queen,55Peace-tie of peoples, oft passed through the building,Cheered the young troopers; she oft tendered a heroA beautiful ring-band, ere she went to her sitting.Hrothgar’s lovelydaughter.Oft the daughter of Hrothgar in view of the courtiersTo the earls at the end the ale-vessel carried,60Whom Freaware I heard then hall-sitters title,When nail-adorned jewels she gave to the heroes:She is betrothed toIngeld, in order tounite the Danesand Heathobards.Gold-bedecked, youthful, to the glad son of FrodaHer faith has been plighted; the friend of the Scyldings,The guard of the kingdom, hath given his sanction,465And counts it a vantage, for a part of the quarrels,A portion of hatred, to pay with the woman.5Somewhere not rarely, when the ruler has fallen,The life-taking lance relaxeth its furyFor a brief breathing-spell, though the bride be charming![1] ‘Meodu-scencum’ (1981) some would render ‘with mead-pourers.’ Translatethen: The daughter of Hæreth went through the building accompanied bymead-pourers.[2] See my note to 1599, supra, and B. in P. and B. XII. 97.[3] For ‘fenne,’ supplied by Grdtvg., B. suggests ‘fácne’ (cf. Jul. 350).Accepting this, translate: Who longest lives of the hated race, steeped intreachery.[4] See note to v. 1599 above.[5] This is perhaps the least understood sentence in the poem, almost everyword being open to dispute. (1) The ‘nó’ of our text is an emendation, andis rejected by many scholars. (2) ‘Seldan’ is by some taken as an adv.(= seldom), and by others as a noun (= page, companion). (3) ‘Léod-hryre,’some render ‘fall of the people’; others, ‘fall of the prince.’ (4) ‘Búgeð,’most scholars regard as the intrans. verb meaning ‘bend,’ ‘rest’; but onegreat scholar has translated it ‘shall kill.’ (5) ‘Hwær,’ Very recently, hasbeen attacked, ‘wære’ being suggested. (6) As a corollary to the above,the same critic proposes to drop ‘oft’ out of the text.—t.B. suggests: Oftseldan wære after léodhryre: lýtle hwíle bongár búgeð, þéah séo brýd duge= often has a treaty been (thus) struck, after a prince had fallen: (but only)a short time is the spear (then) wont to rest, however excellent the bride may be.XXX.BEOWULF NARRATES HIS ADVENTURES TO HIGELAC.“It well may discomfit the prince of the HeathobardsAnd each of the thanemen of earls that attend him,[70]When he goes to the building escorting the woman,That a noble-born Daneman the knights should be feasting:5There gleam on his person the leavings of eldersHard and ring-bright, Heathobards’ treasure,While they wielded their arms, till they misled to the battleTheir own dear lives and belovèd companions.He saith at the banquet who the collar beholdeth,10An ancient ash-warrior who earlmen’s destructionClearly recalleth (cruel his spirit),Sadly beginneth sounding the youthfulThane-champion’s spirit through the thoughts of his bosom,War-grief to waken, and this word-answer speaketh:Ingeld is stirred upto break the truce.15‘Art thou able, my friend, to know when thou seest itThe brand which thy father bare to the conflictIn his latest adventure, ’neath visor of helmet,The dearly-loved iron, where Danemen did slay him,And brave-mooded Scyldings, on the fall of the heroes,20(When vengeance was sleeping) the slaughter-place wielded?E’en now some man of the murderer’s progenyExulting in ornaments enters the building,Boasts of his blood-shedding, offbeareth the jewelWhich thou shouldst wholly hold in possession!’25So he urgeth and mindeth on every occasionWith woe-bringing words, till waxeth the seasonWhen the woman’s thane for the works of his father,The bill having bitten, blood-gory sleepeth,Fated to perish; the other one thenceward30’Scapeth alive, the land knoweth thoroughly.1Then the oaths of the earlmen on each side are broken,When rancors unresting are raging in IngeldAnd his wife-love waxeth less warm after sorrow.So the Heathobards’ favor not faithful I reckon,35Their part in the treaty not true to the Danemen,Their friendship not fast. I further shall tell thee[71]Having made thesepreliminary statements,I will nowtell thee of Grendel,the monster.More about Grendel, that thou fully mayst hear,Ornament-giver, what afterward came fromThe hand-rush of heroes. When heaven’s bright jewel40O’er earthfields had glided, the stranger came raging,The horrible night-fiend, us for to visit,Where wholly unharmed the hall we were guarding.Hondscio fell firstTo Hondscio happened a hopeless contention,Death to the doomed one, dead he fell foremost,45Girded war-champion; to him Grendel became then,To the vassal distinguished, a tooth-weaponed murderer,The well-beloved henchman’s body all swallowed.Not the earlier off empty of hand didThe bloody-toothed murderer, mindful of evils,50Wish to escape from the gold-giver’s palace,But sturdy of strength he strove to outdo me,Hand-ready grappled. A glove was suspendedSpacious and wondrous, in art-fetters fastened,Which was fashioned entirely by touch of the craftman55From the dragon’s skin by the devil’s devices:He down in its depths would do me unsadlyOne among many, deed-doer raging,Though sinless he saw me; not so could it happenWhen I in my anger upright did stand.60’Tis too long to recount how requital I furnishedFor every evil to the earlmen’s destroyer;I reflected honorupon my people.’Twas there, my prince, that I proudly distinguishedThy land with my labors. He left and retreated,He lived his life a little while longer:65Yet his right-hand guarded his footstep in Heorot,And sad-mooded thence to the sea-bottom fell he,Mournful in mind. For the might-rush of battleKing Hrothgarlavished gifts uponme.The friend of the Scyldings, with gold that was plated,With ornaments many, much requited me,70When daylight had dawned, and down to the banquetWe had sat us together. There was chanting and joyance:The age-stricken Scylding asked many questions[72]And of old-times related; oft light-ringing harp-strings,Joy-telling wood, were touched by the brave one;75Now he uttered measures, mourning and truthful,Then the large-hearted land-king a legend of wonderTruthfully told us. Now troubled with yearsThe old king issad over the lossof his youthfulvigor.The age-hoary warrior afterward began toMourn for the might that marked him in youth-days;80His breast within boiled, when burdened with wintersMuch he remembered. From morning till night thenWe joyed us therein as etiquette suffered,Till the second night season came unto earth-folk.Then early thereafter, the mother of GrendelGrendel’s mother.85Was ready for vengeance, wretched she journeyed;Her son had death ravished, the wrath of the Geatmen.The horrible woman avengèd her offspring,And with mighty mainstrength murdered a hero.Æschere falls aprey to her vengeance.There the spirit of Æschere, agèd adviser,90Was ready to vanish; nor when morn had lightenedWere they anywise suffered to consume him with fire,Folk of the Danemen, the death-weakened hero,Nor the belovèd liegeman to lay on the pyre;She suffered nothis body to beburned, but ate it.She the corpse had offcarried in the clutch of the foeman295’Neath mountain-brook’s flood. To Hrothgar ’twas saddestOf pains that ever had preyed on the chieftain;By the life of thee the land-prince then me3Besought very sadly, in sea-currents’ eddiesTo display my prowess, to peril my safety,100Might-deeds accomplish; much did he promise.I sought the creaturein her den,I found then the famous flood-current’s cruel,Horrible depth-warder. A while unto us two[73]Hand was in common; the currents were seethingWith gore that was clotted, and Grendel’s fierce mother’sand hewed herhead off.105Head I offhacked in the hall at the bottomWith huge-reaching sword-edge, hardly I wrestedMy life from her clutches; not doomed was I then,Jewels were freelybestowed upon me.But the warden of earlmen afterward gave meJewels in quantity, kinsman of Healfdene.[1] For ‘lifigende’ (2063), a mere conjecture, ‘wígende’ has been suggested.The line would then read: Escapeth by fighting, knows the land thoroughly.[2] For ‘fæðmum,’ Gr.’s conjecture, B. proposes ‘færunga.’ These threehalf-verses would then read: She bore off the corpse of her foe suddenly underthe mountain-torrent.[3] The phrase ‘þíne lýfe’ (2132) was long rendered ‘with thy (presupposed)permission.’ The verse would read: The land-prince then sadly besought me,with thy (presupposed) permission, etc.XXXI.GIFT-GIVING IS MUTUAL.“So the belovèd land-prince lived in decorum;I had missed no rewards, no meeds of my prowess,But he gave me jewels, regarding my wishes,Healfdene his bairn; I’ll bring them to thee, then,All my gifts I layat thy feet.5Atheling of earlmen, offer them gladly.And still unto thee is all my affection:1But few of my folk-kin find I survivingBut thee, dear Higelac!” Bade he in then to carry2The boar-image, banner, battle-high helmet,10Iron-gray armor, the excellent weapon,This armor I havebelonged of yore toHeregar.In song-measures said: “This suit-for-the-battleHrothgar presented me, bade me expressly,Wise-mooded atheling, thereafter to tell thee3The whole of its history, said King Heregar owned it,15Dane-prince for long: yet he wished not to give then[74]The mail to his son, though dearly he loved him,Hereward the hardy. Hold all in joyance!”I heard that there followed hard on the jewelsTwo braces of stallions of striking resemblance,20Dappled and yellow; he granted him usanceOf horses and treasures. So a kinsman should bear him,No web of treachery weave for another,Nor by cunning craftiness cause the destructionHigelac loves hisnephew Beowulf.Of trusty companion.  Most precious to Higelac,25The bold one in battle, was the bairn of his sister,And each unto other mindful of favors.Beowulf givesHygd the necklacethat Wealhtheowhad given him.I am told that to Hygd he proffered the necklace,Wonder-gem rare that Wealhtheow gave him,The troop-leader’s daughter, a trio of horses30Slender and saddle-bright; soon did the jewelEmbellish her bosom, when the beer-feast was over.So Ecgtheow’s bairn brave did prove him,Beowulf is famous.War-famous man, by deeds that were valiant,He lived in honor, belovèd companions35Slew not carousing; his mood was not cruel,But by hand-strength hugest of heroes then livingThe brave one retained the bountiful gift thatThe Lord had allowed him. Long was he wretched,So that sons of the Geatmen accounted him worthless,40And the lord of the liegemen loth was to do himMickle of honor, when mead-cups were passing;They fully believed him idle and sluggish,He is requited forthe slights sufferedin earlier days.An indolent atheling: to the honor-blest man thereCame requital for the cuts he had suffered.45The folk-troop’s defender bade fetch to the buildingThe heirloom of Hrethel, embellished with gold,Higelac overwhelmsthe conquerorwith gifts.So the brave one enjoined it; there was jewel no richerIn the form of a weapon ’mong Geats of that era;In Beowulf’s keeping he placed it and gave him50Seven of thousands, manor and lordship.Common to both was land ’mong the people,[75]Estate and inherited rights and possessions,To the second one specially spacious dominions,To the one who was better. It afterward happened55In days that followed, befell the battle-thanes,After Heardred’sdeath, Beowulf becomesking.After Higelac’s death, and when Heardred was murderedWith weapons of warfare ’neath well-covered targets,When valiant battlemen in victor-band sought him,War-Scylfing heroes harassed the nephew60Of Hereric in battle. To Beowulf’s keepingTurned there in time extensive dominions:He rules the Geatsfifty years.He fittingly ruled them a fifty of winters(He a man-ruler wise was, manor-ward old) tillA certain one ’gan, on gloom-darkening nights, aThe fire-drake.65Dragon, to govern, who guarded a treasure,A high-rising stone-cliff, on heath that was grayish:A path ’neath it lay, unknown unto mortals.Some one of earthmen entered the mountain,The heathenish hoard laid hold of with ardor;70*         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         *[1] This verse B. renders, ‘Now serve I again thee alone as my gracious king.’[2] For ‘eafor’ (2153), Kl. suggests ‘ealdor.’ Translate then: Bade theprince then to bear in the banner, battle-high helmet, etc. On the other hand,W. takes ‘eaforhéafodsegn’ as a compound, meaning ‘helmet’: He bade thembear in the helmet, battle-high helm, gray armor, etc.[3] The H.-So. rendering (ærest = history, origin; ‘eft’ for ‘est’), thoughliable to objection, is perhaps the best offered. ‘That I should very early tellthee of his favor, kindness’ sounds well; but ‘his’ is badly placed to limit‘ést.’—Perhaps, ‘eft’ with verbs of saying may have the force of Lat. prefix‘re,’ and the H.-So. reading mean, ‘that I should its origin rehearse to thee.’XXXII.THE HOARD AND THE DRAGON.*         *         *         *         *         *         *He sought of himself who sorely did harm him,But, for need very pressing, the servant of one ofThe sons of the heroes hate-blows evaded,5Seeking for shelter and the sin-driven warriorTook refuge within there. He early looked in it,*         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         *[76]*    *    *    *    *  when the onset surprised him,The hoard.10He a gem-vessel saw there: many of suchlikeAncient ornaments in the earth-cave were lying,As in days of yore some one of men ofIllustrious lineage, as a legacy monstrous,There had secreted them, careful and thoughtful,15Dear-valued jewels. Death had offsnatched them,In the days of the past, and the one man moreoverOf the flower of the folk who fared there the longest,Was fain to defer it, friend-mourning warder,A little longer to be left in enjoyment20Of long-lasting treasure.1 A barrow all-readyStood on the plain the stream-currents nigh to,New by the ness-edge, unnethe of approaching:The keeper of rings carried within a2Ponderous deal of the treasure of nobles,25Of gold that was beaten, briefly he spake then:3The ring-giver bewailsthe loss ofretainers.“Hold thou, O Earth, now heroes no more may,The earnings of earlmen. Lo! erst in thy bosomWorthy men won them; war-death hath ravished,Perilous life-bale, all my warriors,30Liegemen belovèd, who this life have forsaken,Who hall-pleasures saw. No sword-bearer have I,And no one to burnish the gold-plated vessel,The high-valued beaker: my heroes are vanished.The hardy helmet behung with gilding35Shall be reaved of its riches: the ring-cleansers slumberWho were charged to have ready visors-for-battle,And the burnie that bided in battle-encounter[77]O’er breaking of war-shields the bite of the edgesMoulds with the hero. The ring-twisted armor,40Its lord being lifeless, no longer may journeyHanging by heroes; harp-joy is vanished,The rapture of glee-wood, no excellent falconSwoops through the building, no swift-footed chargerGrindeth the gravel. A grievous destruction45No few of the world-folk widely hath scattered!”So, woful of spirit one after allLamented mournfully, moaning in sadnessBy day and by night, till death with its billowsThe fire-dragonDashed on his spirit. Then the ancient dusk-scather50Found the great treasure standing all open,He who flaming and fiery flies to the barrows,Naked war-dragon, nightly escapethEncompassed with fire; men under heavenWidely beheld him. ’Tis said that he looks for455The hoard in the earth, where old he is guardingThe heathenish treasure; he’ll be nowise the better.The dragon meetshis match.So three-hundred winters the waster of peoplesHeld upon earth that excellent hoard-hall,Till the forementioned earlman angered him bitterly:60The beat-plated beaker he bare to his chieftainAnd fullest remission for all his remissnessBegged of his liegelord. Then the hoard5 was discovered,The treasure was taken, his petition was grantedThe hero plundersthe dragon’s denThe lorn-mooded liegeman. His lord regarded65The old-work of earth-folk—’twas the earliest occasion.When the dragon awoke, the strife was renewed there;He snuffed ’long the stone then, stout-hearted found he[78]The footprint of foeman; too far had he goneWith cunning craftiness close to the head of70The fire-spewing dragon. So undoomed he may ’scape fromAnguish and exile with ease who possessethThe favor of Heaven. The hoard-warden eagerlySearched o’er the ground then, would meet with the personThat caused him sorrow while in slumber reclining:75Gleaming and wild he oft went round the cavern,All of it outward; not any of earthmenWas seen in that desert.6 Yet he joyed in the battle,Rejoiced in the conflict: oft he turned to the barrow,Sought for the gem-cup;7 this he soon perceived thenThe dragon perceivesthat someone has disturbedhis treasure.80That some man or other had discovered the gold,The famous folk-treasure. Not fain did the hoard-wardWait until evening; then the ward of the barrowWas angry in spirit, the loathèd one wished toPay for the dear-valued drink-cup with fire.85Then the day was done as the dragon would have it,He no longer would wait on the wall, but departedThe dragon is infuriated.Fire-impelled, flaming. Fearful the start wasTo earls in the land, as it early thereafterTo their giver-of-gold was grievously ended.[1] For ‘long-gestréona,’ B. suggests ‘láengestréona,’ and renders, Of fleetingtreasures. S. accepts H.’s ‘long-gestréona,’ but renders, The treasure longin accumulating.[2] For ‘hard-fyrdne’ (2246), B. first suggested ‘hard-fyndne,’ rendering:A heap of treasures … so great that its equal would be hard to find. The samescholar suggests later ‘hord-wynne dæl’ = A deal of treasure-joy.[3] Some read ‘fec-word’ (2247), and render: Banning words uttered.[4] An earlier reading of H.’s gave the following meaning to this passage:He is said to inhabit a mound under the earth, where he, etc. The translationin the text is more authentic.[5] The repetition of ‘hord’ in this passage has led some scholars to suggestnew readings to avoid the second ‘hord.’ This, however, is not under themain stress, and, it seems to me, might easily be accepted.[6] The reading of H.-So. is well defended in the notes to that volume. B.emends and renders: Nor was there any man in that desert who rejoiced inconflict, in battle-work. That is, the hoard-ward could not find any one whohad disturbed his slumbers, for no warrior was there, t.B.’s emendationwould give substantially the same translation.[7] ‘Sinc-fæt’ (2301): this word both here and in v. 2232, t.B. renders‘treasure.’XXXIII.BRAVE THOUGH AGED.—REMINISCENCES.The dragon spitsfire.The stranger began then to vomit forth fire,To burn the great manor; the blaze then glimmeredFor anguish to earlmen, not anything living[79]Was the hateful air-goer willing to leave there.5The war of the worm widely was noticed,The feud of the foeman afar and anear,How the enemy injured the earls of the Geatmen,Harried with hatred: back he hied to the treasure,To the well-hidden cavern ere the coming of daylight.10He had circled with fire the folk of those regions,With brand and burning; in the barrow he trusted,In the wall and his war-might: the weening deceived him.Beowulf hears ofthe havoc wroughtby the dragon.Then straight was the horror to Beowulf published,Early forsooth, that his own native homestead,115The best of buildings, was burning and melting,Gift-seat of Geatmen. ’Twas a grief to the spiritOf the good-mooded hero, the greatest of sorrows:He fears thatHeaven is punishinghim for somecrime.The wise one weened then that wielding his kingdom’Gainst the ancient commandments, he had bitterly angered20The Lord everlasting: with lorn meditationsHis bosom welled inward, as was nowise his custom.The fire-spewing dragon fully had wastedThe fastness of warriors, the water-land outward,The manor with fire. The folk-ruling hero,25Prince of the Weders, was planning to wreak him.The warmen’s defender bade them to make him,Earlmen’s atheling, an excellent war-shieldHe orders an ironshield to be madefrom him, wood isuseless.Wholly of iron: fully he knew thenThat wood from the forest was helpless to aid him,30Shield against fire. The long-worthy rulerMust live the last of his limited earth-days,Of life in the world and the worm along with him,Though he long had been holding hoard-wealth in plenty.He determines tofight alone.Then the ring-prince disdained to seek with a war-band,35With army extensive, the air-going ranger;He felt no fear of the foeman’s assaults andHe counted for little the might of the dragon,[80]His power and prowess: for previously dared heBeowulf’s earlytriumphs referredtoA heap of hostility, hazarded dangers,40War-thane, when Hrothgar’s palace he cleansèd,Conquering combatant, clutched in the battleThe kinsmen of Grendel, of kindred detested.2Higelac’s deathrecalled.’Twas of hand-fights not least where Higelac was slaughtered,When the king of the Geatmen with clashings of battle,45Friend-lord of folks in Frisian dominions,Offspring of Hrethrel perished through sword-drink,With battle-swords beaten; thence Beowulf came thenOn self-help relying, swam through the waters;He bare on his arm, lone-going, thirty50Outfits of armor, when the ocean he mounted.The Hetwars by no means had need to be boastfulOf their fighting afoot, who forward to meet himCarried their war-shields: not many returned fromThe brave-mooded battle-knight back to their homesteads.55Ecgtheow’s bairn o’er the bight-courses swam then,Lone-goer lorn to his land-folk returning,Where Hygd to him tendered treasure and kingdom,Heardred’s lack ofcapacity to rule.Rings and dominion: her son she not trusted,To be able to keep the kingdom devised him60’Gainst alien races, on the death of King Higelac.Beowulf’s tact anddelicacy recalled.Yet the sad ones succeeded not in persuading the athelingIn any way ever, to act as a suzerainTo Heardred, or promise to govern the kingdom;Yet with friendly counsel in the folk he sustained him,65Gracious, with honor, till he grew to be older,Reference is heremade to a visitwhich Beowulf receivesfrom Eanmundand Eadgils,why they come isnot known.Wielded the Weders. Wide-fleeing outlaws,Ohthere’s sons, sought him o’er the waters:They had stirred a revolt ’gainst the helm of the Scylfings,The best of the sea-kings, who in Swedish dominions70Distributed treasure, distinguished folk-leader.[81]’Twas the end of his earth-days; injury fatal3By swing of the sword he received as a greeting,Offspring of Higelac; Ongentheow’s bairnLater departed to visit his homestead,75When Heardred was dead; let Beowulf rule them,Govern the Geatmen: good was that folk-king.[1] ‘Hám’ (2326), the suggestion of B. is accepted by t.B. and otherscholars.[2] For ‘láðan cynnes’ (2355), t.B. suggests ‘láðan cynne,’ apposition to‘mægum.’ From syntactical and other considerations, this is a most excellentemendation.[3] Gr. read ‘on feorme’ (2386), rendering: He there at the banquet a fatalwound received by blows of the sword.XXXIV.BEOWULF SEEKS THE DRAGON.—BEOWULF’S REMINISCENCES.He planned requital for the folk-leader’s ruinIn days thereafter, to Eadgils the wretchedBecoming an enemy. Ohthere’s son thenWent with a war-troop o’er the wide-stretching currents5With warriors and weapons: with woe-journeys cold heAfter avenged him, the king’s life he took.Beowulf has beenpreserved throughmany perils.So he came off uninjured from all of his battles,Perilous fights, offspring of Ecgtheow,From his deeds of daring, till that day most momentous10When he fate-driven fared to fight with the dragon.With eleven comrades,he seeks thedragon.With eleven companions the prince of the GeatmenWent lowering with fury to look at the fire-drake:Inquiring he’d found how the feud had arisen,Hate to his heroes; the highly-famed gem-vessel15Was brought to his keeping through the hand of th’ informer.A guide leads theway, butThat in the throng was thirteenth of heroes,That caused the beginning of conflict so bitter,Captive and wretched, must sad-mooded thencewardvery reluctantly.Point out the place: he passed then unwillingly20To the spot where he knew of the notable cavern,The cave under earth, not far from the ocean,The anger of eddies, which inward was full ofJewels and wires: a warden uncanny,[82]Warrior weaponed, wardered the treasure,25Old under earth; no easy possessionFor any of earth-folk access to get to.Then the battle-brave atheling sat on the naze-edge,While the gold-friend of Geatmen gracious salutedHis fireside-companions: woe was his spirit,30Death-boding, wav’ring; Weird very near him,Who must seize the old hero, his soul-treasure look for,Dragging aloof his life from his body:Not flesh-hidden long was the folk-leader’s spirit.Beowulf spake, Ecgtheow’s son:Beowulf’s retrospect.35“I survived in my youth-days many a conflict,Hours of onset: that all I remember.I was seven-winters old when the jewel-prince took me,High-lord of heroes, at the hands of my father,Hrethel the hero-king had me in keeping,Hrethel took mewhen I was seven.40Gave me treasure and feasting, our kinship remembered;Not ever was I any less dear to himHe treated me asa son.Knight in the boroughs, than the bairns of his household,Herebald and Hæthcyn and Higelac mine.To the eldest unjustly by acts of a kinsman45Was murder-bed strewn, since him Hæthcyn from horn-bowOne of the brothersaccidentally killsanother.His sheltering chieftain shot with an arrow,Erred in his aim and injured his kinsman,One brother the other, with blood-sprinkled spear:No fee could compoundfor such acalamity.’Twas a feeless fight, finished in malice,50Sad to his spirit; the folk-prince howeverHad to part from existence with vengeance untaken.[A parallel caseis supposed.]So to hoar-headed hero ’tis heavily crushing1[83]To live to see his son as he ridethYoung on the gallows: then measures he chanteth,55A song of sorrow, when his son is hangingFor the raven’s delight, and aged and hoaryHe is unable to offer any assistance.Every morning his offspring’s departureIs constant recalled: he cares not to wait for60The birth of an heir in his borough-enclosures,Since that one through death-pain the deeds hath experienced.He heart-grieved beholds in the house of his son theWine-building wasted, the wind-lodging placesReaved of their roaring; the riders are sleeping,65The knights in the grave; there’s no sound of the harp-wood,Joy in the yards, as of yore were familiar.[1] ‘Gomelum ceorle’ (2445).—H. takes these words as referring to Hrethel;but the translator here departs from his editor by understanding the poet torefer to a hypothetical old man, introduced as an illustration of a father’ssorrow.Hrethrel had certainly never seen a son of his ride on the gallows to feedthe crows.The passage beginning ‘swá bið géomorlic’ seems to be an effort to reacha full simile, ‘as … so.’ ‘As it is mournful for an old man, etc. … so thedefence of the Weders (2463) bore heart-sorrow, etc.’ The verses 2451 to2463½ would be parenthetical, the poet’s feelings being so strong as to interruptthe simile. The punctuation of the fourth edition would be better—acomma after ‘galgan’ (2447). The translation may be indicated as follows:(Just) as it is sad for an old man to see his son ride young on the gallows whenhe himself is uttering mournful measures, a sorrowful song, while his son hangsfor a comfort to the raven, and he, old and infirm, cannot render him anykelp—(he is constantly reminded, etc., 2451-2463)—so the defence of theWeders, etc.XXXV.REMINISCENCES (continued).—BEOWULF’S LAST BATTLE.“He seeks then his chamber, singeth a woe-songOne for the other; all too extensiveSeemed homesteads and plains. So the helm of the WedersHrethel grievesfor Herebald.Mindful of Herebald heart-sorrow carried,5Stirred with emotion, nowise was ableTo wreak his ruin on the ruthless destroyer:He was unable to follow the warrior with hatred,With deeds that were direful, though dear he not held him.[84]Then pressed by the pang this pain occasioned him,10He gave up glee, God-light elected;He left to his sons, as the man that is rich does,His land and fortress, when from life he departed.Strife betweenSwedes and Geats.Then was crime and hostility ’twixt Swedes and Geatmen,O’er wide-stretching water warring was mutual,15Burdensome hatred, when Hrethel had perished,And Ongentheow’s offspring were active and valiant,Wished not to hold to peace oversea, butRound Hreosna-beorh often accomplishedCruelest massacre. This my kinsman avengèd,20The feud and fury, as ’tis found on inquiry,Though one of them paid it with forfeit of life-joys,Hæthcyn’s fall atRavenswood.With price that was hard: the struggle became thenFatal to Hæthcyn, lord of the Geatmen.Then I heard that at morning one brother the other25With edges of irons egged on to murder,Where Ongentheow maketh onset on Eofor:The helmet crashed, the hoary-haired ScylfingSword-smitten fell, his hand then rememberedFeud-hate sufficient, refused not the death-blow.I requited him forthe jewels he gaveme.30The gems that he gave me, with jewel-bright sword I’Quited in contest, as occasion was offered:Land he allowed me, life-joy at homestead,Manor to live on. Little he neededFrom Gepids or Danes or in Sweden to look for35Trooper less true, with treasure to buy him;’Mong foot-soldiers ever in front I would hie me,Alone in the vanguard, and evermore gladlyWarfare shall wage, while this weapon endurethThat late and early often did serve meBeowulf refers tohis having slainDæghrefn.40When I proved before heroes the slayer of Dæghrefn,Knight of the Hugmen: he by no means was sufferedTo the king of the Frisians to carry the jewels,The breast-decoration; but the banner-possessorBowed in the battle, brave-mooded atheling.[85]45No weapon was slayer, but war-grapple broke thenThe surge of his spirit, his body destroying.Now shall weapon’s edge make war for the treasure,And hand and firm-sword.” Beowulf spake then,Boast-words uttered—the latest occasion:He boasts of hisyouthful prowess,and declares himselfstill fearless.50“I braved in my youth-days battles unnumbered;Still am I willing the struggle to look for,Fame-deeds perform, folk-warden prudent,If the hateful despoiler forth from his cavernSeeketh me out!” Each of the heroes,55Helm-bearers sturdy, he thereupon greetedHis last salutations.Belovèd co-liegemen—his last salutation:“No brand would I bear, no blade for the dragon,Wist I a way my word-boast to ’complish1Else with the monster, as with Grendel I did it;60But fire in the battle hot I expect there,Furious flame-burning: so I fixed on my bodyTarget and war-mail. The ward of the barrow2I’ll not flee from a foot-length, the foeman uncanny.At the wall ’twill befall us as Fate decreeth,Let Fate decidebetween us.65Each one’s Creator. I am eager in spirit,With the wingèd war-hero to away with all boasting.Bide on the barrow with burnies protected,Wait ye here tillthe battle is over.Earls in armor, which of us two may betterBear his disaster, when the battle is over.70’Tis no matter of yours, and man cannot do it,But me and me only, to measure his strength withThe monster of malice, might-deeds to ’complish.I with prowess shall gain the gold, or the battle,[86]Direful death-woe will drag off your ruler!”75The mighty champion rose by his shield then,Brave under helmet, in battle-mail went he’Neath steep-rising stone-cliffs, the strength he relied onOf one man alone: no work for a coward.Then he saw by the wall who a great many battles80Had lived through, most worthy, when foot-troops collided,The place of strifeis described.Stone-arches standing, stout-hearted champion,Saw a brook from the barrow bubbling out thenceward:The flood of the fountain was fuming with war-flame:Not nigh to the hoard, for season the briefest85Could he brave, without burning, the abyss that was yawning,The drake was so fiery. The prince of the WedersCaused then that words came from his bosom,So fierce was his fury; the firm-hearted shouted:His battle-clear voice came in resounding90’Neath the gray-colored stone. Stirred was his hatred,Beowulf calls outunder the stonearches.The hoard-ward distinguished the speech of a man;Time was no longer to look out for friendship.The breath of the monster issued forth first,Vapory war-sweat, out of the stone-cave:The terrible encounter.95The earth re-echoed. The earl ’neath the barrowLifted his shield, lord of the Geatmen,Tow’rd the terrible stranger: the ring-twisted creature’sHeart was then ready to seek for a struggle.Beowulf brandisheshis sword,The excellent battle-king first brandished his weapon,100The ancient heirloom, of edges unblunted,3To the death-planners twain was terror from other.and stands againsthis shield.The lord of the troopers intrepidly stood then’Gainst his high-rising shield, when the dragon coiled himThe dragon coilshimself.Quickly together: in corslet he bided.[87]105He went then in blazes, bended and striding,Hasting him forward. His life and bodyThe targe well protected, for time-period shorterThan wish demanded for the well-renowned leader,Where he then for the first day was forced to be victor,110Famous in battle, as Fate had not willed it.The lord of the Geatmen uplifted his hand then,Smiting the fire-drake with sword that was precious,That bright on the bone the blade-edge did weaken,Bit more feebly than his folk-leader needed,115Burdened with bale-griefs. Then the barrow-protector,The dragon ragesWhen the sword-blow had fallen, was fierce in his spirit,Flinging his fires, flamings of battleGleamed then afar: the gold-friend of WedersBeowulf’s swordfails him.Boasted no conquests, his battle-sword failed him120Naked in conflict, as by no means it ought to,Long-trusty weapon. ’Twas no slight undertakingThat Ecgtheow’s famous offspring would leaveThe drake-cavern’s bottom; he must live in some regionOther than this, by the will of the dragon,125As each one of earthmen existence must forfeit.’Twas early thereafter the excellent warriorsThe combat isrenewed.Met with each other. Anew and afreshThe hoard-ward took heart (gasps heaved then his bosom):The great hero isreduced to extremities.Sorrow he suffered encircled with fire130Who the people erst governed. His companions by no meansWere banded about him, bairns of the princes,His comrades flee!With valorous spirit, but they sped to the forest,Seeking for safety. The soul-deeps of one wereBlood is thickerthan water.Ruffled by care: kin-love can never135Aught in him waver who well doth consider.[88][1] The clause 2520(2)-2522(1), rendered by ‘Wist I … monster,’ Gr.,followed by S., translates substantially as follows: If I knew how else I mightcombat the boastful defiance of the monster.—The translation turns upon‘wiðgrípan,’ a word not understood.[2] B. emends and translates: I will not flee the space of a foot from the guardof the barrow, but there shall be to us a fight at the wall, as fate decrees, eachone’s Creator.[3] The translation of this passage is based on ‘unsláw’ (2565), accepted byH.-So., in lieu of the long-standing ‘ungléaw.’ The former is taken as anadj. limiting ‘sweord’; the latter as an adj. c. ‘gúð-cyning’: The good war-king,rash with edges, brandished his sword, his old relic. The latter gives amore rhetorical Anglo-Saxon (poetical) sentence.XXXVI.WIGLAF THE TRUSTY.—BEOWULF IS DESERTED BY FRIENDSAND BY SWORD.Wiglaf remainstrue—the idealTeutonic liegeman.The son of Weohstan was Wiglaf entitled,Shield-warrior precious, prince of the Scylfings,Ælfhere’s kinsman: he saw his dear liegelordEnduring the heat ’neath helmet and visor.5Then he minded the holding that erst he had given him,Wiglaf recallsBeowulf’s generosity.The Wægmunding warriors’ wealth-blessèd homestead,Each of the folk-rights his father had wielded;He was hot for the battle, his hand seized the target,The yellow-bark shield, he unsheathed his old weapon,10Which was known among earthmen as the relic of Eanmund,Ohthere’s offspring, whom, exiled and friendless,Weohstan did slay with sword-edge in battle,And carried his kinsman the clear-shining helmet,The ring-made burnie, the old giant-weapon15That Onela gave him, his boon-fellow’s armor,Ready war-trappings: he the feud did not mention,Though he’d fatally smitten the son of his brother.Many a half-year held he the treasures,The bill and the burnie, till his bairn became able,20Like his father before him, fame-deeds to ’complish;Then he gave him ’mong Geatmen a goodly array ofWeeds for his warfare; he went from life thenOld on his journey. ’Twas the earliest time thenThis is Wiglaf’sfirst battle as liegemanof Beowulf.That the youthful champion might charge in the battle25Aiding his liegelord; his spirit was dauntless.Nor did kinsman’s bequest quail at the battle:This the dragon discovered on their coming together.Wiglaf uttered many a right-saying,Said to his fellows, sad was his spirit:Wiglaf appeals tothe pride of thecowards.30“I remember the time when, tasting the mead-cup,We promised in the hall the lord of us all[89]Who gave us these ring-treasures, that this battle-equipment,Swords and helmets, we’d certainly quite him,Should need of such aid ever befall him:How we have forfeitedour liegelord’s confidence!35In the war-band he chose us for this journey spontaneously,Stirred us to glory and gave me these jewels,Since he held and esteemed us trust-worthy spearmen,Hardy helm-bearers, though this hero-achievementOur lord intended alone to accomplish,40Ward of his people, for most of achievements,Doings audacious, he did among earth-folk.Our lord is in soreneed of us.The day is now come when the ruler of earthmenNeedeth the vigor of valiant heroes:Let us wend us towards him, the war-prince to succor,45While the heat yet rageth, horrible fire-fight.I would rather diethan go home without my suzerain.God wot in me, ’tis mickle the lieferThe blaze should embrace my body and eat itWith my treasure-bestower. Meseemeth not properTo bear our battle-shields back to our country,50’Less first we are able to fell and destroy theLong-hating foeman, to defend the life ofSurely he doesnot deserve to diealone.The prince of the Weders. Well do I know ’tisn’tEarned by his exploits, he only of GeatmenSorrow should suffer, sink in the battle:55Brand and helmet to us both shall be common,1Shield-cover, burnie.” Through the bale-smoke he stalked then,Went under helmet to the help of his chieftain,Wiglaf remindsBeowulf of hisyouthful boasts.Briefly discoursing: “Beowulf dear,Perform thou all fully, as thou formerly saidst,60In thy youthful years, that while yet thou livedst[90]Thou wouldst let thine honor not ever be lessened.Thy life thou shalt save, mighty in actions,Atheling undaunted, with all of thy vigor;The monster advanceson them.I’ll give thee assistance.” The dragon came raging,65Wild-mooded stranger, when these words had been uttered(’Twas the second occasion), seeking his enemies,Men that were hated, with hot-gleaming fire-waves;With blaze-billows burned the board to its edges:The fight-armor failed then to furnish assistance70To the youthful spear-hero: but the young-agèd striplingQuickly advanced ’neath his kinsman’s war-target,Since his own had been ground in the grip of the fire.Beowulf strikes atthe dragon.Then the warrior-king was careful of glory,He soundly smote with sword-for-the-battle,75That it stood in the head by hatred driven;Nægling was shivered, the old and iron-madeHis sword failshim.Brand of Beowulf in battle deceived him.’Twas denied him that edges of irons were ableTo help in the battle; the hand was too mighty802Which every weapon, as I heard on inquiry,Outstruck in its stroke, when to struggle he carriedThe wonderful war-sword: it waxed him no better.The dragon advanceson Beowulfagain.Then the people-despoiler—third of his onsets—Fierce-raging fire-drake, of feud-hate was mindful,85Charged on the strong one, when chance was afforded,Heated and war-grim, seized on his neckWith teeth that were bitter; he bloody did wax withSoul-gore seething; sword-blood in waves boiled.[1] The passage ‘Brand … burnie,’ is much disputed. In the first place,some eminent critics assume a gap of at least two half-verses.—‘Úrum’ (2660),being a peculiar form, has been much discussed. ‘Byrdu-scrúd’ is also a crux.B. suggests ‘býwdu-scrúd’ = splendid vestments. Nor is ‘bám’ accepted by all,‘béon’ being suggested. Whatever the individual words, the passage mustmean, “I intend to share with him my equipments of defence.”[2] B. would render: Which, as I heard, excelled in stroke every sword thathe carried to the strife, even the strongest (sword). For ‘Þonne’ he reads‘Þone,’ rel. pr.[91]XXXVII.THE FATAL STRUGGLE.—BEOWULF’S LAST MOMENTS.Wiglaf defendsBeowulf.Then I heard that at need of the king of the peopleThe upstanding earlman exhibited prowess,Vigor and courage, as suited his nature;1He his head did not guard, but the high-minded liegeman’s5Hand was consumed, when he succored his kinsman,So he struck the strife-bringing strange-comer lower,Earl-thane in armor, that in went the weaponGleaming and plated, that ’gan then the fire2Beowulf drawshis knife,Later to lessen. The liegelord himself then10Retained his consciousness, brandished his war-knife,Battle-sharp, bitter, that he bare on his armor:and cuts thedragon.The Weder-lord cut the worm in the middle.They had felled the enemy (life drove out then3Puissant prowess), the pair had destroyed him,15Land-chiefs related: so a liegeman should prove him,A thaneman when needed. To the prince ’twas the last ofHis era of conquest by his own great achievements,[92]Beowulf’s woundswells and burns.The latest of world-deeds. The wound then beganWhich the earth-dwelling dragon erstwhile had wrought him20To burn and to swell. He soon then discoveredThat bitterest bale-woe in his bosom was raging,Poison within. The atheling advanced then,He sits down exhausted.That along by the wall, he prudent of spiritMight sit on a settle; he saw the giant-work,25How arches of stone strengthened with pillarsThe earth-hall eternal inward supported.Then the long-worthy liegeman laved with his hand theWiglaf bathes hislord’s head.Far-famous chieftain, gory from sword-edge,Refreshing the face of his friend-lord and ruler,30Sated with battle, unbinding his helmet.Beowulf answered, of his injury spake he,His wound that was fatal (he was fully awareHe had lived his allotted life-days enjoyingThe pleasures of earth; then past was entirely35His measure of days, death very near):Beowulf regretsthat he has no son.“My son I would give now my battle-equipments,Had any of heirs been after me granted,Along of my body. This people I governedFifty of winters: no king ’mong my neighbors40Dared to encounter me with comrades-in-battle,Try me with terror. The time to me orderedI bided at home, mine own kept fitly,Sought me no snares, swore me not manyI can rejoice in awell-spent life.Oaths in injustice. Joy over all this45I’m able to have, though ill with my death-wounds;Hence the Ruler of Earthmen need not charge meWith the killing of kinsmen, when cometh my life outForth from my body. Fare thou with haste nowBring me thehoard, Wiglaf, thatmy dying eyes maybe refreshed by asight of it.To behold the hoard ’neath the hoar-grayish stone,50Well-lovèd Wiglaf, now the worm is a-lying,Sore-wounded sleepeth, disseized of his treasure.Go thou in haste that treasures of old I,Gold-wealth may gaze on, together see lying[93]The ether-bright jewels, be easier able,55Having the heap of hoard-gems, to yield myLife and the land-folk whom long I have governed.”[1] B. renders: He (W.) did not regard his (the dragon’s) head (sinceBeowulf had struck it without effect), but struck the dragon a little lower down.—Onecrux is to find out whose head is meant; another is to bring out theantithesis between ‘head’ and ‘hand.’[2] ‘Þæt þæt fýr’ (2702), S. emends to ‘þá þæt fýr’ = when the fire began togrow less intense afterward. This emendation relieves the passage of aplethora of conjunctive þæt’s.[3] For ‘gefyldan’ (2707), S. proposes ‘gefylde.’ The passage would read:He felled the foe (life drove out strength), and they then both had destroyed him,chieftains related. This gives Beowulf the credit of having felled the dragon;then they combine to annihilate him.—For ‘ellen’ (2707), Kl. suggests‘e(a)llne.’—The reading ‘life drove out strength’ is very unsatisfactory andvery peculiar. I would suggest as follows: Adopt S.’s emendation, removeH.’s parenthesis, read ‘ferh-ellen wræc,’ and translate: He felled the foe,drove out his life-strength (that is, made him hors de combat), and then theyboth, etc.XXXVIII.WIGLAF PLUNDERS THE DRAGON’S DEN.—BEOWULF’SDEATH.Wiglaf fulfils hislord’s behest.Then heard I that Wihstan’s son very quickly,These words being uttered, heeded his liegelordWounded and war-sick, went in his armor,His well-woven ring-mail, ’neath the roof of the barrow.5Then the trusty retainer treasure-gems manyThe dragon’s den.Victorious saw, when the seat he came near to,Gold-treasure sparkling spread on the bottom,Wonder on the wall, and the worm-creature’s cavern,The ancient dawn-flier’s, vessels a-standing,10Cups of the ancients of cleansers bereavèd,Robbed of their ornaments: there were helmets in numbers,Old and rust-eaten, arm-bracelets many,Artfully woven. Wealth can easily,Gold on the sea-bottom, turn into vanity115Each one of earthmen, arm him who pleaseth!And he saw there lying an all-golden bannerHigh o’er the hoard, of hand-wonders greatest,Linkèd with lacets: a light from it sparkled,That the floor of the cavern he was able to look on,The dragon is notthere.20To examine the jewels. Sight of the dragon[94]Not any was offered, but edge offcarried him.Wiglaf bears thehoard away.Then I heard that the hero the hoard-treasure plundered,The giant-work ancient reaved in the cavern,Bare on his bosom the beakers and platters,25As himself would fain have it, and took off the standard,The brightest of beacons;2 the bill had erst injured(Its edge was of iron), the old-ruler’s weapon,Him who long had watched as ward of the jewels,Who fire-terror carried hot for the treasure,30Rolling in battle, in middlemost darkness,Till murdered he perished. The messenger hastened,Not loth to return, hurried by jewels:Curiosity urged him if, excellent-mooded,Alive he should find the lord of the Weders35Mortally wounded, at the place where he left him.’Mid the jewels he found then the famous old chieftain,His liegelord belovèd, at his life’s-end gory:He thereupon ’gan to lave him with water,Till the point of his word piercèd his breast-hoard.40Beowulf spake (the gold-gems he noticed),Beowulf is rejoicedto see the jewels.The old one in sorrow: “For the jewels I look onThanks do I utter for all to the Ruler,Wielder of Worship, with words of devotion,The Lord everlasting, that He let me such treasures45Gain for my people ere death overtook me.Since I’ve bartered the agèd life to me grantedFor treasure of jewels, attend ye henceforwardHe desires to beheld in memory byhis people.The wants of the war-thanes; I can wait here no longer.The battle-famed bid ye to build them a grave-hill,50Bright when I’m burned, at the brim-current’s limit;As a memory-mark to the men I have governed,[95]Aloft it shall tower on Whale’s-Ness uprising,That earls of the ocean hereafter may call itBeowulf’s barrow, those who barks ever-dashing55From a distance shall drive o’er the darkness of waters.”The hero’s lastgiftThe bold-mooded troop-lord took from his neck thenThe ring that was golden, gave to his liegeman,The youthful war-hero, his gold-flashing helmet,His collar and war-mail, bade him well to enjoy them:and last words.60“Thou art latest left of the line of our kindred,Of Wægmunding people: Weird hath offcarriedAll of my kinsmen to the Creator’s glory,Earls in their vigor: I shall after them fare.”’Twas the aged liegelord’s last-spoken word in65His musings of spirit, ere he mounted the fire,The battle-waves burning: from his bosom departedHis soul to seek the sainted ones’ glory.[1] The word ‘oferhígian’ (2767) being vague and little understood, twoquite distinct translations of this passage have arisen. One takes ‘oferhígian’as meaning ‘to exceed,’ and, inserting ‘hord’ after ‘gehwone,’ renders: Thetreasure may easily, the gold in the ground, exceed in value every hoard ofman, hide it who will. The other takes ‘oferhígian’ as meaning ‘to renderarrogant,’ and, giving the sentence a moralizing tone, renders substantially asin the body of this work. (Cf. 28 13 et seq.)[2] The passage beginning here is very much disputed. ‘The bill of the oldlord’ is by some regarded as Beowulf’s sword; by others, as that of theancient possessor of the hoard. ‘Ær gescód’ (2778), translated in this workas verb and adverb, is by some regarded as a compound participial adj. =sheathed in brass.XXXIX.THE DEAD FOES.—WIGLAF’S BITTER TAUNTS.Wiglaf is sorelygrieved to see hislord look so un-warlike.It had wofully chanced then the youthful retainerTo behold on earth the most ardent-belovèdAt his life-days’ limit, lying there helpless.The slayer too lay there, of life all bereavèd,5Horrible earth-drake, harassed with sorrow:The dragon hasplundered his lasthoard.The round-twisted monster was permitted no longerTo govern the ring-hoards, but edges of war-swordsMightily seized him, battle-sharp, sturdyLeavings of hammers, that still from his wounds10The flier-from-farland fell to the earthHard by his hoard-house, hopped he at midnightNot e’er through the air, nor exulting in jewelsSuffered them to see him: but he sank then to earthwardThrough the hero-chief’s handwork. I heard sure it throve then[96]Few warriorsdared to face themonster.15But few in the land of liegemen of valor,Though of every achievement bold he had proved him,To run ’gainst the breath of the venomous scather,Or the hall of the treasure to trouble with hand-blows,If he watching had found the ward of the hoard-hall20On the barrow abiding. Beowulf’s part ofThe treasure of jewels was paid for with death;Each of the twain had attained to the end ofLife so unlasting. Not long was the time tillThe cowardlythanes come outof the thicket.The tardy-at-battle returned from the thicket,25The timid truce-breakers ten all together,Who durst not before play with the lancesIn the prince of the people’s pressing emergency;They are ashamedof their desertion.But blushing with shame, with shields they betook them,With arms and armor where the old one was lying:30They gazed upon Wiglaf. He was sitting exhausted,Foot-going fighter, not far from the shouldersOf the lord of the people, would rouse him with water;No whit did it help him; though he hoped for it keenly,He was able on earth not at all in the leader35Life to retain, and nowise to alterThe will of the Wielder; the World-Ruler’s power1Would govern the actions of each one of heroes,Wiglaf is ready toexcoriate them.As yet He is doing. From the young one forthwith thenCould grim-worded greeting be got for him quickly40Whose courage had failed him. Wiglaf discoursed then,Weohstan his son, sad-mooded hero,He begins to tauntthem.Looked on the hated: “He who soothness will utterCan say that the liegelord who gave you the jewels,The ornament-armor wherein ye are standing,45When on ale-bench often he offered to hall-menHelmet and burnie, the prince to his liegemen,As best upon earth he was able to find him,—[97]Surely our lordwasted his armoron poltroons.That he wildly wasted his war-gear undoubtedlyWhen battle o’ertook him.2 The troop-king no need had50To glory in comrades; yet God permitted him,He, however, gotalong without youVictory-Wielder, with weapon unaidedHimself to avenge, when vigor was needed.I life-protection but little was ableTo give him in battle, and I ’gan, notwithstanding,With some aid, Icould have savedour liegelord55Helping my kinsman (my strength overtaxing):He waxed the weaker when with weapon I smote onMy mortal opponent, the fire less stronglyFlamed from his bosom. Too few of protectorsCame round the king at the critical moment.Gift-giving is overwith your people:the ring-lord isdead.60Now must ornament-taking and weapon-bestowing,Home-joyance all, cease for your kindred,Food for the people; each of your warriorsMust needs be bereavèd of rights that he holdethIn landed possessions, when faraway nobles65Shall learn of your leaving your lord so basely,What is life withouthonor?The dastardly deed. Death is more pleasantTo every earlman than infamous life is!”[1] For ‘dædum rædan’ (2859) B. suggests ‘déað árædan,’ and renders: Themight (or judgment) of God would determine death for every man, as he stilldoes.[2] Some critics, H. himself in earlier editions, put the clause, ‘When …him’ (A.-S. ‘þá … beget’) with the following sentence; that is, they make itdependent upon ‘þorfte’ (2875) instead of upon ‘forwurpe’ (2873).XL.THE MESSENGER OF DEATH.Wiglaf sends thenews of Beowulf’sdeath to liegemennear by.Then he charged that the battle be announced at the hedgeUp o’er the cliff-edge, where the earl-troopers bidedThe whole of the morning, mood-wretched sat them,Bearers of battle-shields, both things expecting,5The end of his lifetime and the coming again ofThe liegelord belovèd. Little reserved heOf news that was known, who the ness-cliff did travel,But he truly discoursed to all that could hear him:[98]The messengerspeaks.“Now the free-giving friend-lord of the folk of the Weders,10The folk-prince of Geatmen, is fast in his death-bed,By the deeds of the dragon in death-bed abideth;Along with him lieth his life-taking foemanSlain with knife-wounds: he was wholly unableTo injure at all the ill-planning monsterWiglaf sits by ourdead lord.15With bite of his sword-edge. Wiglaf is sitting,Offspring of Wihstan, up over Beowulf,Earl o’er another whose end-day hath reached him,Head-watch holdeth o’er heroes unliving,1Our lord’s deathwill lead toattacks from ourold foes.For friend and for foeman. The folk now expecteth20A season of strife when the death of the folk-kingTo Frankmen and Frisians in far-lands is published.The war-hatred waxed warm ’gainst the Hugmen,Higelac’s deathrecalled.When Higelac came with an army of vesselsFaring to Friesland, where the Frankmen in battle25Humbled him and bravely with overmight ’complishedThat the mail-clad warrior must sink in the battle,Fell ’mid his folk-troop: no fret-gems presentedThe atheling to earlmen; aye was denied usMerewing’s mercy. The men of the Swedelands30For truce or for truth trust I but little;But widely ’twas known that near Ravenswood OngentheowHæthcyn’s fallreferred to.Sundered Hæthcyn the Hrethling from life-joys,When for pride overweening the War-Scylfings first didSeek the Geatmen with savage intentions.35Early did Ohthere’s age-laden father,Old and terrible, give blow in requital,Killing the sea-king, the queen-mother rescued,The old one his consort deprived of her gold,Onela’s mother and Ohthere’s also,[99]40And then followed the feud-nursing foemen till hardly,Reaved of their ruler, they Ravenswood entered.Then with vast-numbered forces he assaulted the remnant,Weary with wounds, woe often promisedThe livelong night to the sad-hearted war-troop:45Said he at morning would kill them with edges of weapons,Some on the gallows for glee to the fowls.Aid came after to the anxious-in-spiritAt dawn of the day, after Higelac’s bugleAnd trumpet-sound heard they, when the good one proceeded50And faring followed the flower of the troopers.[1] ‘Hige-méðum’ (2910) is glossed by H. as dat. plu. (= for the dead). S.proposes ‘hige-méðe,’ nom. sing. limiting Wigláf; i.e. W., mood-weary, holdshead-watch o’er friend and foe.—B. suggests taking the word as dat. inst.plu. of an abstract noun in -‘u.’ The translation would be substantially thesame as S.’s.XLI.THE MESSENGER’S RETROSPECT.The messengercontinues, andrefers to the feudsof Swedes andGeats.“The blood-stainèd trace of Swedes and Geatmen,The death-rush of warmen, widely was noticed,How the folks with each other feud did awaken.The worthy one went then1 with well-beloved comrades,5Old and dejected to go to the fastness,Ongentheo earl upward then turned him;Of Higelac’s battle he’d heard on inquiry,The exultant one’s prowess, despaired of resistance,With earls of the ocean to be able to struggle,10’Gainst sea-going sailors to save the hoard-treasure,His wife and his children; he fled after thencewardOld ’neath the earth-wall. Then was offered pursuanceTo the braves of the Swedemen, the banner2 to Higelac.[100]They fared then forth o’er the field-of-protection,15When the Hrethling heroes hedgeward had thronged them.Then with edges of irons was Ongentheow driven,The gray-haired to tarry, that the troop-ruler had toSuffer the power solely of Eofor:Wulf woundsOngentheow.Wulf then wildly with weapon assaulted him,20Wonred his son, that for swinge of the edgesThe blood from his body burst out in currents,Forth ’neath his hair. He feared not however,Gray-headed Scylfing, but speedily quitedOngentheow givesa stout blow inreturn.The wasting wound-stroke with worse exchange,25When the king of the thane-troop thither did turn him:The wise-mooded son of Wonred was powerlessTo give a return-blow to the age-hoary man,But his head-shielding helmet first hewed he to pieces,That flecked with gore perforce he did totter,30Fell to the earth; not fey was he yet then,But up did he spring though an edge-wound had reached him.Eofor smites Ongentheowfiercely.Then Higelac’s vassal, valiant and dauntless,When his brother lay dead, made his broad-bladed weapon,Giant-sword ancient, defence of the giants,35Bound o’er the shield-wall; the folk-prince succumbed then,Ongentheow isslain.Shepherd of people, was pierced to the vitals.There were many attendants who bound up his kinsman,Carried him quickly when occasion was grantedThat the place of the slain they were suffered to manage.40This pending, one hero plundered the other,His armor of iron from Ongentheow ravished,His hard-sword hilted and helmet together;Eofor takes theold king’s war-gearto Higelac.The old one’s equipments he carried to Higelac.He the jewels received, and rewards ’mid the troopers45Graciously promised, and so did accomplish:The king of the Weders requited the war-rush,Hrethel’s descendant, when home he repaired him,Higelac rewardsthe brothers.To Eofor and Wulf with wide-lavished treasures,To each of them granted a hundred of thousands[101]50In land and rings wrought out of wire:His gifts were beyondcavil.None upon mid-earth needed to twit him3With the gifts he gave them, when glory they conquered;To Eofor he alsogives his onlydaughter in marriage.And to Eofor then gave he his one only daughter,The honor of home, as an earnest of favor.55That’s the feud and hatred—as ween I ’twill happen—The anger of earthmen, that earls of the SwedemenWill visit on us, when they hear that our leaderLifeless is lying, he who longtime protectedHis hoard and kingdom ’gainst hating assailers,60Who on the fall of the heroes defended of yoreThe deed-mighty Scyldings,4 did for the troopersWhat best did avail them, and further moreoverIt is time for us topay the last marksof respect to ourlord.Hero-deeds ’complished.  Now is haste most fitting,That the lord of liegemen we look upon yonder,65And that one carry on journey to death-pyreWho ring-presents gave us. Not aught of it allShall melt with the brave one—there’s a mass of bright jewels,Gold beyond measure, grewsomely purchasedAnd ending it all ornament-rings too70Bought with his life; these fire shall devour,Flame shall cover, no earlman shall wearA jewel-memento, nor beautiful virginHave on her neck rings to adorn her,But wretched in spirit bereavèd of gold-gems75She shall oft with others be exiled and banished,Since the leader of liegemen hath laughter forsaken,[102]Mirth and merriment. Hence many a war-spearCold from the morning shall be clutched in the fingers,Heaved in the hand, no harp-music’s sound shall80Waken the warriors, but the wan-coated ravenFain over fey ones freely shall gabble,Shall say to the eagle how he sped in the eating,When, the wolf his companion, he plundered the slain.”So the high-minded hero was rehearsing these stories85Loathsome to hear; he lied as to few ofThe warriors gosadly to look atBeowulf’s lifelessbody.Weirds and of words. All the war-troop arose then,’Neath the Eagle’s Cape sadly betook them,Weeping and woful, the wonder to look at.They saw on the sand then soulless a-lying,90His slaughter-bed holding, him who rings had given themIn days that were done; then the death-bringing momentWas come to the good one, that the king very warlike,Wielder of Weders, with wonder-death perished.First they beheld there a creature more wondrous,They also see thedragon.95The worm on the field, in front of them lying,The foeman before them: the fire-spewing dragon,Ghostly and grisly guest in his terrors,Was scorched in the fire; as he lay there he measuredFifty of feet; came forth in the night-time5100To rejoice in the air, thereafter departingTo visit his den; he in death was then fastened,He would joy in no other earth-hollowed caverns.There stood round about him beakers and vessels,Dishes were lying and dear-valued weapons,105With iron-rust eaten, as in earth’s mighty bosomA thousand of winters there they had rested:The hoard wasunder a magicspell.That mighty bequest then with magic was guarded,Gold of the ancients, that earlman not anyThe ring-hall could touch, save Ruling-God only,[103]110Sooth-king of Vict’ries gave whom He wished toGod alone couldgive access to it.6(He is earth-folk’s protector) to open the treasure,E’en to such among mortals as seemed to Him proper.[1] For ‘góda,’ which seems a surprising epithet for a Geat to apply to the“terrible” Ongentheow, B. suggests ‘gomela.’ The passage would thenstand: ‘The old one went then,’ etc.[2] For ‘segn Higeláce,’ K., Th., and B. propose ‘segn Higeláces,’ meaning:Higelac’s banner followed the Swedes (in pursuit).—S. suggests ‘sæcc Higeláces,’and renders: Higelac’s pursuit.—The H.-So. reading, as translated inour text, means that the banner of the enemy was captured and brought toHigelac as a trophy.[3] The rendering given in this translation represents the king as being generousbeyond the possibility of reproach; but some authorities construe ‘him’(2996) as plu., and understand the passage to mean that no one reproachedthe two brothers with having received more reward than they were entitled to.[4] The name ‘Scyldingas’ here (3006) has caused much discussion, and givenrise to several theories, the most important of which are as follows: (1) Afterthe downfall of Hrothgar’s family, Beowulf was king of the Danes, or Scyldings.(2) For ‘Scyldingas’ read ‘Scylfingas’—that is, after killing Eadgils,the Scylfing prince, Beowulf conquered his land, and held it in subjection.(3) M. considers 3006 a thoughtless repetition of 2053. (Cf. H.-So.)[5] B. takes ‘nihtes’ and ‘hwílum’ (3045) as separate adverbial cases, andrenders: Joy in the air had he of yore by night, etc. He thinks that the idea ofvanished time ought to be expressed.[6] The parenthesis is by some emended so as to read: (1) (He (i.e. God)is the hope of men); (2) (he is the hope of heroes). Gr.’s reading has noparenthesis, but says: … could touch, unless God himself, true king of victories,gave to whom he would to open the treasure, the secret place of enchanters,etc. The last is rejected on many grounds.XLII.WIGLAF’S SAD STORY.—THE HOARD CARRIED OFF.Then ’twas seen that the journey prospered him littleWho wrongly within had the ornaments hidden1Down ’neath the wall. The warden erst slaughteredSome few of the folk-troop: the feud then thereafter5Was hotly avengèd. ’Tis a wonder where,2When the strength-famous trooper has attained to the end ofLife-days allotted, then no longer the man mayRemain with his kinsmen where mead-cups are flowing.So to Beowulf happened when the ward of the barrow,10Assaults, he sought for: himself had no knowledgeHow his leaving this life was likely to happen.So to doomsday, famous folk-leaders down didCall it with curses—who ’complished it there—[104]That that man should be ever of ill-deeds convicted,15Confined in foul-places, fastened in hell-bonds,Punished with plagues, who this place should e’er ravage.3He cared not for gold: rather the Wielder’sFavor preferred he first to get sight of.4Wiglaf addresseshis comrades.Wiglaf discoursed then, Wihstan his son:20“Oft many an earlman on one man’s account mustSorrow endure, as to us it hath happened.The liegelord belovèd we could little prevail on,Kingdom’s keeper, counsel to follow,Not to go to the guardian of the gold-hoard, but let him25Lie where he long was, live in his dwellingTill the end of the world. Met we a destinyHard to endure: the hoard has been looked at,Been gained very grimly; too grievous the fate that5The prince of the people pricked to come thither.30I was therein and all of it looked at,The building’s equipments, since access was given me,Not kindly at all entrance permittedHe tells them ofBeowulf’s lastmoments.Within under earth-wall. Hastily seized IAnd held in my hands a huge-weighing burden35Of hoard-treasures costly, hither out bare themTo my liegelord belovèd: life was yet in him,And consciousness also; the old one discoursed thenMuch and mournfully, commanded to greet you,Beowulf’s dyingrequest.Bade that remembering the deeds of your friend-lord40Ye build on the fire-hill of corpses a loftyBurial-barrow, broad and far-famous,As ’mid world-dwelling warriors he was widely most honoredWhile he reveled in riches. Let us rouse us and hasten[105]Again to see and seek for the treasure,45The wonder ’neath wall. The way I will show you,That close ye may look at ring-gems sufficientAnd gold in abundance. Let the bier with promptnessFully be fashioned, when forth we shall come,And lift we our lord, then, where long he shall tarry,50Well-beloved warrior, ’neath the Wielder’s protection.”Wiglaf chargesthem to build afuneral-pyre.Then the son of Wihstan bade orders be given,Mood-valiant man, to many of heroes,Holders of homesteads, that they hither from far,6Leaders of liegemen, should look for the good one55With wood for his pyre: “The flame shall now swallow(The wan fire shall wax7) the warriors’ leaderWho the rain of the iron often abided,When, sturdily hurled, the storm of the arrowsLeapt o’er linden-wall, the lance rendered service,60Furnished with feathers followed the arrow.”Now the wise-mooded son of Wihstan did summonThe best of the braves from the band of the rulerHe takes seventhanes, and entersthe den.Seven together; ’neath the enemy’s roof heWent with the seven; one of the heroes65Who fared at the front, a fire-blazing torch-lightBare in his hand. No lot then decidedWho that hoard should havoc, when hero-earls saw itLying in the cavern uncared-for entirely,Rusting to ruin: they rued then but little70That they hastily hence hauled out the treasure,They push thedragon over thewall.The dear-valued jewels; the dragon eke pushed they,The worm o’er the wall, let the wave-currents take him,[106]The waters enwind the ward of the treasures.The hoard is laidon a wain.There wounden gold on a wain was uploaded,75A mass unmeasured, the men-leader off then,The hero hoary, to Whale’s-Ness was carried.[1] For ‘gehýdde,’ B. suggests ‘gehýðde’: the passage would stand as aboveexcept the change of ‘hidden’ (v. 2) to ‘plundered.’ The reference, however,would be to the thief, not to the dragon.[2] The passage ‘Wundur … búan’ (3063-3066), M. took to be a questionasking whether it was strange that a man should die when his appointed timehad come.—B. sees a corruption, and makes emendations introducing theidea that a brave man should not die from sickness or from old age, but shouldfind death in the performance of some deed of daring.—S. sees an indirectquestion introduced by ‘hwár’ and dependent upon ‘wundur’: A secret is itwhen the hero is to die, etc.—Why may the two clauses not be parallel, andthe whole passage an Old English cry of ‘How wonderful is death!’?—S.’sis the best yet offered, if ‘wundor’ means ‘mystery.’[3] For ‘strude’ in H.-So., S. suggests ‘stride.’ This would require ‘ravage’(v. 16) to be changed to ‘tread.’[4] ‘He cared … sight of’ (17, 18), S. emends so as to read as follows:He (Beowulf) had not before seen the favor of the avaricious possessor.[5] B. renders: That which drew the king thither (i.e. the treasure) wasgranted us, but in such a way that it overcomes us.[6] ‘Folc-ágende’ (3114) B. takes as dat. sing. with ‘gódum,’ and refers it toBeowulf; that is, Should bring fire-wood to the place where the good folk-rulerlay.[7] C. proposes to take ‘weaxan’ = L. ‘vescor,’ and translate devour. Thisgives a parallel to ‘fretan’ above. The parenthesis would be discarded andthe passage read: Now shall the fire consume, the wan-flame devour, theprince of warriors, etc.XLIII.THE BURNING OF BEOWULF.Beowulf’s pyre.The folk of the Geatmen got him then readyA pile on the earth strong for the burning,Behung with helmets, hero-knights’ targets,And bright-shining burnies, as he begged they should have them;5Then wailing war-heroes their world-famous chieftain,Their liegelord beloved, laid in the middle.The funeral-flame.Soldiers began then to make on the barrowThe largest of dead-fires: dark o’er the vaporThe smoke-cloud ascended, the sad-roaring fire,10Mingled with weeping (the wind-roar subsided)Till the building of bone it had broken to pieces,Hot in the heart. Heavy in spiritThey mood-sad lamented the men-leader’s ruin;And mournful measures the much-grieving widow15*         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         **         *         *         *         *         *         *20*         *         *         *         *         *         *The Weders carryout their lord’s lastrequest.The men of the Weders made accordinglyA hill on the height, high and extensive,Of sea-going sailors to be seen from a distance,And the brave one’s beacon built where the fire was,25In ten-days’ space, with a wall surrounded it,As wisest of world-folk could most worthily plan it.They placed in the barrow rings and jewels,[107]Rings and gemsare laid in thebarrow.All such ornaments as erst in the treasureWar-mooded men had won in possession:30The earnings of earlmen to earth they entrusted,The gold to the dust, where yet it remainethAs useless to mortals as in foregoing eras.’Round the dead-mound rode then the doughty-in-battle,Bairns of all twelve of the chiefs of the people,They mourn fortheir lord, and singhis praises.35More would they mourn, lament for their ruler,Speak in measure, mention him with pleasure,Weighed his worth, and his warlike achievementsMightily commended, as ’tis meet one praise hisLiegelord in words and love him in spirit,40When forth from his body he fares to destruction.So lamented mourning the men of the Geats,Fond-loving vassals, the fall of their lord,An ideal king.Said he was kindest of kings under heaven,Gentlest of men, most winning of manner,45Friendliest to folk-troops and fondest of honor.[109]ADDENDA.Several discrepancies and other oversights have been noticed in the H.-So.glossary. Of these a good part were avoided by Harrison and Sharp, theAmerican editors of Beowulf, in their last edition, 1888. The rest will, Ihope, be noticed in their fourth edition. As, however, this book may fall intothe hands of some who have no copy of the American edition, it seems bestto notice all the principal oversights of the German editors.From hám (194).—Notes and glossary conflict; the latter not having been alteredto suit the conclusions accepted in the former.Þær gelýfan sceal dryhtnes dóme (440).—Under ‘dóm’ H. says ‘the might ofthe Lord’; while under ‘gelýfan’ he says ‘the judgment of the Lord.’Eal bencþelu (486).—Under ‘benc-þelu’ H. says nom. plu.; while under ‘eal’ hesays nom. sing.Heatho-ræmas (519).—Under ‘ætberan’ H. translates ‘to the Heathoremes’; whileunder ‘Heatho-ræmas’ he says ‘Heathoræmas reaches Breca in the swimming-match withBeowulf.’ Harrison and Sharp (3d edition, 1888) avoid the discrepancy.Fáh féond-scaða (554).—Under ‘féond-scaða’ H. says ‘a gleaming sea-monster’;under ‘fáh’ he says ‘hostile.’Onfeng hraðe inwit-þancum (749).—Under ‘onfón’ H. says ‘he received themaliciously-disposed one’; under ‘inwit-þanc’ he says ‘he grasped,’ etc.Níð-wundor séon (1366).—Under ‘níð-wundor’ H. calls this word itself nom. sing.;under ‘séon’ he translates it as accus. sing., understanding ‘man’ as subject of ‘séon.’ H.and S. (3d edition) make the correction.Forgeaf hilde-bille (1521).—H., under the second word, calls it instr. dat.; whileunder ‘forgifan’ he makes it the dat. of indir. obj. H. and S. (3d edition) make the change.Brád and brún-ecg (1547).—Under ‘brád’ H. says ‘das breite Hüftmesser mitbronzener Klinge’; under ‘brún-ecg’ he says ‘ihr breites Hüftmesser mit blitzender Klinge.’[110]Yðelíce (1557).—Under this word H. makes it modify ‘ástód.’ If this be right, thepunctuation of the fifth edition is wrong. See H. and S., appendix.Sélran gesóhte (1840).—Under ‘sél’ and ‘gesécan’ H. calls these two words accus.plu.; but this is clearly an error, as both are nom. plu., pred. nom. H. and S. correct under‘sél.’Wið sylfne (1978).—Under ‘wið’ and ‘gesittan’ H. says ‘wið = near, by’; under‘self’ he says ‘opposite.’þéow (2225) is omitted from the glossary.For duguðum (2502).—Under ‘duguð’ H. translates this phrase, ‘in Tüchtigkeit’;under ‘for,’ by ‘vor der edlen Kriegerschaar.’þær (2574).—Under ‘wealdan’ H. translates þær by ‘wo’; under ‘mótan,’ by ‘da.’H. and S. suggest ‘if’ in both passages.Wunde (2726).—Under ‘wund’ H. says ‘dative,’ and under ‘wæl-bléate’ he says‘accus.’ It is without doubt accus., parallel with ‘benne.’Strengum gebæded (3118).—Under ‘strengo’ H. says ‘Strengum’ = mit Macht;under ‘gebæded’ he translates ‘von den Sehnen.’ H. and S. correct this discrepancy byrejecting the second reading.Bronda be láfe (3162).—A recent emendation. The fourth edition had ‘brondabetost.’ In the fifth edition the editor neglects to change the glossary to suit the newemendation. See ‘bewyrcan.’*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BEOWULF ***This file should be named 16328-h.htm or 16328-h.zipThis and all associated files of various formats will be found in https://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/3/2/16328/Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks. 