START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO ***THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTOby Alexandre Dumas [père]Contents VOLUME ONEChapter 1. Marseilles—The ArrivalChapter 2. Father and SonChapter 3. The CatalansChapter 4. ConspiracyChapter 5. The Marriage FeastChapter 6. The Deputy Procureur du RoiChapter 7. The ExaminationChapter 8. The Château d’IfChapter 9. The Evening of the BetrothalChapter 10. The King’s Closet at theTuileriesChapter 11. The Corsican OgreChapter 12. Father and SonChapter 13. The Hundred DaysChapter 14. The Two PrisonersChapter 15. Number 34 and Number 27Chapter 16. A Learned ItalianChapter 17. The Abbé’s ChamberChapter 18. The TreasureChapter 19. The Third AttackChapter 20. The Cemetery of the Château d’IfChapter 21. The Island of TiboulenChapter 22. The SmugglersChapter 23. The Island of Monte CristoChapter 24. The Secret CaveChapter 25. The UnknownChapter 26. The Pont du Gard InnChapter 27. The Story VOLUME TWOChapter 28. The Prison RegisterChapter 29. The House of Morrel & SonChapter 30. The Fifth of SeptemberChapter 31. Italy: Sinbad the SailorChapter 32. The WakingChapter 33. Roman BanditsChapter 34. The ColosseumChapter 35. La MazzolataChapter 36. The Carnival at Rome.Chapter 37. The Catacombs of Saint Sebastian Chapter 38. The RendezvousChapter 39. The GuestsChapter 40. The BreakfastChapter 41. The PresentationChapter 42. Monsieur BertuccioChapter 43. The House at AuteuilChapter 44. The VendettaChapter 45. The Rain of BloodChapter 46. Unlimited CreditChapter 47. The Dappled Grays VOLUME THREEChapter 48. IdeologyChapter 49. HaydéeChapter 50. The Morrel FamilyChapter 51. Pyramus and ThisbeChapter 52. ToxicologyChapter 53. Robert le DiableChapter 54. A Flurry in StocksChapter 55. Major CavalcantiChapter 56. Andrea CavalcantiChapter 57. In the Lucern PatchChapter 58. M. Noirtier de VillefortChapter 59. The WillChapter 60. The TelegraphChapter 61. How a Gardener May Get Rid of theDormiceChapter 62. GhostsChapter 63. The DinnerChapter 64. The BeggarChapter 65. A Conjugal SceneChapter 66. Matrimonial ProjectsChapter 67. The Office of the King’sAttorneyChapter 68. A Summer BallChapter 69. The InquiryChapter 70. The BallChapter 71. Bread and SaltChapter 72. Madame de Saint-MéranChapter 73. The PromiseVOLUME FOURChapter 74. The Villefort Family VaultChapter 75. A Signed StatementChapter 76. Progress of Cavalcanti the YoungerChapter 77. HaydéeChapter 78. We hear From YaninaChapter 79. The LemonadeChapter 80. The AccusationChapter 81. The Room of the Retired BakerChapter 82. The BurglaryChapter 83. The Hand of GodChapter 84. BeauchampChapter 85. The JourneyChapter 86. The TrialChapter 87. The ChallengeChapter 88. The InsultChapter 89. The NightChapter 90. The MeetingChapter 91. Mother and SonChapter 92. The SuicideChapter 93. ValentineChapter 94. Maximilian’s AvowalChapter 95. Father and DaughterVOLUME FIVEChapter 96. The ContractChapter 97. The Departure for BelgiumChapter 98. The Bell and Bottle TavernChapter 99. The LawChapter 100. The ApparitionChapter 101. LocustaChapter 102. ValentineChapter 103. MaximilianChapter 104. Danglars’ SignatureChapter 105. The Cemetery of Père-Lachaise Chapter 106. Dividing the ProceedsChapter 107. The Lions’ DenChapter 108. The JudgeChapter 109. The AssizesChapter 110. The IndictmentChapter 111. ExpiationChapter 112. The DepartureChapter 113. The PastChapter 114. PeppinoChapter 115. Luigi Vampa’s Bill of Fare Chapter 116. The PardonChapter 117. The Fifth of OctoberVOLUME ONE Chapter 1.Marseilles—The ArrivalOn the 24th of February,1815, the look-out at Notre-Dame de la Garde signalled the three-master, thePharaon from Smyrna, Trieste, and Naples.As usual, a pilot put off immediately, and rounding the Château d’If, goton board the vessel between Cape Morgiou and Rion island.Immediately, and according to custom, the ramparts of Fort Saint-Jean werecovered with spectators; it is always an event at Marseilles for a ship to comeinto port, especially when this ship, like the Pharaon, has been built,rigged, and laden at the old Phocee docks, and belongs to an owner of the city.The ship drew on and had safely passed the strait, which some volcanic shockhas made between the Calasareigne and Jaros islands; had doubled Pomègue, andapproached the harbor under topsails, jib, and spanker, but so slowly andsedately that the idlers, with that instinct which is the forerunner of evil,asked one another what misfortune could have happened on board. However, thoseexperienced in navigation saw plainly that if any accident had occurred, it wasnot to the vessel herself, for she bore down with all the evidence of beingskilfully handled, the anchor a-cockbill, the jib-boom guys already eased off,and standing by the side of the pilot, who was steering the Pharaontowards the narrow entrance of the inner port, was a young man, who, withactivity and vigilant eye, watched every motion of the ship, and repeated eachdirection of the pilot.The vague disquietude which prevailed among the spectators had so much affectedone of the crowd that he did not await the arrival of the vessel in harbor, butjumping into a small skiff, desired to be pulled alongside the Pharaon,which he reached as she rounded into La Réserve basin.When the young man on board saw this person approach, he left his station bythe pilot, and, hat in hand, leaned over the ship’s bulwarks.He was a fine, tall, slim young fellow of eighteen or twenty, with black eyes,and hair as dark as a raven’s wing; and his whole appearance bespoke thatcalmness and resolution peculiar to men accustomed from their cradle to contendwith danger.“Ah, is it you, Dantès?” cried the man in the skiff.“What’s the matter? and why have you such an air of sadnessaboard?”“A great misfortune, M. Morrel,” replied the young man, “agreat misfortune, for me especially! Off Civita Vecchia we lost our braveCaptain Leclere.”“And the cargo?” inquired the owner, eagerly.“Is all safe, M. Morrel; and I think you will be satisfied on that head.But poor Captain Leclere——”“What happened to him?” asked the owner, with an air ofconsiderable resignation. “What happened to the worthy captain?”“He died.”“Fell into the sea?”“No, sir, he died of brain-fever in dreadful agony.” Then turningto the crew, he said, “Bear a hand there, to take in sail!”All hands obeyed, and at once the eight or ten seamen who composed the crew,sprang to their respective stations at the spanker brails and outhaul, topsailsheets and halyards, the jib downhaul, and the topsail clewlines and buntlines.The young sailor gave a look to see that his orders were promptly andaccurately obeyed, and then turned again to the owner.“And how did this misfortune occur?” inquired the latter, resumingthe interrupted conversation.“Alas, sir, in the most unexpected manner. After a long talk with theharbor-master, Captain Leclere left Naples greatly disturbed in mind. Intwenty-four hours he was attacked by a fever, and died three days afterwards.We performed the usual burial service, and he is at his rest, sewn up in hishammock with a thirty-six-pound shot at his head and his heels, off El Giglioisland. We bring to his widow his sword and cross of honor. It was worth while,truly,” added the young man with a melancholy smile, “to make waragainst the English for ten years, and to die in his bed at last, likeeverybody else.”“Why, you see, Edmond,” replied the owner, who appeared morecomforted at every moment, “we are all mortal, and the old must make wayfor the young. If not, why, there would be no promotion; and since you assureme that the cargo——”“Is all safe and sound, M. Morrel, take my word for it; and I advise younot to take 25,000 francs for the profits of the voyage.”Then, as they were just passing the Round Tower, the young man shouted:“Stand by there to lower the topsails and jib; brail up thespanker!”The order was executed as promptly as it would have been on board a man-of-war.“Let go—and clue up!” At this last command all the sails werelowered, and the vessel moved almost imperceptibly onwards.“Now, if you will come on board, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, observingthe owner’s impatience, “here is your supercargo, M. Danglars,coming out of his cabin, who will furnish you with every particular. As for me,I must look after the anchoring, and dress the ship in mourning.”The owner did not wait for a second invitation. He seized a rope which Dantèsflung to him, and with an activity that would have done credit to a sailor,climbed up the side of the ship, while the young man, going to his task, leftthe conversation to Danglars, who now came towards the owner. He was a man oftwenty-five or twenty-six years of age, of unprepossessing countenance,obsequious to his superiors, insolent to his subordinates; and this, inaddition to his position as responsible agent on board, which is alwaysobnoxious to the sailors, made him as much disliked by the crew as EdmondDantès was beloved by them.“Well, M. Morrel,” said Danglars, “you have heard of themisfortune that has befallen us?”“Yes—yes: poor Captain Leclere! He was a brave and an honestman.”“And a first-rate seaman, one who had seen long and honorable service, asbecame a man charged with the interests of a house so important as that ofMorrel & Son,” replied Danglars.“But,” replied the owner, glancing after Dantès, who was watchingthe anchoring of his vessel, “it seems to me that a sailor needs not beso old as you say, Danglars, to understand his business, for our friend Edmondseems to understand it thoroughly, and not to require instruction fromanyone.”“Yes,” said Danglars, darting at Edmond a look gleaming with hate.“Yes, he is young, and youth is invariably self-confident. Scarcely wasthe captain’s breath out of his body when he assumed the command withoutconsulting anyone, and he caused us to lose a day and a half at the Island ofElba, instead of making for Marseilles direct.”“As to taking command of the vessel,” replied Morrel, “thatwas his duty as captain’s mate; as to losing a day and a half off theIsland of Elba, he was wrong, unless the vessel needed repairs.”“The vessel was in as good condition as I am, and as, I hope you are, M.Morrel, and this day and a half was lost from pure whim, for the pleasure ofgoing ashore, and nothing else.”“Dantès,” said the shipowner, turning towards the young man,“come this way!”“In a moment, sir,” answered Dantès, “and I’m withyou.” Then calling to the crew, he said, “Let go!”The anchor was instantly dropped, and the chain ran rattling through theport-hole. Dantès continued at his post in spite of the presence of the pilot,until this manœuvre was completed, and then he added, “Half-mastthe colors, and square the yards!”“You see,” said Danglars, “he fancies himself captainalready, upon my word.”“And so, in fact, he is,” said the owner.“Except your signature and your partner’s, M. Morrel.”“And why should he not have this?” asked the owner; “he isyoung, it is true, but he seems to me a thorough seaman, and of fullexperience.”A cloud passed over Danglars’ brow.“Your pardon, M. Morrel,” said Dantès, approaching, “thevessel now rides at anchor, and I am at your service. You hailed me, Ithink?”Danglars retreated a step or two. “I wished to inquire why you stopped atthe Island of Elba?”“I do not know, sir; it was to fulfil the last instructions of CaptainLeclere, who, when dying, gave me a packet for Marshal Bertrand.”“Then did you see him, Edmond?”“Who?”“The marshal.”“Yes.”Morrel looked around him, and then, drawing Dantès on one side, he saidsuddenly—“And how is the emperor?”“Very well, as far as I could judge from the sight of him.”“You saw the emperor, then?”“He entered the marshal’s apartment while I was there.”“And you spoke to him?”“Why, it was he who spoke to me, sir,” said Dantès, with a smile.“And what did he say to you?”“Asked me questions about the vessel, the time she left Marseilles, thecourse she had taken, and what was her cargo. I believe, if she had not beenladen, and I had been her master, he would have bought her. But I told him Iwas only mate, and that she belonged to the firm of Morrel & Son.‘Ah, yes,’ he said, ‘I know them. The Morrels have beenshipowners from father to son; and there was a Morrel who served in the sameregiment with me when I was in garrison at Valence.’”“Pardieu! and that is true!” cried the owner, greatlydelighted. “And that was Policar Morrel, my uncle, who was afterwards acaptain. Dantès, you must tell my uncle that the emperor remembered him, andyou will see it will bring tears into the old soldier’s eyes. Come,come,” continued he, patting Edmond’s shoulder kindly, “youdid very right, Dantès, to follow Captain Leclere’s instructions, andtouch at Elba, although if it were known that you had conveyed a packet to themarshal, and had conversed with the emperor, it might bring you intotrouble.”“How could that bring me into trouble, sir?” asked Dantès;“for I did not even know of what I was the bearer; and the emperor merelymade such inquiries as he would of the first comer. But, pardon me, here arethe health officers and the customs inspectors coming alongside.” And theyoung man went to the gangway. As he departed, Danglars approached, andsaid,—“Well, it appears that he has given you satisfactory reasons for hislanding at Porto-Ferrajo?”“Yes, most satisfactory, my dear Danglars.”“Well, so much the better,” said the supercargo; “for it isnot pleasant to think that a comrade has not done his duty.”“Dantès has done his,” replied the owner, “and that is notsaying much. It was Captain Leclere who gave orders for this delay.”“Talking of Captain Leclere, has not Dantès given you a letter fromhim?”“To me?—no—was there one?”“I believe that, besides the packet, Captain Leclere confided a letter tohis care.”“Of what packet are you speaking, Danglars?”“Why, that which Dantès left at Porto-Ferrajo.”“How do you know he had a packet to leave at Porto-Ferrajo?”Danglars turned very red.“I was passing close to the door of the captain’s cabin, which washalf open, and I saw him give the packet and letter to Dantès.”“He did not speak to me of it,” replied the shipowner; “butif there be any letter he will give it to me.”Danglars reflected for a moment. “Then, M. Morrel, I beg of you,”said he, “not to say a word to Dantès on the subject. I may have beenmistaken.”At this moment the young man returned; Danglars withdrew.“Well, my dear Dantès, are you now free?” inquired the owner.“Yes, sir.”“You have not been long detained.”“No. I gave the custom-house officers a copy of our bill of lading; andas to the other papers, they sent a man off with the pilot, to whom I gavethem.”“Then you have nothing more to do here?”“No—everything is all right now.”“Then you can come and dine with me?”“I really must ask you to excuse me, M. Morrel. My first visit is due tomy father, though I am not the less grateful for the honor you have doneme.”“Right, Dantès, quite right. I always knew you were a good son.”“And,” inquired Dantès, with some hesitation, “do you knowhow my father is?”“Well, I believe, my dear Edmond, though I have not seen himlately.”“Yes, he likes to keep himself shut up in his little room.”“That proves, at least, that he has wanted for nothing during yourabsence.”Dantès smiled. “My father is proud, sir, and if he had not a meal left, Idoubt if he would have asked anything from anyone, except from Heaven.”“Well, then, after this first visit has been made we shall count onyou.”“I must again excuse myself, M. Morrel, for after this first visit hasbeen paid I have another which I am most anxious to pay.”“True, Dantès, I forgot that there was at the Catalans someone whoexpects you no less impatiently than your father—the lovelyMercédès.”Dantès blushed.“Ah, ha,” said the shipowner, “I am not in the leastsurprised, for she has been to me three times, inquiring if there were any newsof the Pharaon. Peste! Edmond, you have a very handsomemistress!”“She is not my mistress,” replied the young sailor, gravely;“she is my betrothed.”“Sometimes one and the same thing,” said Morrel, with a smile.“Not with us, sir,” replied Dantès.“Well, well, my dear Edmond,” continued the owner,“don’t let me detain you. You have managed my affairs so well thatI ought to allow you all the time you require for your own. Do you want anymoney?”“No, sir; I have all my pay to take—nearly three months’wages.”“You are a careful fellow, Edmond.”“Say I have a poor father, sir.”“Yes, yes, I know how good a son you are, so now hasten away to see yourfather. I have a son too, and I should be very wroth with those who detainedhim from me after a three months’ voyage.”“Then I have your leave, sir?”“Yes, if you have nothing more to say to me.”“Nothing.”“Captain Leclere did not, before he died, give you a letter forme?”“He was unable to write, sir. But that reminds me that I must ask yourleave of absence for some days.”“To get married?”“Yes, first, and then to go to Paris.”“Very good; have what time you require, Dantès. It will take quite sixweeks to unload the cargo, and we cannot get you ready for sea until threemonths after that; only be back again in three months, for thePharaon,” added the owner, patting the young sailor on the back,“cannot sail without her captain.”“Without her captain!” cried Dantès, his eyes sparkling withanimation; “pray mind what you say, for you are touching on the mostsecret wishes of my heart. Is it really your intention to make me captain ofthe Pharaon?”“If I were sole owner we’d shake hands on it now, my dear Dantès,and call it settled; but I have a partner, and you know the Italianproverb—Chi ha compagno ha padrone—‘He who has apartner has a master.’ But the thing is at least half done, as you haveone out of two votes. Rely on me to procure you the other; I will do mybest.”“Ah, M. Morrel,” exclaimed the young seaman, with tears in hiseyes, and grasping the owner’s hand, “M. Morrel, I thank you in thename of my father and of Mercédès.”“That’s all right, Edmond. There’s a providence that watchesover the deserving. Go to your father; go and see Mercédès, and afterwards cometo me.”“Shall I row you ashore?”“No, thank you; I shall remain and look over the accounts with Danglars.Have you been satisfied with him this voyage?”“That is according to the sense you attach to the question, sir. Do youmean is he a good comrade? No, for I think he never liked me since the day whenI was silly enough, after a little quarrel we had, to propose to him to stopfor ten minutes at the island of Monte Cristo to settle the dispute—aproposition which I was wrong to suggest, and he quite right to refuse. If youmean as responsible agent when you ask me the question, I believe there isnothing to say against him, and that you will be content with the way in whichhe has performed his duty.”“But tell me, Dantès, if you had command of the Pharaon should yoube glad to see Danglars remain?”“Captain or mate, M. Morrel, I shall always have the greatest respect forthose who possess the owners’ confidence.”“That’s right, that’s right, Dantès! I see you are athoroughly good fellow, and will detain you no longer. Go, for I see howimpatient you are.”“Then I have leave?”“Go, I tell you.”“May I have the use of your skiff?”“Certainly.”“Then, for the present, M. Morrel, farewell, and a thousandthanks!”“I hope soon to see you again, my dear Edmond. Good luck to you.”The young sailor jumped into the skiff, and sat down in the stern sheets, withthe order that he be put ashore at La Canebière. The two oarsmen bent to theirwork, and the little boat glided away as rapidly as possible in the midst ofthe thousand vessels which choke up the narrow way which leads between the tworows of ships from the mouth of the harbor to the Quai d’Orléans.The shipowner, smiling, followed him with his eyes until he saw him spring outon the quay and disappear in the midst of the throng, which from fiveo’clock in the morning until nine o’clock at night, swarms in thefamous street of La Canebière,—a street of which the modern Phocéens areso proud that they say with all the gravity in the world, and with that accentwhich gives so much character to what is said, “If Paris had LaCanebière, Paris would be a second Marseilles.” On turning round theowner saw Danglars behind him, apparently awaiting orders, but in reality alsowatching the young sailor,—but there was a great difference in theexpression of the two men who thus followed the movements of Edmond Dantès. Chapter 2. Father andSonWe will leave Danglarsstruggling with the demon of hatred, and endeavoring to insinuate in the ear ofthe shipowner some evil suspicions against his comrade, and follow Dantès, who,after having traversed La Canebière, took the Rue de Noailles, and entering asmall house, on the left of the Allées de Meilhan, rapidly ascended fourflights of a dark staircase, holding the baluster with one hand, while with theother he repressed the beatings of his heart, and paused before a half-opendoor, from which he could see the whole of a small room.This room was occupied by Dantès’ father. The news of the arrival of thePharaon had not yet reached the old man, who, mounted on a chair, wasamusing himself by training with trembling hand the nasturtiums and sprays ofclematis that clambered over the trellis at his window. Suddenly, he felt anarm thrown around his body, and a well-known voice behind him exclaimed,“Father—dear father!”The old man uttered a cry, and turned round; then, seeing his son, he fell intohis arms, pale and trembling.“What ails you, my dearest father? Are you ill?” inquired the youngman, much alarmed.“No, no, my dear Edmond—my boy—my son!—no; but I didnot expect you; and joy, the surprise of seeing you so suddenly—Ah, Ifeel as if I were going to die.”“Come, come, cheer up, my dear father! ’Tis I—really I! Theysay joy never hurts, and so I came to you without any warning. Come now, dosmile, instead of looking at me so solemnly. Here I am back again, and we aregoing to be happy.”“Yes, yes, my boy, so we will—so we will,” replied the oldman; “but how shall we be happy? Shall you never leave me again? Come,tell me all the good fortune that has befallen you.”“God forgive me,” said the young man, “for rejoicing athappiness derived from the misery of others, but, Heaven knows, I did not seekthis good fortune; it has happened, and I really cannot pretend to lament it.The good Captain Leclere is dead, father, and it is probable that, with the aidof M. Morrel, I shall have his place. Do you understand, father? Only imagineme a captain at twenty, with a hundred louis pay, and a share in the profits!Is this not more than a poor sailor like me could have hoped for?”“Yes, my dear boy,” replied the old man, “it is veryfortunate.”“Well, then, with the first money I touch, I mean you to have a smallhouse, with a garden in which to plant clematis, nasturtiums, and honeysuckle.But what ails you, father? Are you not well?”“’Tis nothing, nothing; it will soon pass away”—and ashe said so the old man’s strength failed him, and he fell backwards.“Come, come,” said the young man, “a glass of wine, father,will revive you. Where do you keep your wine?”“No, no; thanks. You need not look for it; I do not want it,” saidthe old man.“Yes, yes, father, tell me where it is,” and he opened two or threecupboards.“It is no use,” said the old man, “there is no wine.”“What, no wine?” said Dantès, turning pale, and looking alternatelyat the hollow cheeks of the old man and the empty cupboards. “What, nowine? Have you wanted money, father?”“I want nothing now that I have you,” said the old man.“Yet,” stammered Dantès, wiping the perspiration from hisbrow,—“yet I gave you two hundred francs when I left, three monthsago.”“Yes, yes, Edmond, that is true, but you forgot at that time a littledebt to our neighbor, Caderousse. He reminded me of it, telling me if I did notpay for you, he would be paid by M. Morrel; and so, you see, lest he might doyou an injury——”“Well?”“Why, I paid him.”“But,” cried Dantès, “it was a hundred and forty francs Iowed Caderousse.”“Yes,” stammered the old man.“And you paid him out of the two hundred francs I left you?”The old man nodded.“So that you have lived for three months on sixty francs,” mutteredEdmond.“You know how little I require,” said the old man.“Heaven pardon me,” cried Edmond, falling on his knees before hisfather.“What are you doing?”“You have wounded me to the heart.”“Never mind it, for I see you once more,” said the old man;“and now it’s all over—everything is all right again.”“Yes, here I am,” said the young man, “with a promisingfuture and a little money. Here, father, here!” he said, “takethis—take it, and send for something immediately.” And he emptiedhis pockets on the table, the contents consisting of a dozen gold pieces, fiveor six five-franc pieces, and some smaller coin. The countenance of old Dantèsbrightened.“Whom does this belong to?” he inquired.“To me, to you, to us! Take it; buy some provisions; be happy, andtomorrow we shall have more.”“Gently, gently,” said the old man, with a smile; “and byyour leave I will use your purse moderately, for they would say, if they saw mebuy too many things at a time, that I had been obliged to await your return, inorder to be able to purchase them.”“Do as you please; but, first of all, pray have a servant, father. I willnot have you left alone so long. I have some smuggled coffee and most capitaltobacco, in a small chest in the hold, which you shall have tomorrow. But,hush, here comes somebody.”“’Tis Caderousse, who has heard of your arrival, and no doubt comesto congratulate you on your fortunate return.”“Ah, lips that say one thing, while the heart thinks another,”murmured Edmond. “But, never mind, he is a neighbor who has done us aservice on a time, so he’s welcome.”As Edmond paused, the black and bearded head of Caderousse appeared at thedoor. He was a man of twenty-five or six, and held a piece of cloth, which,being a tailor, he was about to make into a coat-lining.“What, is it you, Edmond, back again?” said he, with a broadMarseillaise accent, and a grin that displayed his ivory-white teeth.“Yes, as you see, neighbor Caderousse; and ready to be agreeable to youin any and every way,” replied Dantès, but ill-concealing his coldnessunder this cloak of civility.“Thanks—thanks; but, fortunately, I do not want for anything; andit chances that at times there are others who have need of me.” Dantèsmade a gesture. “I do not allude to you, my boy. No!—no! I lent youmoney, and you returned it; that’s like good neighbors, and we arequits.”“We are never quits with those who oblige us,” was Dantès’reply; “for when we do not owe them money, we owe them gratitude.”“What’s the use of mentioning that? What is done is done. Let ustalk of your happy return, my boy. I had gone on the quay to match a piece ofmulberry cloth, when I met friend Danglars. ‘You atMarseilles?’—‘Yes,’ says he.“‘I thought you were at Smyrna.’—‘I was; but amnow back again.’“‘And where is the dear boy, our little Edmond?’“‘Why, with his father, no doubt,’ replied Danglars. And so Icame,” added Caderousse, “as fast as I could to have the pleasureof shaking hands with a friend.”“Worthy Caderousse!” said the old man, “he is so muchattached to us.”“Yes, to be sure I am. I love and esteem you, because honest folks are sorare. But it seems you have come back rich, my boy,” continued thetailor, looking askance at the handful of gold and silver which Dantès hadthrown on the table.The young man remarked the greedy glance which shone in the dark eyes of hisneighbor. “Eh,” he said, negligently, “this money is notmine. I was expressing to my father my fears that he had wanted many things inmy absence, and to convince me he emptied his purse on the table. Come,father” added Dantès, “put this money back in your box—unlessneighbor Caderousse wants anything, and in that case it is at hisservice.”“No, my boy, no,” said Caderousse. “I am not in any want,thank God, my living is suited to my means. Keep your money—keep it, Isay;—one never has too much;—but, at the same time, my boy, I am asmuch obliged by your offer as if I took advantage of it.”“It was offered with good will,” said Dantès.“No doubt, my boy; no doubt. Well, you stand well with M. Morrel Ihear,—you insinuating dog, you!”“M. Morrel has always been exceedingly kind to me,” replied Dantès.“Then you were wrong to refuse to dine with him.”“What, did you refuse to dine with him?” said old Dantès;“and did he invite you to dine?”“Yes, my dear father,” replied Edmond, smiling at hisfather’s astonishment at the excessive honor paid to his son.“And why did you refuse, my son?” inquired the old man.“That I might the sooner see you again, my dear father,” repliedthe young man. “I was most anxious to see you.”“But it must have vexed M. Morrel, good, worthy man,” saidCaderousse. “And when you are looking forward to be captain, it was wrongto annoy the owner.”“But I explained to him the cause of my refusal,” replied Dantès,“and I hope he fully understood it.”“Yes, but to be captain one must do a little flattery to one’spatrons.”“I hope to be captain without that,” said Dantès.“So much the better—so much the better! Nothing will give greaterpleasure to all your old friends; and I know one down there behind the SaintNicolas citadel who will not be sorry to hear it.”“Mercédès?” said the old man.“Yes, my dear father, and with your permission, now I have seen you, andknow you are well and have all you require, I will ask your consent to go andpay a visit to the Catalans.”“Go, my dear boy,” said old Dantès; “and Heaven bless you inyour wife, as it has blessed me in my son!”“His wife!” said Caderousse; “why, how fast you go on, fatherDantès; she is not his wife yet, as it seems to me.”“No, but according to all probability she soon will be,” repliedEdmond.“Yes—yes,” said Caderousse; “but you were right toreturn as soon as possible, my boy.”“And why?”“Because Mercédès is a very fine girl, and fine girls never lackfollowers; she particularly has them by dozens.”“Really?” answered Edmond, with a smile which had in it traces ofslight uneasiness.“Ah, yes,” continued Caderousse, “and capital offers, too;but you know, you will be captain, and who could refuse you then?”“Meaning to say,” replied Dantès, with a smile which butill-concealed his trouble, “that if I were not acaptain——”“Eh—eh!” said Caderousse, shaking his head.“Come, come,” said the sailor, “I have a better opinion thanyou of women in general, and of Mercédès in particular; and I am certain that,captain or not, she will remain ever faithful to me.”“So much the better—so much the better,” said Caderousse.“When one is going to be married, there is nothing like implicitconfidence; but never mind that, my boy,—go and announce your arrival,and let her know all your hopes and prospects.”“I will go directly,” was Edmond’s reply; and, embracing hisfather, and nodding to Caderousse, he left the apartment.Caderousse lingered for a moment, then taking leave of old Dantès, he wentdownstairs to rejoin Danglars, who awaited him at the corner of the Rue Senac.“Well,” said Danglars, “did you see him?”“I have just left him,” answered Caderousse.“Did he allude to his hope of being captain?”“He spoke of it as a thing already decided.”“Indeed!” said Danglars, “he is in too much hurry, it appearsto me.”“Why, it seems M. Morrel has promised him the thing.”“So that he is quite elated about it?”“Why, yes, he is actually insolent over the matter—has alreadyoffered me his patronage, as if he were a grand personage, and proffered me aloan of money, as though he were a banker.”“Which you refused?”“Most assuredly; although I might easily have accepted it, for it was Iwho put into his hands the first silver he ever earned; but now M. Dantès hasno longer any occasion for assistance—he is about to become acaptain.”“Pooh!” said Danglars, “he is not one yet.”“Ma foi! it will be as well if he is not,” answeredCaderousse; “for if he should be, there will be really no speaking tohim.”“If we choose,” replied Danglars, “he will remain what he is;and perhaps become even less than he is.”“What do you mean?”“Nothing—I was speaking to myself. And is he still in love with theCatalane?”“Over head and ears; but, unless I am much mistaken, there will be astorm in that quarter.”“Explain yourself.”“Why should I?”“It is more important than you think, perhaps. You do not likeDantès?”“I never like upstarts.”“Then tell me all you know about the Catalane.”“I know nothing for certain; only I have seen things which induce me tobelieve, as I told you, that the future captain will find some annoyance in thevicinity of the Vieilles Infirmeries.”“What have you seen?—come, tell me!”“Well, every time I have seen Mercédès come into the city she has beenaccompanied by a tall, strapping, black-eyed Catalan, with a red complexion,brown skin, and fierce air, whom she calls cousin.”“Really; and you think this cousin pays her attentions?”“I only suppose so. What else can a strapping chap of twenty-one meanwith a fine wench of seventeen?”“And you say that Dantès has gone to the Catalans?”“He went before I came down.”“Let us go the same way; we will stop at La Réserve, and we can drink aglass of La Malgue, whilst we wait for news.”“Come along,” said Caderousse; “but you pay the score.”“Of course,” replied Danglars; and going quickly to the designatedplace, they called for a bottle of wine, and two glasses.Père Pamphile had seen Dantès pass not ten minutes before; and assured that hewas at the Catalans, they sat down under the budding foliage of the planes andsycamores, in the branches of which the birds were singing their welcome to oneof the first days of spring. Chapter 3. TheCatalansBeyond a bare,weather-worn wall, about a hundred paces from the spot where the two friendssat looking and listening as they drank their wine, was the village of theCatalans. Long ago this mysterious colony quitted Spain, and settled on thetongue of land on which it is to this day. Whence it came no one knew, and itspoke an unknown tongue. One of its chiefs, who understood Provençal, beggedthe commune of Marseilles to give them this bare and barren promontory, where,like the sailors of old, they had run their boats ashore. The request wasgranted; and three months afterwards, around the twelve or fifteen smallvessels which had brought these gypsies of the sea, a small village sprang up.This village, constructed in a singular and picturesque manner, half Moorish,half Spanish, still remains, and is inhabited by descendants of the firstcomers, who speak the language of their fathers. For three or four centuriesthey have remained upon this small promontory, on which they had settled like aflight of seabirds, without mixing with the Marseillaise population,intermarrying, and preserving their original customs and the costume of theirmother-country as they have preserved its language.Our readers will follow us along the only street of this little village, andenter with us one of the houses, which is sunburned to the beautiful dead-leafcolor peculiar to the buildings of the country, and within coated withwhitewash, like a Spanish posada. A young and beautiful girl, with hair asblack as jet, her eyes as velvety as the gazelle’s, was leaning with herback against the wainscot, rubbing in her slender delicately moulded fingers abunch of heath blossoms, the flowers of which she was picking off and strewingon the floor; her arms, bare to the elbow, brown, and modelled after those ofthe Arlesian Venus, moved with a kind of restless impatience, and she tappedthe earth with her arched and supple foot, so as to display the pure and fullshape of her well-turned leg, in its red cotton, gray and blue clocked,stocking. At three paces from her, seated in a chair which he balanced on twolegs, leaning his elbow on an old worm-eaten table, was a tall young man oftwenty, or two-and-twenty, who was looking at her with an air in which vexationand uneasiness were mingled. He questioned her with his eyes, but the firm andsteady gaze of the young girl controlled his look.“You see, Mercédès,” said the young man, “here is Easter comeround again; tell me, is this the moment for a wedding?”“I have answered you a hundred times, Fernand, and really you must bevery stupid to ask me again.”“Well, repeat it,—repeat it, I beg of you, that I may at lastbelieve it! Tell me for the hundredth time that you refuse my love, which hadyour mother’s sanction. Make me understand once for all that you aretrifling with my happiness, that my life or death are nothing to you. Ah, tohave dreamed for ten years of being your husband, Mercédès, and to lose thathope, which was the only stay of my existence!”“At least it was not I who ever encouraged you in that hope,Fernand,” replied Mercédès; “you cannot reproach me with theslightest coquetry. I have always said to you, ‘I love you as a brother;but do not ask from me more than sisterly affection, for my heart isanother’s.’ Is not this true, Fernand?”“Yes, that is very true, Mercédès,” replied the young man,“Yes, you have been cruelly frank with me; but do you forget that it isamong the Catalans a sacred law to intermarry?”“You mistake, Fernand; it is not a law, but merely a custom, and, I prayof you, do not cite this custom in your favor. You are included in theconscription, Fernand, and are only at liberty on sufferance, liable at anymoment to be called upon to take up arms. Once a soldier, what would you dowith me, a poor orphan, forlorn, without fortune, with nothing but ahalf-ruined hut and a few ragged nets, the miserable inheritance left by myfather to my mother, and by my mother to me? She has been dead a year, and youknow, Fernand, I have subsisted almost entirely on public charity. Sometimesyou pretend I am useful to you, and that is an excuse to share with me theproduce of your fishing, and I accept it, Fernand, because you are the son ofmy father’s brother, because we were brought up together, and still morebecause it would give you so much pain if I refuse. But I feel very deeply thatthis fish which I go and sell, and with the produce of which I buy the flax Ispin,—I feel very keenly, Fernand, that this is charity.”“And if it were, Mercédès, poor and lone as you are, you suit me as wellas the daughter of the first shipowner or the richest banker of Marseilles!What do such as we desire but a good wife and careful housekeeper, and wherecan I look for these better than in you?”“Fernand,” answered Mercédès, shaking her head, “a womanbecomes a bad manager, and who shall say she will remain an honest woman, whenshe loves another man better than her husband? Rest content with my friendship,for I say once more that is all I can promise, and I will promise no more thanI can bestow.”“I understand,” replied Fernand, “you can endure your ownwretchedness patiently, but you are afraid to share mine. Well, Mercédès,beloved by you, I would tempt fortune; you would bring me good luck, and Ishould become rich. I could extend my occupation as a fisherman, might get aplace as clerk in a warehouse, and become in time a dealer myself.”“You could do no such thing, Fernand; you are a soldier, and if youremain at the Catalans it is because there is no war; so remain a fisherman,and contented with my friendship, as I cannot give you more.”“Well, I will do better, Mercédès. I will be a sailor; instead of thecostume of our fathers, which you despise, I will wear a varnished hat, astriped shirt, and a blue jacket, with an anchor on the buttons. Would not thatdress please you?”“What do you mean?” asked Mercédès, with an angryglance,—“what do you mean? I do not understand you?”“I mean, Mercédès, that you are thus harsh and cruel with me, because youare expecting someone who is thus attired; but perhaps he whom you await isinconstant, or if he is not, the sea is so to him.”“Fernand,” cried Mercédès, “I believed you were good-hearted,and I was mistaken! Fernand, you are wicked to call to your aid jealousy andthe anger of God! Yes, I will not deny it, I do await, and I do love him ofwhom you speak; and, if he does not return, instead of accusing him of theinconstancy which you insinuate, I will tell you that he died loving me and meonly.” The young girl made a gesture of rage. “I understand you,Fernand; you would be revenged on him because I do not love you; you wouldcross your Catalan knife with his dirk. What end would that answer? To lose youmy friendship if he were conquered, and see that friendship changed into hateif you were victor. Believe me, to seek a quarrel with a man is a bad method ofpleasing the woman who loves that man. No, Fernand, you will not thus give wayto evil thoughts. Unable to have me for your wife, you will content yourselfwith having me for your friend and sister; and besides,” she added, hereyes troubled and moistened with tears, “wait, wait, Fernand; you saidjust now that the sea was treacherous, and he has been gone four months, andduring these four months there have been some terrible storms.”Fernand made no reply, nor did he attempt to check the tears which flowed downthe cheeks of Mercédès, although for each of these tears he would have shed hisheart’s blood; but these tears flowed for another. He arose, paced awhile up and down the hut, and then, suddenly stopping before Mercédès, withhis eyes glowing and his hands clenched,—“Say, Mercédès,” hesaid, “once for all, is this your final determination?”“I love Edmond Dantès,” the young girl calmly replied, “andnone but Edmond shall ever be my husband.”“And you will always love him?”“As long as I live.”Fernand let fall his head like a defeated man, heaved a sigh that was like agroan, and then suddenly looking her full in the face, with clenched teeth andexpanded nostrils, said,—“But if he is dead——”“If he is dead, I shall die too.”“If he has forgotten you——”“Mercédès!” called a joyous voice fromwithout,—“Mercédès!”“Ah,” exclaimed the young girl, blushing with delight, and fairlyleaping in excess of love, “you see he has not forgotten me, for here heis!” And rushing towards the door, she opened it, saying, “Here,Edmond, here I am!”Fernand, pale and trembling, drew back, like a traveller at the sight of aserpent, and fell into a chair beside him. Edmond and Mercédès were clasped ineach other’s arms. The burning Marseilles sun, which shot into the roomthrough the open door, covered them with a flood of light. At first they sawnothing around them. Their intense happiness isolated them from all the rest ofthe world, and they only spoke in broken words, which are the tokens of a joyso extreme that they seem rather the expression of sorrow. Suddenly Edmond sawthe gloomy, pale, and threatening countenance of Fernand, as it was defined inthe shadow. By a movement for which he could scarcely account to himself, theyoung Catalan placed his hand on the knife at his belt.“Ah, your pardon,” said Dantès, frowning in his turn; “I didnot perceive that there were three of us.” Then, turning to Mercédès, heinquired, “Who is this gentleman?”“One who will be your best friend, Dantès, for he is my friend, mycousin, my brother; it is Fernand—the man whom, after you, Edmond, I lovethe best in the world. Do you not remember him?”“Yes!” said Dantès, and without relinquishing Mercédès’ handclasped in one of his own, he extended the other to the Catalan with a cordialair. But Fernand, instead of responding to this amiable gesture, remained muteand trembling. Edmond then cast his eyes scrutinizingly at the agitated andembarrassed Mercédès, and then again on the gloomy and menacing Fernand. Thislook told him all, and his anger waxed hot.“I did not know, when I came with such haste to you, that I was to meetan enemy here.”“An enemy!” cried Mercédès, with an angry look at her cousin.“An enemy in my house, do you say, Edmond! If I believed that, I wouldplace my arm under yours and go with you to Marseilles, leaving the house toreturn to it no more.”Fernand’s eye darted lightning. “And should any misfortune occur toyou, dear Edmond,” she continued with the same calmness which proved toFernand that the young girl had read the very innermost depths of his sinisterthought, “if misfortune should occur to you, I would ascend the highestpoint of the Cape de Morgiou and cast myself headlong from it.”Fernand became deadly pale. “But you are deceived, Edmond,” shecontinued. “You have no enemy here—there is no one but Fernand, mybrother, who will grasp your hand as a devoted friend.”And at these words the young girl fixed her imperious look on the Catalan, who,as if fascinated by it, came slowly towards Edmond, and offered him his hand.His hatred, like a powerless though furious wave, was broken against the strongascendancy which Mercédès exercised over him. Scarcely, however, had he touchedEdmond’s hand when he felt he had done all he could do, and rushedhastily out of the house.“Oh,” he exclaimed, running furiously and tearing hishair—“Oh, who will deliver me from this man?Wretched—wretched that I am!”“Hallo, Catalan! Hallo, Fernand! where are you running to?”exclaimed a voice.The young man stopped suddenly, looked around him, and perceived Caderoussesitting at table with Danglars, under an arbor.“Well”, said Caderousse, “why don’t you come? Are youreally in such a hurry that you have no time to pass the time of day with yourfriends?”“Particularly when they have still a full bottle before them,”added Danglars. Fernand looked at them both with a stupefied air, but did notsay a word.“He seems besotted,” said Danglars, pushing Caderousse with hisknee. “Are we mistaken, and is Dantès triumphant in spite of all we havebelieved?”“Why, we must inquire into that,” was Caderousse’s reply; andturning towards the young man, said, “Well, Catalan, can’t you makeup your mind?”Fernand wiped away the perspiration steaming from his brow, and slowly enteredthe arbor, whose shade seemed to restore somewhat of calmness to his senses,and whose coolness somewhat of refreshment to his exhausted body.“Good-day,” said he. “You called me, didn’t you?”And he fell, rather than sat down, on one of the seats which surrounded thetable.“I called you because you were running like a madman, and I was afraidyou would throw yourself into the sea,” said Caderousse, laughing.“Why, when a man has friends, they are not only to offer him a glass ofwine, but, moreover, to prevent his swallowing three or four pints of waterunnecessarily!”Fernand gave a groan, which resembled a sob, and dropped his head into hishands, his elbows leaning on the table.“Well, Fernand, I must say,” said Caderousse, beginning theconversation, with that brutality of the common people in which curiositydestroys all diplomacy, “you look uncommonly like a rejectedlover;” and he burst into a hoarse laugh.“Bah!” said Danglars, “a lad of his make was not born to beunhappy in love. You are laughing at him, Caderousse.”“No,” he replied, “only hark how he sighs! Come, come,Fernand,” said Caderousse, “hold up your head, and answer us.It’s not polite not to reply to friends who ask news of yourhealth.”“My health is well enough,” said Fernand, clenching his handswithout raising his head.“Ah, you see, Danglars,” said Caderousse, winking at his friend,“this is how it is; Fernand, whom you see here, is a good and braveCatalan, one of the best fishermen in Marseilles, and he is in love with a veryfine girl, named Mercédès; but it appears, unfortunately, that the fine girl isin love with the mate of the Pharaon; and as the Pharaon arrivedtoday—why, you understand!”“No; I do not understand,” said Danglars.“Poor Fernand has been dismissed,” continued Caderousse.“Well, and what then?” said Fernand, lifting up his head, andlooking at Caderousse like a man who looks for someone on whom to vent hisanger; “Mercédès is not accountable to any person, is she? Is she notfree to love whomsoever she will?”“Oh, if you take it in that sense,” said Caderousse, “it isanother thing. But I thought you were a Catalan, and they told me the Catalanswere not men to allow themselves to be supplanted by a rival. It was even toldme that Fernand, especially, was terrible in his vengeance.”Fernand smiled piteously. “A lover is never terrible,” he said.“Poor fellow!” remarked Danglars, affecting to pity the young manfrom the bottom of his heart. “Why, you see, he did not expect to seeDantès return so suddenly—he thought he was dead, perhaps; or perchancefaithless! These things always come on us more severely when they comesuddenly.”“Ah, ma foi, under any circumstances!” said Caderousse, whodrank as he spoke, and on whom the fumes of the wine began to takeeffect,—“under any circumstances Fernand is not the only person putout by the fortunate arrival of Dantès; is he, Danglars?”“No, you are right—and I should say that would bring himill-luck.”“Well, never mind,” answered Caderousse, pouring out a glass ofwine for Fernand, and filling his own for the eighth or ninth time, whileDanglars had merely sipped his. “Never mind—in the meantime hemarries Mercédès—the lovely Mercédès—at least he returns to dothat.”During this time Danglars fixed his piercing glance on the young man, on whoseheart Caderousse’s words fell like molten lead.“And when is the wedding to be?” he asked.“Oh, it is not yet fixed!” murmured Fernand.“No, but it will be,” said Caderousse, “as surely as Dantèswill be captain of the Pharaon—eh, Danglars?”Danglars shuddered at this unexpected attack, and turned to Caderousse, whosecountenance he scrutinized, to try and detect whether the blow waspremeditated; but he read nothing but envy in a countenance already renderedbrutal and stupid by drunkenness.“Well,” said he, filling the glasses, “let us drink toCaptain Edmond Dantès, husband of the beautiful Catalane!”Caderousse raised his glass to his mouth with unsteady hand, and swallowed thecontents at a gulp. Fernand dashed his on the ground.“Eh, eh, eh!” stammered Caderousse. “What do I see down thereby the wall, in the direction of the Catalans? Look, Fernand, your eyes arebetter than mine. I believe I see double. You know wine is a deceiver; but Ishould say it was two lovers walking side by side, and hand in hand. Heavenforgive me, they do not know that we can see them, and they are actuallyembracing!”Danglars did not lose one pang that Fernand endured.“Do you know them, Fernand?” he said.“Yes,” was the reply, in a low voice. “It is Edmond andMercédès!”“Ah, see there, now!” said Caderousse; “and I did notrecognize them! Hallo, Dantès! hello, lovely damsel! Come this way, and let usknow when the wedding is to be, for Fernand here is so obstinate he will nottell us.”“Hold your tongue, will you?” said Danglars, pretending to restrainCaderousse, who, with the tenacity of drunkards, leaned out of the arbor.“Try to stand upright, and let the lovers make love without interruption.See, look at Fernand, and follow his example; he is well-behaved!”Fernand, probably excited beyond bearing, pricked by Danglars, as the bull isby the bandilleros, was about to rush out; for he had risen from his seat, andseemed to be collecting himself to dash headlong upon his rival, when Mercédès,smiling and graceful, lifted up her lovely head, and looked at them with herclear and bright eyes. At this Fernand recollected her threat of dying ifEdmond died, and dropped again heavily on his seat. Danglars looked at the twomen, one after the other, the one brutalized by liquor, the other overwhelmedwith love.“I shall get nothing from these fools,” he muttered; “and Iam very much afraid of being here between a drunkard and a coward. Here’san envious fellow making himself boozy on wine when he ought to be nursing hiswrath, and here is a fool who sees the woman he loves stolen from under hisnose and takes on like a big baby. Yet this Catalan has eyes that glisten likethose of the vengeful Spaniards, Sicilians, and Calabrians, and the other hasfists big enough to crush an ox at one blow. Unquestionably, Edmond’sstar is in the ascendant, and he will marry the splendid girl—he will becaptain, too, and laugh at us all, unless”—a sinister smile passedover Danglars’ lips—“unless I take a hand in theaffair,” he added.“Hallo!” continued Caderousse, half-rising, and with his fist onthe table, “hallo, Edmond! do you not see your friends, or are you tooproud to speak to them?”“No, my dear fellow!” replied Dantès, “I am not proud, but Iam happy, and happiness blinds, I think, more than pride.”“Ah, very well, that’s an explanation!” said Caderousse.“How do you do, Madame Dantès?”Mercédès courtesied gravely, and said—“That is not my name, and inmy country it bodes ill fortune, they say, to call a young girl by the name ofher betrothed before he becomes her husband. So call me Mercédès, if youplease.”“We must excuse our worthy neighbor, Caderousse,” said Dantès,“he is so easily mistaken.”“So, then, the wedding is to take place immediately, M. Dantès,”said Danglars, bowing to the young couple.“As soon as possible, M. Danglars; today all preliminaries will bearranged at my father’s, and tomorrow, or next day at latest, the weddingfestival here at La Réserve. My friends will be there, I hope; that is to say,you are invited, M. Danglars, and you, Caderousse.”“And Fernand,” said Caderousse with a chuckle; “Fernand, too,is invited!”“My wife’s brother is my brother,” said Edmond; “andwe, Mercédès and I, should be very sorry if he were absent at such atime.”Fernand opened his mouth to reply, but his voice died on his lips, and he couldnot utter a word.“Today the preliminaries, tomorrow or next day the ceremony! You are in ahurry, captain!”“Danglars,” said Edmond, smiling, “I will say to you asMercédès said just now to Caderousse, ‘Do not give me a title which doesnot belong to me’; that may bring me bad luck.”“Your pardon,” replied Danglars, “I merely said you seemed ina hurry, and we have lots of time; the Pharaon cannot be under weighagain in less than three months.”“We are always in a hurry to be happy, M. Danglars; for when we havesuffered a long time, we have great difficulty in believing in good fortune.But it is not selfishness alone that makes me thus in haste; I must go toParis.”“Ah, really?—to Paris! and will it be the first time you have everbeen there, Dantès?”“Yes.”“Have you business there?”“Not of my own; the last commission of poor Captain Leclere; you know towhat I allude, Danglars—it is sacred. Besides, I shall only take the timeto go and return.”“Yes, yes, I understand,” said Danglars, and then in a low tone, headded, “To Paris, no doubt to deliver the letter which the grand marshalgave him. Ah, this letter gives me an idea—a capital idea! Ah; Dantès, myfriend, you are not yet registered number one on board the good shipPharaon;” then turning towards Edmond, who was walking away,“A pleasant journey,” he cried.“Thank you,” said Edmond with a friendly nod, and the two loverscontinued on their way, as calm and joyous as if they were the very elect ofheaven. Chapter 4. ConspiracyDanglars followed Edmondand Mercédès with his eyes until the two lovers disappeared behind one of theangles of Fort Saint Nicolas; then, turning round, he perceived Fernand, whohad fallen, pale and trembling, into his chair, while Caderousse stammered outthe words of a drinking-song.“Well, my dear sir,” said Danglars to Fernand, “here is amarriage which does not appear to make everybody happy.”“It drives me to despair,” said Fernand.“Do you, then, love Mercédès?”“I adore her!”“For long?”“As long as I have known her—always.”“And you sit there, tearing your hair, instead of seeking to remedy yourcondition; I did not think that was the way of your people.”“What would you have me do?” said Fernand.“How do I know? Is it my affair? I am not in love with MademoiselleMercédès; but for you—in the words of the gospel, seek, and you shallfind.”“I have found already.”“What?”“I would stab the man, but the woman told me that if any misfortunehappened to her betrothed, she would kill herself.”“Pooh! Women say those things, but never do them.”“You do not know Mercédès; what she threatens she will do.”“Idiot!” muttered Danglars; “whether she kill herself or not,what matter, provided Dantès is not captain?”“Before Mercédès should die,” replied Fernand, with the accents ofunshaken resolution, “I would die myself!”“That’s what I call love!” said Caderousse with a voice moretipsy than ever. “That’s love, or I don’t know what loveis.”“Come,” said Danglars, “you appear to me a good sort offellow, and hang me, I should like to help you, but——”“Yes,” said Caderousse, “but how?”“My dear fellow,” replied Danglars, “you are three partsdrunk; finish the bottle, and you will be completely so. Drink then, and do notmeddle with what we are discussing, for that requires all one’s wit andcool judgment.”“I—drunk!” said Caderousse; “well that’s a goodone! I could drink four more such bottles; they are no bigger than cologneflasks. Père Pamphile, more wine!”And Caderousse rattled his glass upon the table.“You were saying, sir——” said Fernand, awaiting withgreat anxiety the end of this interrupted remark.“What was I saying? I forget. This drunken Caderousse has made me losethe thread of my sentence.”“Drunk, if you like; so much the worse for those who fear wine, for it isbecause they have bad thoughts which they are afraid the liquor will extractfrom their hearts;” and Caderousse began to sing the two last lines of asong very popular at the time:‘Tous les méchants sont buveurs d’eau;C’est bien prouvé par le déluge.’[1]“You said, sir, you would like to help me, but——”“Yes; but I added, to help you it would be sufficient that Dantès did notmarry her you love; and the marriage may easily be thwarted, methinks, and yetDantès need not die.”“Death alone can separate them,” remarked Fernand.“You talk like a noodle, my friend,” said Caderousse; “andhere is Danglars, who is a wide-awake, clever, deep fellow, who will prove toyou that you are wrong. Prove it, Danglars. I have answered for you. Say thereis no need why Dantès should die; it would, indeed, be a pity he should. Dantèsis a good fellow; I like Dantès. Dantès, your health.”Fernand rose impatiently. “Let him run on,” said Danglars,restraining the young man; “drunk as he is, he is not much out in what hesays. Absence severs as well as death, and if the walls of a prison werebetween Edmond and Mercédès they would be as effectually separated as if he layunder a tombstone.”“Yes; but one gets out of prison,” said Caderousse, who, with whatsense was left him, listened eagerly to the conversation, “and when onegets out and one’s name is Edmond Dantès, one seeksrevenge——”“What matters that?” muttered Fernand.“And why, I should like to know,” persisted Caderousse,“should they put Dantès in prison? he has neither robbed, nor killed, normurdered.”“Hold your tongue!” said Danglars.“I won’t hold my tongue!” replied Caderousse; “I say Iwant to know why they should put Dantès in prison; I like Dantès; Dantès, yourhealth!” and he swallowed another glass of wine.Danglars saw in the muddled look of the tailor the progress of hisintoxication, and turning towards Fernand, said, “Well, you understandthere is no need to kill him.”“Certainly not, if, as you said just now, you have the means of havingDantès arrested. Have you that means?”“It is to be found for the searching. But why should I meddle in thematter? it is no affair of mine.”“I know not why you meddle,” said Fernand, seizing his arm;“but this I know, you have some motive of personal hatred against Dantès,for he who himself hates is never mistaken in the sentiments of others.”“I! motives of hatred against Dantès? None, on my word! I saw you wereunhappy, and your unhappiness interested me; that’s all; but since youbelieve I act for my own account, adieu, my dear friend, get out of the affairas best you may;” and Danglars rose as if he meant to depart.“No, no,” said Fernand, restraining him, “stay! It is of verylittle consequence to me at the end of the matter whether you have any angryfeeling or not against Dantès. I hate him! I confess it openly. Do you find themeans, I will execute it, provided it is not to kill the man, for Mercédès hasdeclared she will kill herself if Dantès is killed.”Caderousse, who had let his head drop on the table, now raised it, and lookingat Fernand with his dull and fishy eyes, he said, “Kill Dantès! who talksof killing Dantès? I won’t have him killed—I won’t!He’s my friend, and this morning offered to share his money with me, as Ishared mine with him. I won’t have Dantès killed—Iwon’t!”“And who has said a word about killing him, muddlehead?” repliedDanglars. “We were merely joking; drink to his health,” he added,filling Caderousse’s glass, “and do not interfere with us.”“Yes, yes, Dantès’ good health!” said Caderousse, emptyinghis glass, “here’s to his health! his health—hurrah!”“But the means—the means?” said Fernand.“Have you not hit upon any?” asked Danglars.“No!—you undertook to do so.”“True,” replied Danglars; “the French have the superiorityover the Spaniards, that the Spaniards ruminate, while the Frenchinvent.”“Do you invent, then,” said Fernand impatiently.“Waiter,” said Danglars, “pen, ink, and paper.”“Pen, ink, and paper,” muttered Fernand.“Yes; I am a supercargo; pen, ink, and paper are my tools, and without mytools I am fit for nothing.”“Pen, ink, and paper, then,” called Fernand loudly.“There’s what you want on that table,” said the waiter.“Bring them here.” The waiter did as he was desired.“When one thinks,” said Caderousse, letting his hand drop on thepaper, “there is here wherewithal to kill a man more sure than if wewaited at the corner of a wood to assassinate him! I have always had more dreadof a pen, a bottle of ink, and a sheet of paper, than of a sword orpistol.”“The fellow is not so drunk as he appears to be,” said Danglars.“Give him some more wine, Fernand.” Fernand filledCaderousse’s glass, who, like the confirmed toper he was, lifted his handfrom the paper and seized the glass.The Catalan watched him until Caderousse, almost overcome by this fresh assaulton his senses, rested, or rather dropped, his glass upon the table.“Well!” resumed the Catalan, as he saw the final glimmer ofCaderousse’s reason vanishing before the last glass of wine.“Well, then, I should say, for instance,” resumed Danglars,“that if after a voyage such as Dantès has just made, in which he touchedat the Island of Elba, someone were to denounce him to the king’sprocureur as a Bonapartist agent——”“I will denounce him!” exclaimed the young man hastily.“Yes, but they will make you then sign your declaration, and confront youwith him you have denounced; I will supply you with the means of supportingyour accusation, for I know the fact well. But Dantès cannot remain forever inprison, and one day or other he will leave it, and the day when he comes out,woe betide him who was the cause of his incarceration!”“Oh, I should wish nothing better than that he would come and seek aquarrel with me.”“Yes, and Mercédès! Mercédès, who will detest you if you have only themisfortune to scratch the skin of her dearly beloved Edmond!”“True!” said Fernand.“No, no,” continued Danglars; “if we resolve on such a step,it would be much better to take, as I now do, this pen, dip it into this ink,and write with the left hand (that the writing may not be recognized) thedenunciation we propose.” And Danglars, uniting practice with theory,wrote with his left hand, and in a writing reversed from his usual style, andtotally unlike it, the following lines, which he handed to Fernand, and whichFernand read in an undertone:“The honorable, the king’s attorney, is informed by a friend of thethrone and religion, that one Edmond Dantès, mate of the ship Pharaon,arrived this morning from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples andPorto-Ferrajo, has been intrusted by Murat with a letter for the usurper, andby the usurper with a letter for the Bonapartist committee in Paris. Proof ofthis crime will be found on arresting him, for the letter will be found uponhim, or at his father’s, or in his cabin on board thePharaon.”“Very good,” resumed Danglars; “now your revenge looks likecommon sense, for in no way can it revert to yourself, and the matter will thuswork its own way; there is nothing to do now but fold the letter as I am doing,and write upon it, ‘To the king’s attorney,’ and that’sall settled.” And Danglars wrote the address as he spoke.“Yes, and that’s all settled!” exclaimed Caderousse, who, bya last effort of intellect, had followed the reading of the letter, andinstinctively comprehended all the misery which such a denunciation mustentail. “Yes, and that’s all settled; only it will be an infamousshame;” and he stretched out his hand to reach the letter.“Yes,” said Danglars, taking it from beyond his reach; “andas what I say and do is merely in jest, and I, amongst the first and foremost,should be sorry if anything happened to Dantès—the worthyDantès—look here!” And taking the letter, he squeezed it up in hishands and threw it into a corner of the arbor.“All right!” said Caderousse. “Dantès is my friend, and Iwon’t have him ill-used.”“And who thinks of using him ill? Certainly neither I nor Fernand,”said Danglars, rising and looking at the young man, who still remained seated,but whose eye was fixed on the denunciatory sheet of paper flung into thecorner.“In this case,” replied Caderousse, “let’s have somemore wine. I wish to drink to the health of Edmond and the lovelyMercédès.”“You have had too much already, drunkard,” said Danglars;“and if you continue, you will be compelled to sleep here, because unableto stand on your legs.”“I?” said Caderousse, rising with all the offended dignity of adrunken man, “I can’t keep on my legs? Why, I’ll wager I cango up into the belfry of the Accoules, and without staggering, too!”“Done!” said Danglars, “I’ll take your bet; buttomorrow—today it is time to return. Give me your arm, and let usgo.”“Very well, let us go,” said Caderousse; “but I don’twant your arm at all. Come, Fernand, won’t you return to Marseilles withus?”“No,” said Fernand; “I shall return to the Catalans.”“You’re wrong. Come with us to Marseilles—come along.”“I will not.”“What do you mean? you will not? Well, just as you like, my prince;there’s liberty for all the world. Come along, Danglars, and let theyoung gentleman return to the Catalans if he chooses.”Danglars took advantage of Caderousse’s temper at the moment, to take himoff towards Marseilles by the Porte Saint-Victor, staggering as he went.When they had advanced about twenty yards, Danglars looked back and saw Fernandstoop, pick up the crumpled paper, and putting it into his pocket then rush outof the arbor towards Pillon.“Well,” said Caderousse, “why, what a lie he told! He said hewas going to the Catalans, and he is going to the city. Hallo, Fernand! You arecoming, my boy!”“Oh, you don’t see straight,” said Danglars;“he’s gone right by the road to the Vieilles Infirmeries.”“Well,” said Caderousse, “I should have sworn that he turnedto the right—how treacherous wine is!”“Come, come,” said Danglars to himself, “now the thing is atwork and it will effect its purpose unassisted.” Chapter 5. The MarriageFeastThe morning’s sunrose clear and resplendent, touching the foamy waves into a network ofruby-tinted light.The feast had been made ready on the second floor at La Réserve, with whosearbor the reader is already familiar. The apartment destined for the purposewas spacious and lighted by a number of windows, over each of which was writtenin golden letters for some inexplicable reason the name of one of the principalcities of France; beneath these windows a wooden balcony extended the entirelength of the house. And although the entertainment was fixed for twelveo’clock, an hour previous to that time the balcony was filled withimpatient and expectant guests, consisting of the favored part of the crew ofthe Pharaon, and other personal friends of the bridegroom, the whole ofwhom had arrayed themselves in their choicest costumes, in order to do greaterhonor to the occasion.Various rumors were afloat to the effect that the owners of the Pharaonhad promised to attend the nuptial feast; but all seemed unanimous in doubtingthat an act of such rare and exceeding condescension could possibly beintended.Danglars, however, who now made his appearance, accompanied by Caderousse,effectually confirmed the report, stating that he had recently conversed withM. Morrel, who had himself assured him of his intention to dine at La Réserve.In fact, a moment later M. Morrel appeared and was saluted with an enthusiasticburst of applause from the crew of the Pharaon, who hailed the visit ofthe shipowner as a sure indication that the man whose wedding feast he thusdelighted to honor would ere long be first in command of the ship; and asDantès was universally beloved on board his vessel, the sailors put norestraint on their tumultuous joy at finding that the opinion and choice oftheir superiors so exactly coincided with their own.With the entrance of M. Morrel, Danglars and Caderousse were despatched insearch of the bridegroom to convey to him the intelligence of the arrival ofthe important personage whose coming had created such a lively sensation, andto beseech him to make haste.Danglars and Caderousse set off upon their errand at full speed; but ere theyhad gone many steps they perceived a group advancing towards them, composed ofthe betrothed pair, a party of young girls in attendance on the bride, by whoseside walked Dantès’ father; the whole brought up by Fernand, whose lipswore their usual sinister smile.Neither Mercédès nor Edmond observed the strange expression of his countenance;they were so happy that they were conscious only of the sunshine and thepresence of each other.Having acquitted themselves of their errand, and exchanged a hearty shake ofthe hand with Edmond, Danglars and Caderousse took their places beside Fernandand old Dantès,—the latter of whom attracted universal notice.The old man was attired in a suit of glistening watered silk, trimmed withsteel buttons, beautifully cut and polished. His thin but wiry legs werearrayed in a pair of richly embroidered clocked stockings, evidently of Englishmanufacture, while from his three-cornered hat depended a long streaming knotof white and blue ribbons. Thus he came along, supporting himself on acuriously carved stick, his aged countenance lit up with happiness, looking forall the world like one of the aged dandies of 1796, parading the newly openedgardens of the Luxembourg and Tuileries.Beside him glided Caderousse, whose desire to partake of the good thingsprovided for the wedding party had induced him to become reconciled to theDantès, father and son, although there still lingered in his mind a faint andunperfect recollection of the events of the preceding night; just as the brainretains on waking in the morning the dim and misty outline of a dream.As Danglars approached the disappointed lover, he cast on him a look of deepmeaning, while Fernand, as he slowly paced behind the happy pair, who seemed,in their own unmixed content, to have entirely forgotten that such a being ashimself existed, was pale and abstracted; occasionally, however, a deep flushwould overspread his countenance, and a nervous contraction distort hisfeatures, while, with an agitated and restless gaze, he would glance in thedirection of Marseilles, like one who either anticipated or foresaw some greatand important event.Dantès himself was simply, but becomingly, clad in the dress peculiar to themerchant service—a costume somewhat between a military and a civil garb;and with his fine countenance, radiant with joy and happiness, a more perfectspecimen of manly beauty could scarcely be imagined.Lovely as the Greek girls of Cyprus or Chios, Mercédès boasted the same brightflashing eyes of jet, and ripe, round, coral lips. She moved with the light,free step of an Arlesienne or an Andalusian. One more practiced in the arts ofgreat cities would have hid her blushes beneath a veil, or, at least, have castdown her thickly fringed lashes, so as to have concealed the liquid lustre ofher animated eyes; but, on the contrary, the delighted girl looked around herwith a smile that seemed to say: “If you are my friends, rejoice with me,for I am very happy.”As soon as the bridal party came in sight of La Réserve, M. Morrel descendedand came forth to meet it, followed by the soldiers and sailors thereassembled, to whom he had repeated the promise already given, that Dantèsshould be the successor to the late Captain Leclere. Edmond, at the approach ofhis patron, respectfully placed the arm of his affianced bride within that ofM. Morrel, who, forthwith conducting her up the flight of wooden steps leadingto the chamber in which the feast was prepared, was gayly followed by theguests, beneath whose heavy tread the slight structure creaked and groaned forthe space of several minutes.“Father,” said Mercédès, stopping when she had reached the centreof the table, “sit, I pray you, on my right hand; on my left I will placehim who has ever been as a brother to me,” pointing with a soft andgentle smile to Fernand; but her words and look seemed to inflict the diresttorture on him, for his lips became ghastly pale, and even beneath the dark hueof his complexion the blood might be seen retreating as though some sudden pangdrove it back to the heart.During this time, Dantès, at the opposite side of the table, had been occupiedin similarly placing his most honored guests. M. Morrel was seated at his righthand, Danglars at his left; while, at a sign from Edmond, the rest of thecompany ranged themselves as they found it most agreeable.Then they began to pass around the dusky, piquant, Arlesian sausages, andlobsters in their dazzling red cuirasses, prawns of large size and brilliantcolor, the echinus with its prickly outside and dainty morsel within, theclovis, esteemed by the epicures of the South as more than rivalling theexquisite flavor of the oyster, North. All the delicacies, in fact, that arecast up by the wash of waters on the sandy beach, and styled by the gratefulfishermen “fruits of the sea.”“A pretty silence truly!” said the old father of the bridegroom, ashe carried to his lips a glass of wine of the hue and brightness of the topaz,and which had just been placed before Mercédès herself. “Now, wouldanybody think that this room contained a happy, merry party, who desire nothingbetter than to laugh and dance the hours away?”“Ah,” sighed Caderousse, “a man cannot always feel happybecause he is about to be married.”“The truth is,” replied Dantès, “that I am too happy fornoisy mirth; if that is what you meant by your observation, my worthy friend,you are right; joy takes a strange effect at times, it seems to oppress usalmost the same as sorrow.”Danglars looked towards Fernand, whose excitable nature received and betrayedeach fresh impression.“Why, what ails you?” asked he of Edmond. “Do you fear anyapproaching evil? I should say that you were the happiest man alive at thisinstant.”“And that is the very thing that alarms me,” returned Dantès.“Man does not appear to me to be intended to enjoy felicity so unmixed;happiness is like the enchanted palaces we read of in our childhood, wherefierce, fiery dragons defend the entrance and approach; and monsters of allshapes and kinds, requiring to be overcome ere victory is ours. I own that I amlost in wonder to find myself promoted to an honor of which I feel myselfunworthy—that of being the husband of Mercédès.”“Nay, nay!” cried Caderousse, smiling, “you have not attainedthat honor yet. Mercédès is not yet your wife. Just assume the tone and mannerof a husband, and see how she will remind you that your hour is not yetcome!”The bride blushed, while Fernand, restless and uneasy, seemed to start at everyfresh sound, and from time to time wiped away the large drops of perspirationthat gathered on his brow.“Well, never mind that, neighbor Caderousse; it is not worthwhile tocontradict me for such a trifle as that. ’Tis true that Mercédès is notactually my wife; but,” added he, drawing out his watch, “in anhour and a half she will be.”A general exclamation of surprise ran round the table, with the exception ofthe elder Dantès, whose laugh displayed the still perfect beauty of his largewhite teeth. Mercédès looked pleased and gratified, while Fernand grasped thehandle of his knife with a convulsive clutch.“In an hour?” inquired Danglars, turning pale. “How is that,my friend?”“Why, thus it is,” replied Dantès. “Thanks to the influenceof M. Morrel, to whom, next to my father, I owe every blessing I enjoy, everydifficulty has been removed. We have purchased permission to waive the usualdelay; and at half-past two o’clock the Mayor of Marseilles will bewaiting for us at the city hall. Now, as a quarter-past one has already struck,I do not consider I have asserted too much in saying, that, in another hour andthirty minutes Mercédès will have become Madame Dantès.”Fernand closed his eyes, a burning sensation passed across his brow, and he wascompelled to support himself by the table to prevent his falling from hischair; but in spite of all his efforts, he could not refrain from uttering adeep groan, which, however, was lost amid the noisy felicitations of thecompany.“Upon my word,” cried the old man, “you make short work ofthis kind of affair. Arrived here only yesterday morning, and married today atthree o’clock! Commend me to a sailor for going the quick way towork!”“But,” asked Danglars, in a timid tone, “how did you manageabout the other formalities—the contract—the settlement?”“The contract,” answered Dantès, laughingly, “it didn’ttake long to fix that. Mercédès has no fortune; I have none to settle on her.So, you see, our papers were quickly written out, and certainly do not comevery expensive.” This joke elicited a fresh burst of applause.“So that what we presumed to be merely the betrothal feast turns out tobe the actual wedding dinner!” said Danglars.“No, no,” answered Dantès; “don’t imagine I am going toput you off in that shabby manner. Tomorrow morning I start for Paris; fourdays to go, and the same to return, with one day to discharge the commissionentrusted to me, is all the time I shall be absent. I shall be back here by thefirst of March, and on the second I give my real marriage feast.”This prospect of fresh festivity redoubled the hilarity of the guests to such adegree, that the elder Dantès, who, at the commencement of the repast, hadcommented upon the silence that prevailed, now found it difficult, amid thegeneral din of voices, to obtain a moment’s tranquillity in which todrink to the health and prosperity of the bride and bridegroom.Dantès, perceiving the affectionate eagerness of his father, responded by alook of grateful pleasure; while Mercédès glanced at the clock and made anexpressive gesture to Edmond.Around the table reigned that noisy hilarity which usually prevails at such atime among people sufficiently free from the demands of social position not tofeel the trammels of etiquette. Such as at the commencement of the repast hadnot been able to seat themselves according to their inclination roseunceremoniously, and sought out more agreeable companions. Everybody talked atonce, without waiting for a reply and each one seemed to be contented withexpressing his or her own thoughts.Fernand’s paleness appeared to have communicated itself to Danglars. Asfor Fernand himself, he seemed to be enduring the tortures of the damned;unable to rest, he was among the first to quit the table, and, as thoughseeking to avoid the hilarious mirth that rose in such deafening sounds, hecontinued, in utter silence, to pace the farther end of the salon.Caderousse approached him just as Danglars, whom Fernand seemed most anxious toavoid, had joined him in a corner of the room.“Upon my word,” said Caderousse, from whose mind the friendlytreatment of Dantès, united with the effect of the excellent wine he hadpartaken of, had effaced every feeling of envy or jealousy at Dantès’good fortune,—“upon my word, Dantès is a downright good fellow, andwhen I see him sitting there beside his pretty wife that is so soon to be. Icannot help thinking it would have been a great pity to have served him thattrick you were planning yesterday.”“Oh, there was no harm meant,” answered Danglars; “at first Icertainly did feel somewhat uneasy as to what Fernand might be tempted to do;but when I saw how completely he had mastered his feelings, even so far as tobecome one of his rival’s attendants, I knew there was no further causefor apprehension.” Caderousse looked full at Fernand—he was ghastlypale.“Certainly,” continued Danglars, “the sacrifice was notrifling one, when the beauty of the bride is concerned. Upon my soul, thatfuture captain of mine is a lucky dog! Gad! I only wish he would let me takehis place.”“Shall we not set forth?” asked the sweet, silvery voice ofMercédès; “two o’clock has just struck, and you know we areexpected in a quarter of an hour.”“To be sure!—to be sure!” cried Dantès, eagerly quitting thetable; “let us go directly!”His words were re-echoed by the whole party, with vociferous cheers.At this moment Danglars, who had been incessantly observing every change inFernand’s look and manner, saw him stagger and fall back, with an almostconvulsive spasm, against a seat placed near one of the open windows. At thesame instant his ear caught a sort of indistinct sound on the stairs, followedby the measured tread of soldiery, with the clanking of swords and militaryaccoutrements; then came a hum and buzz as of many voices, so as to deaden eventhe noisy mirth of the bridal party, among whom a vague feeling of curiosityand apprehension quelled every disposition to talk, and almost instantaneouslythe most deathlike stillness prevailed.The sounds drew nearer. Three blows were struck upon the panel of the door. Thecompany looked at each other in consternation.“I demand admittance,” said a loud voice outside the room,“in the name of the law!” As no attempt was made to prevent it, thedoor was opened, and a magistrate, wearing his official scarf, presentedhimself, followed by four soldiers and a corporal. Uneasiness now yielded tothe most extreme dread on the part of those present.“May I venture to inquire the reason of this unexpected visit?”said M. Morrel, addressing the magistrate, whom he evidently knew; “thereis doubtless some mistake easily explained.”“If it be so,” replied the magistrate, “rely upon everyreparation being made; meanwhile, I am the bearer of an order of arrest, andalthough I most reluctantly perform the task assigned me, it must,nevertheless, be fulfilled. Who among the persons here assembled answers to thename of Edmond Dantès?”Every eye was turned towards the young man who, spite of the agitation he couldnot but feel, advanced with dignity, and said, in a firm voice:“I am he; what is your pleasure with me?”“Edmond Dantès,” replied the magistrate, “I arrest you in thename of the law!”“Me!” repeated Edmond, slightly changing color, “andwherefore, I pray?”“I cannot inform you, but you will be duly acquainted with the reasonsthat have rendered such a step necessary at the preliminary examination.”M. Morrel felt that further resistance or remonstrance was useless. He sawbefore him an officer delegated to enforce the law, and perfectly well knewthat it would be as unavailing to seek pity from a magistrate decked with hisofficial scarf, as to address a petition to some cold marble effigy. OldDantès, however, sprang forward. There are situations which the heart of afather or a mother cannot be made to understand. He prayed and supplicated interms so moving, that even the officer was touched, and, although firm in hisduty, he kindly said, “My worthy friend, let me beg of you to calm yourapprehensions. Your son has probably neglected some prescribed form orattention in registering his cargo, and it is more than probable he will be setat liberty directly he has given the information required, whether touching thehealth of his crew, or the value of his freight.”“What is the meaning of all this?” inquired Caderousse, frowningly,of Danglars, who had assumed an air of utter surprise.“How can I tell you?” replied he; “I am, like yourself,utterly bewildered at all that is going on, and cannot in the least make outwhat it is about.” Caderousse then looked around for Fernand, but he haddisappeared.The scene of the previous night now came back to his mind with startlingclearness. The painful catastrophe he had just witnessed appeared effectuallyto have rent away the veil which the intoxication of the evening before hadraised between himself and his memory.“So, so,” said he, in a hoarse and choking voice, to Danglars,“this, then, I suppose, is a part of the trick you were concertingyesterday? All I can say is, that if it be so, ’tis an ill turn, and welldeserves to bring double evil on those who have projected it.”“Nonsense,” returned Danglars, “I tell you again I havenothing whatever to do with it; besides, you know very well that I tore thepaper to pieces.”“No, you did not!” answered Caderousse, “you merely threw itby—I saw it lying in a corner.”“Hold your tongue, you fool!—what should you know aboutit?—why, you were drunk!”“Where is Fernand?” inquired Caderousse.“How do I know?” replied Danglars; “gone, as every prudentman ought to be, to look after his own affairs, most likely. Never mind wherehe is, let you and I go and see what is to be done for our poor friends.”During this conversation, Dantès, after having exchanged a cheerful shake ofthe hand with all his sympathizing friends, had surrendered himself to theofficer sent to arrest him, merely saying, “Make yourselves quite easy,my good fellows, there is some little mistake to clear up, that’s all,depend upon it; and very likely I may not have to go so far as the prison toeffect that.”“Oh, to be sure!” responded Danglars, who had now approached thegroup, “nothing more than a mistake, I feel quite certain.”Dantès descended the staircase, preceded by the magistrate, and followed by thesoldiers. A carriage awaited him at the door; he got in, followed by twosoldiers and the magistrate, and the vehicle drove off towards Marseilles.“Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!” cried Mercédès, stretching out herarms to him from the balcony.The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of a broken heart, andleaning from the coach he called out, “Good-bye, Mercédès—we shallsoon meet again!” Then the vehicle disappeared round one of the turningsof Fort Saint Nicholas.“Wait for me here, all of you!” cried M. Morrel; “I will takethe first conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles, whence I will bring youword how all is going on.”“That’s right!” exclaimed a multitude of voices, “go,and return as quickly as you can!”This second departure was followed by a long and fearful state of terrifiedsilence on the part of those who were left behind. The old father and Mercédèsremained for some time apart, each absorbed in grief; but at length the twopoor victims of the same blow raised their eyes, and with a simultaneous burstof feeling rushed into each other’s arms.Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out for himself a glass of waterwith a trembling hand; then hastily swallowing it, went to sit down at thefirst vacant place, and this was, by mere chance, placed next to the seat onwhich poor Mercédès had fallen half fainting, when released from the warm andaffectionate embrace of old Dantès. Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.“He is the cause of all this misery—I am quite sure of it,”whispered Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off Fernand, to Danglars.“I don’t think so,” answered the other; “he’s toostupid to imagine such a scheme. I only hope the mischief will fall upon thehead of whoever wrought it.”“You don’t mention those who aided and abetted the deed,”said Caderousse.“Surely,” answered Danglars, “one cannot be held responsiblefor every chance arrow shot into the air.”“You can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward onsomebody’s head.”Meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed in every different form.“What think you, Danglars,” said one of the party, turning towardshim, “of this event?”“Why,” replied he, “I think it just possible Dantès may havebeen detected with some trifling article on board ship considered here ascontraband.”“But how could he have done so without your knowledge, Danglars, sinceyou are the ship’s supercargo?”“Why, as for that, I could only know what I was told respecting themerchandise with which the vessel was laden. I know she was loaded with cotton,and that she took in her freight at Alexandria from Pastret’s warehouse,and at Smyrna from Pascal’s; that is all I was obliged to know, and I begI may not be asked for any further particulars.”“Now I recollect,” said the afflicted old father; “my poorboy told me yesterday he had got a small case of coffee, and another of tobaccofor me!”“There, you see,” exclaimed Danglars. “Now the mischief isout; depend upon it the custom-house people went rummaging about the ship inour absence, and discovered poor Dantès’ hidden treasures.”Mercédès, however, paid no heed to this explanation of her lover’sarrest. Her grief, which she had hitherto tried to restrain, now burst out in aviolent fit of hysterical sobbing.“Come, come,” said the old man, “be comforted, my poor child;there is still hope!”“Hope!” repeated Danglars.“Hope!” faintly murmured Fernand, but the word seemed to die awayon his pale agitated lips, and a convulsive spasm passed over his countenance.“Good news! good news!” shouted forth one of the party stationed inthe balcony on the lookout. “Here comes M. Morrel back. No doubt, now, weshall hear that our friend is released!”Mercédès and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner and greeted him at thedoor. He was very pale.“What news?” exclaimed a general burst of voices.“Alas, my friends,” replied M. Morrel, with a mournful shake of hishead, “the thing has assumed a more serious aspect than Iexpected.”“Oh, indeed—indeed, sir, he is innocent!” sobbed forthMercédès.“That I believe!” answered M. Morrel; “but still he ischarged——”“With what?” inquired the elder Dantès.“With being an agent of the Bonapartist faction!” Many of ourreaders may be able to recollect how formidable such an accusation became inthe period at which our story is dated.A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercédès; the old man sank into achair.“Ah, Danglars!” whispered Caderousse, “you have deceivedme—the trick you spoke of last night has been played; but I cannot suffera poor old man or an innocent girl to die of grief through your fault. I amdetermined to tell them all about it.”“Be silent, you simpleton!” cried Danglars, grasping him by thearm, “or I will not answer even for your own safety. Who can tell whetherDantès be innocent or guilty? The vessel did touch at Elba, where he quittedit, and passed a whole day in the island. Now, should any letters or otherdocuments of a compromising character be found upon him, will it not be takenfor granted that all who uphold him are his accomplices?”With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readily perceived thesolidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed, doubtfully, wistfully, onDanglars, and then caution supplanted generosity.“Suppose we wait a while, and see what comes of it,” said he,casting a bewildered look on his companion.“To be sure!” answered Danglars. “Let us wait, by all means.If he be innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; if guilty, why, it isno use involving ourselves in a conspiracy.”“Let us go, then. I cannot stay here any longer.”“With all my heart!” replied Danglars, pleased to find the other sotractable. “Let us take ourselves out of the way, and leave things forthe present to take their course.”After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become the friend andprotector of Mercédès, led the girl to her home, while some friends of Dantèsconducted his father, nearly lifeless, to the Allées de Meilhan.The rumor of Edmond’s arrest as a Bonapartist agent was not slow incirculating throughout the city.“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?”asked M. Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaningfresh tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, heovertook his supercargo and Caderousse. “Could you have believed such athing possible?”“Why, you know I told you,” replied Danglars, “that Iconsidered the circumstance of his having anchored at the Island of Elba as avery suspicious circumstance.”“And did you mention these suspicions to any person beside myself?”“Certainly not!” returned Danglars. Then added in a low whisper,“You understand that, on account of your uncle, M. Policar Morrel, whoserved under the other government, and who does not altogether concealwhat he thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of regretting theabdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure both Edmond andyourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions to a soul. I am too well awarethat though a subordinate, like myself, is bound to acquaint the shipowner witheverything that occurs, there are many things he ought most carefully toconceal from all else.”“’Tis well, Danglars—’tis well!” replied M.Morrel. “You are a worthy fellow; and I had already thought of yourinterests in the event of poor Edmond having become captain of thePharaon.”“Is it possible you were so kind?”“Yes, indeed; I had previously inquired of Dantès what was his opinion ofyou, and if he should have any reluctance to continue you in your post, forsomehow I have perceived a sort of coolness between you.”“And what was his reply?”“That he certainly did think he had given you offence in an affair whichhe merely referred to without entering into particulars, but that whoeverpossessed the good opinion and confidence of the ship’s owners would havehis preference also.”“The hypocrite!” murmured Danglars.“Poor Dantès!” said Caderousse. “No one can deny his being anoble-hearted young fellow.”“But meanwhile,” continued M. Morrel, “here is thePharaon without a captain.”“Oh,” replied Danglars, “since we cannot leave this port forthe next three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of that periodDantès will be set at liberty.”“No doubt; but in the meantime?”“I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel,” answered Danglars.“You know that I am as capable of managing a ship as the most experiencedcaptain in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to accept myservices, that upon Edmond’s release from prison no further change willbe requisite on board the Pharaon than for Dantès and myself each toresume our respective posts.”“Thanks, Danglars—that will smooth over all difficulties. I fullyauthorize you at once to assume the command of the Pharaon, and lookcarefully to the unloading of her freight. Private misfortunes must never beallowed to interfere with business.”“Be easy on that score, M. Morrel; but do you think we shall be permittedto see our poor Edmond?”“I will let you know that directly I have seen M. de Villefort, whom Ishall endeavor to interest in Edmond’s favor. I am aware he is a furiousroyalist; but, in spite of that, and of his being king’s attorney, he isa man like ourselves, and I fancy not a bad sort of one.”“Perhaps not,” replied Danglars; “but I hear that he isambitious, and that’s rather against him.”“Well, well,” returned M. Morrel, “we shall see. But nowhasten on board, I will join you there ere long.”So saying, the worthy shipowner quitted the two allies, and proceeded in thedirection of the Palais de Justice.“You see,” said Danglars, addressing Caderousse, “the turnthings have taken. Do you still feel any desire to stand up in hisdefence?”“Not the slightest, but yet it seems to me a shocking thing that a merejoke should lead to such consequences.”“But who perpetrated that joke, let me ask? neither you nor myself, butFernand; you knew very well that I threw the paper into a corner of theroom—indeed, I fancied I had destroyed it.”“Oh, no,” replied Caderousse, “that I can answer for, you didnot. I only wish I could see it now as plainly as I saw it lying all crushedand crumpled in a corner of the arbor.”“Well, then, if you did, depend upon it, Fernand picked it up, and eithercopied it or caused it to be copied; perhaps, even, he did not take the troubleof recopying it. And now I think of it, by Heavens, he may have sent the letteritself! Fortunately, for me, the handwriting was disguised.”“Then you were aware of Dantès being engaged in a conspiracy?”“Not I. As I before said, I thought the whole thing was a joke, nothingmore. It seems, however, that I have unconsciously stumbled upon thetruth.”“Still,” argued Caderousse, “I would give a great deal ifnothing of the kind had happened; or, at least, that I had had no hand in it.You will see, Danglars, that it will turn out an unlucky job for both ofus.”“Nonsense! If any harm come of it, it should fall on the guilty person;and that, you know, is Fernand. How can we be implicated in any way? All wehave got to do is, to keep our own counsel, and remain perfectly quiet, notbreathing a word to any living soul; and you will see that the storm will passaway without in the least affecting us.”“Amen!” responded Caderousse, waving his hand in token of adieu toDanglars, and bending his steps towards the Allées de Meilhan, moving his headto and fro, and muttering as he went, after the manner of one whose mind wasovercharged with one absorbing idea.“So far, then,” said Danglars, mentally, “all has gone as Iwould have it. I am, temporarily, commander of the Pharaon, with thecertainty of being permanently so, if that fool of a Caderousse can bepersuaded to hold his tongue. My only fear is the chance of Dantès beingreleased. But, there, he is in the hands of Justice; and,” added he witha smile, “she will take her own.” So saying, he leaped into a boat,desiring to be rowed on board the Pharaon, where M. Morrel had agreed tomeet him. Chapter 6. The DeputyProcureur du RoiIn one of thearistocratic mansions built by Puget in the Rue du Grand Cours opposite theMedusa fountain, a second marriage feast was being celebrated, almost at thesame hour with the nuptial repast given by Dantès. In this case, however,although the occasion of the entertainment was similar, the company wasstrikingly dissimilar. Instead of a rude mixture of sailors, soldiers, andthose belonging to the humblest grade of life, the present assembly wascomposed of the very flower of Marseilles society,—magistrates who hadresigned their office during the usurper’s reign; officers who haddeserted from the imperial army and joined forces with Condé; and youngermembers of families, brought up to hate and execrate the man whom five years ofexile would convert into a martyr, and fifteen of restoration elevate to therank of a god.The guests were still at table, and the heated and energetic conversation thatprevailed betrayed the violent and vindictive passions that then agitated eachdweller of the South, where unhappily, for five centuries religious strife hadlong given increased bitterness to the violence of party feeling.The emperor, now king of the petty Island of Elba, after having held sovereignsway over one-half of the world, counting as his subjects a small population offive or six thousand souls,—after having been accustomed to hear the“Vive Napoléons” of a hundred and twenty millions of humanbeings, uttered in ten different languages,—was looked upon here as aruined man, separated forever from any fresh connection with France or claim toher throne.The magistrates freely discussed their political views; the military part ofthe company talked unreservedly of Moscow and Leipsic, while the womencommented on the divorce of Josephine. It was not over the downfall of the man,but over the defeat of the Napoleonic idea, that they rejoiced, and in thisthey foresaw for themselves the bright and cheering prospect of a revivifiedpolitical existence.An old man, decorated with the cross of Saint Louis, now rose and proposed thehealth of King Louis XVIII. It was the Marquis de Saint-Méran. This toast,recalling at once the patient exile of Hartwell and the peace-loving King ofFrance, excited universal enthusiasm; glasses were elevated in the air àl’Anglaise, and the ladies, snatching their bouquets from their fairbosoms, strewed the table with their floral treasures. In a word, an almostpoetical fervor prevailed.“Ah,” said the Marquise de Saint-Méran, a woman with a stern,forbidding eye, though still noble and distinguished in appearance, despite herfifty years—“ah, these revolutionists, who have driven us fromthose very possessions they afterwards purchased for a mere trifle during theReign of Terror, would be compelled to own, were they here, that all truedevotion was on our side, since we were content to follow the fortunes of afalling monarch, while they, on the contrary, made their fortune by worshippingthe rising sun; yes, yes, they could not help admitting that the king, for whomwe sacrificed rank, wealth, and station was truly our ‘Louis thewell-beloved,’ while their wretched usurper has been, and ever will be,to them their evil genius, their ‘Napoleon the accursed.’ Am I notright, Villefort?”“I beg your pardon, madame. I really must pray you to excuse me,but—in truth—I was not attending to the conversation.”“Marquise, marquise!” interposed the old nobleman who had proposedthe toast, “let the young people alone; let me tell you, on one’swedding day there are more agreeable subjects of conversation than drypolitics.”“Never mind, dearest mother,” said a young and lovely girl, with aprofusion of light brown hair, and eyes that seemed to float in liquid crystal,“’tis all my fault for seizing upon M. de Villefort, so as toprevent his listening to what you said. But there—now take him—heis your own for as long as you like. M. Villefort, I beg to remind you mymother speaks to you.”“If the marquise will deign to repeat the words I but imperfectly caught,I shall be delighted to answer,” said M. de Villefort.“Never mind, Renée,” replied the marquise, with a look oftenderness that seemed out of keeping with her harsh dry features; but, howeverall other feelings may be withered in a woman’s nature, there is alwaysone bright smiling spot in the desert of her heart, and that is the shrine ofmaternal love. “I forgive you. What I was saying, Villefort, was, thatthe Bonapartists had not our sincerity, enthusiasm, or devotion.”“They had, however, what supplied the place of those finequalities,” replied the young man, “and that was fanaticism.Napoleon is the Mahomet of the West, and is worshipped by his commonplace butambitious followers, not only as a leader and lawgiver, but also as thepersonification of equality.”“He!” cried the marquise: “Napoleon the type of equality! Formercy’s sake, then, what would you call Robespierre? Come, come, do notstrip the latter of his just rights to bestow them on the Corsican, who, to mymind, has usurped quite enough.”“Nay, madame; I would place each of these heroes on his rightpedestal—that of Robespierre on his scaffold in the Place Louis Quinze;that of Napoleon on the column of the Place Vendôme. The only differenceconsists in the opposite character of the equality advocated by these two men;one is the equality that elevates, the other is the equality that degrades; onebrings a king within reach of the guillotine, the other elevates the people toa level with the throne. Observe,” said Villefort, smiling, “I donot mean to deny that both these men were revolutionary scoundrels, and thatthe 9th Thermidor and the 4th of April, in the year 1814, were lucky days forFrance, worthy of being gratefully remembered by every friend to monarchy andcivil order; and that explains how it comes to pass that, fallen, as I trust heis forever, Napoleon has still retained a train of parasitical satellites.Still, marquise, it has been so with other usurpers—Cromwell, forinstance, who was not half so bad as Napoleon, had his partisans andadvocates.”“Do you know, Villefort, that you are talking in a most dreadfullyrevolutionary strain? But I excuse it, it is impossible to expect the son of aGirondin to be free from a small spice of the old leaven.” A deep crimsonsuffused the countenance of Villefort.“’Tis true, madame,” answered he, “that my father was aGirondin, but he was not among the number of those who voted for theking’s death; he was an equal sufferer with yourself during the Reign ofTerror, and had well-nigh lost his head on the same scaffold on which yourfather perished.”“True,” replied the marquise, without wincing in the slightestdegree at the tragic remembrance thus called up; “but bear in mind, ifyou please, that our respective parents underwent persecution and proscriptionfrom diametrically opposite principles; in proof of which I may remark, thatwhile my family remained among the staunchest adherents of the exiled princes,your father lost no time in joining the new government; and that while theCitizen Noirtier was a Girondin, the Count Noirtier became a senator.”“Dear mother,” interposed Renée, “you know very well it wasagreed that all these disagreeable reminiscences should forever be laidaside.”“Suffer me, also, madame,” replied Villefort, “to add myearnest request to Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran’s, that you will kindlyallow the veil of oblivion to cover and conceal the past. What availsrecrimination over matters wholly past recall? For my own part, I have laidaside even the name of my father, and altogether disown his politicalprinciples. He was—nay, probably may still be—a Bonapartist, and iscalled Noirtier; I, on the contrary, am a staunch royalist, and style myself deVillefort. Let what may remain of revolutionary sap exhaust itself and die awaywith the old trunk, and condescend only to regard the young shoot which hasstarted up at a distance from the parent tree, without having the power, anymore than the wish, to separate entirely from the stock from which itsprung.”“Bravo, Villefort!” cried the marquis; “excellently wellsaid! Come, now, I have hopes of obtaining what I have been for yearsendeavoring to persuade the marquise to promise; namely, a perfect amnesty andforgetfulness of the past.”“With all my heart,” replied the marquise; “let the past beforever forgotten. I promise you it affords me as little pleasure torevive it as it does you. All I ask is, that Villefort will be firm andinflexible for the future in his political principles. Remember, also,Villefort, that we have pledged ourselves to his majesty for your fealty andstrict loyalty, and that at our recommendation the king consented to forget thepast, as I do” (and here she extended to him her hand)—“as Inow do at your entreaty. But bear in mind, that should there fall in your wayanyone guilty of conspiring against the government, you will be so much themore bound to visit the offence with rigorous punishment, as it is known youbelong to a suspected family.”“Alas, madame,” returned Villefort, “my profession, as wellas the times in which we live, compels me to be severe. I have alreadysuccessfully conducted several public prosecutions, and brought the offendersto merited punishment. But we have not done with the thing yet.”“Do you, indeed, think so?” inquired the marquise.“I am, at least, fearful of it. Napoleon, in the Island of Elba, is toonear France, and his proximity keeps up the hopes of his partisans. Marseillesis filled with half-pay officers, who are daily, under one frivolous pretext orother, getting up quarrels with the royalists; from hence arise continual andfatal duels among the higher classes of persons, and assassinations in thelower.”“You have heard, perhaps,” said the Comte de Salvieux, one of M. deSaint-Méran’s oldest friends, and chamberlain to the Comted’Artois, “that the Holy Alliance purpose removing him fromthence?”“Yes; they were talking about it when we left Paris,” said M. deSaint-Méran; “and where is it decided to transfer him?”“To Saint Helena.”“For heaven’s sake, where is that?” asked the marquise.“An island situated on the other side of the equator, at least twothousand leagues from here,” replied the count.“So much the better. As Villefort observes, it is a great act of folly tohave left such a man between Corsica, where he was born, and Naples, of whichhis brother-in-law is king, and face to face with Italy, the sovereignty ofwhich he coveted for his son.”“Unfortunately,” said Villefort, “there are the treaties of1814, and we cannot molest Napoleon without breaking those compacts.”“Oh, well, we shall find some way out of it,” responded M. deSalvieux. “There wasn’t any trouble over treaties when it was aquestion of shooting the poor Duc d’Enghien.”“Well,” said the marquise, “it seems probable that, by theaid of the Holy Alliance, we shall be rid of Napoleon; and we must trust to thevigilance of M. de Villefort to purify Marseilles of his partisans. The king iseither a king or no king; if he be acknowledged as sovereign of France, heshould be upheld in peace and tranquillity; and this can best be effected byemploying the most inflexible agents to put down every attempt atconspiracy—’tis the best and surest means of preventingmischief.”“Unfortunately, madame,” answered Villefort, “the strong armof the law is not called upon to interfere until the evil has takenplace.”“Then all he has got to do is to endeavor to repair it.”“Nay, madame, the law is frequently powerless to effect this; all it cando is to avenge the wrong done.”“Oh, M. de Villefort,” cried a beautiful young creature, daughterto the Comte de Salvieux, and the cherished friend of Mademoiselle deSaint-Méran, “do try and get up some famous trial while we are atMarseilles. I never was in a law-court; I am told it is so very amusing!”“Amusing, certainly,” replied the young man, “inasmuch as,instead of shedding tears as at the fictitious tale of woe produced at atheatre, you behold in a law-court a case of real and genuine distress—adrama of life. The prisoner whom you there see pale, agitated, and alarmed,instead of—as is the case when a curtain falls on a tragedy—goinghome to sup peacefully with his family, and then retiring to rest, that he mayrecommence his mimic woes on the morrow,—is removed from your sightmerely to be reconducted to his prison and delivered up to the executioner. Ileave you to judge how far your nerves are calculated to bear you through sucha scene. Of this, however, be assured, that should any favorable opportunitypresent itself, I will not fail to offer you the choice of beingpresent.”“For shame, M. de Villefort!” said Renée, becoming quite pale;“don’t you see how you are frightening us?—and yet youlaugh.”“What would you have? ’Tis like a duel. I have already recordedsentence of death, five or six times, against the movers of politicalconspiracies, and who can say how many daggers may be ready sharpened, and onlywaiting a favorable opportunity to be buried in my heart?”“Gracious heavens, M. de Villefort,” said Renée, becoming more andmore terrified; “you surely are not in earnest.”“Indeed I am,” replied the young magistrate with a smile;“and in the interesting trial that young lady is anxious to witness, thecase would only be still more aggravated. Suppose, for instance, the prisoner,as is more than probable, to have served under Napoleon—well, can youexpect for an instant, that one accustomed, at the word of his commander, torush fearlessly on the very bayonets of his foe, will scruple more to drive astiletto into the heart of one he knows to be his personal enemy, than toslaughter his fellow-creatures, merely because bidden to do so by one he isbound to obey? Besides, one requires the excitement of being hateful in theeyes of the accused, in order to lash one’s self into a state ofsufficient vehemence and power. I would not choose to see the man against whomI pleaded smile, as though in mockery of my words. No; my pride is to see theaccused pale, agitated, and as though beaten out of all composure by the fireof my eloquence.” Renée uttered a smothered exclamation.“Bravo!” cried one of the guests; “that is what I calltalking to some purpose.”“Just the person we require at a time like the present,” said asecond.“What a splendid business that last case of yours was, my dearVillefort!” remarked a third; “I mean the trial of the man formurdering his father. Upon my word, you killed him ere the executioner had laidhis hand upon him.”“Oh, as for parricides, and such dreadful people as that,”interposed Renée, “it matters very little what is done to them; but asregards poor unfortunate creatures whose only crime consists in having mixedthemselves up in political intrigues——”“Why, that is the very worst offence they could possibly commit; for,don’t you see, Renée, the king is the father of his people, and he whoshall plot or contrive aught against the life and safety of the parent ofthirty-two millions of souls, is a parricide upon a fearfully greatscale?”“I don’t know anything about that,” replied Renée;“but, M. de Villefort, you have promised me—have younot?—always to show mercy to those I plead for.”“Make yourself quite easy on that point,” answered Villefort, withone of his sweetest smiles; “you and I will always consult upon ourverdicts.”“My love,” said the marquise, “attend to your doves, yourlap-dogs, and embroidery, but do not meddle with what you do not understand.Nowadays the military profession is in abeyance and the magisterial robe is thebadge of honor. There is a wise Latin proverb that is very much inpoint.”“Cedant arma togæ,” said Villefort with a bow.“I cannot speak Latin,” responded the marquise.“Well,” said Renée, “I cannot help regretting you had notchosen some other profession than your own—a physician, for instance. Doyou know I always felt a shudder at the idea of even a destroyingangel?”“Dear, good Renée,” whispered Villefort, as he gazed withunutterable tenderness on the lovely speaker.“Let us hope, my child,” cried the marquis, “that M. deVillefort may prove the moral and political physician of this province; if so,he will have achieved a noble work.”“And one which will go far to efface the recollection of hisfather’s conduct,” added the incorrigible marquise.“Madame,” replied Villefort, with a mournful smile, “I havealready had the honor to observe that my father has—at least, I hopeso—abjured his past errors, and that he is, at the present moment, a firmand zealous friend to religion and order—a better royalist, possibly,than his son; for he has to atone for past dereliction, while I have no otherimpulse than warm, decided preference and conviction.” Having made thiswell-turned speech, Villefort looked carefully around to mark the effect of hisoratory, much as he would have done had he been addressing the bench in opencourt.“Do you know, my dear Villefort,” cried the Comte de Salvieux,“that is exactly what I myself said the other day at the Tuileries, whenquestioned by his majesty’s principal chamberlain touching thesingularity of an alliance between the son of a Girondin and the daughter of anofficer of the Duc de Condé; and I assure you he seemed fully to comprehendthat this mode of reconciling political differences was based upon sound andexcellent principles. Then the king, who, without our suspecting it, hadoverheard our conversation, interrupted us by saying,‘Villefort’—observe that the king did not pronounce the wordNoirtier, but, on the contrary, placed considerable emphasis on that ofVillefort—‘Villefort,’ said his majesty, ‘is a youngman of great judgment and discretion, who will be sure to make a figure in hisprofession; I like him much, and it gave me great pleasure to hear that he wasabout to become the son-in-law of the Marquis and Marquise de Saint-Méran. Ishould myself have recommended the match, had not the noble marquis anticipatedmy wishes by requesting my consent to it.’”“Is it possible the king could have condescended so far as to expresshimself so favorably of me?” asked the enraptured Villefort.“I give you his very words; and if the marquis chooses to be candid, hewill confess that they perfectly agree with what his majesty said to him, whenhe went six months ago to consult him upon the subject of your espousing hisdaughter.”“That is true,” answered the marquis.“How much do I owe this gracious prince! What is there I would not do toevince my earnest gratitude!”“That is right,” cried the marquise. “I love to see you thus.Now, then, were a conspirator to fall into your hands, he would be mostwelcome.”“For my part, dear mother,” interposed Renée, “I trust yourwishes will not prosper, and that Providence will only permit petty offenders,poor debtors, and miserable cheats to fall into M. de Villefort’shands,—then I shall be contented.”“Just the same as though you prayed that a physician might only be calledupon to prescribe for headaches, measles, and the stings of wasps, or any otherslight affection of the epidermis. If you wish to see me the king’sattorney, you must desire for me some of those violent and dangerous diseasesfrom the cure of which so much honor redounds to the physician.”At this moment, and as though the utterance of Villefort’s wish hadsufficed to effect its accomplishment, a servant entered the room, andwhispered a few words in his ear. Villefort immediately rose from table andquitted the room upon the plea of urgent business; he soon, however, returned,his whole face beaming with delight. Renée regarded him with fond affection;and certainly his handsome features, lit up as they then were with more thanusual fire and animation, seemed formed to excite the innocent admiration withwhich she gazed on her graceful and intelligent lover.“You were wishing just now,” said Villefort, addressing her,“that I were a doctor instead of a lawyer. Well, I at least resemble thedisciples of Esculapius in one thing [people spoke in this style in 1815], thatof not being able to call a day my own, not even that of my betrothal.”“And wherefore were you called away just now?” asked Mademoisellede Saint-Méran, with an air of deep interest.“For a very serious matter, which bids fair to make work for theexecutioner.”“How dreadful!” exclaimed Renée, turning pale.“Is it possible?” burst simultaneously from all who were nearenough to the magistrate to hear his words.“Why, if my information prove correct, a sort of Bonapartist conspiracyhas just been discovered.”“Can I believe my ears?” cried the marquise.“I will read you the letter containing the accusation, at least,”said Villefort:“‘The king’s attorney is informed by a friend to the throneand the religious institutions of his country, that one named Edmond Dantès,mate of the ship Pharaon, this day arrived from Smyrna, after havingtouched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has been the bearer of a letter from Muratto the usurper, and again taken charge of another letter from the usurper tothe Bonapartist club in Paris. Ample corroboration of this statement may beobtained by arresting the above-mentioned Edmond Dantès, who either carries theletter for Paris about with him, or has it at his father’s abode. Shouldit not be found in the possession of father or son, then it will assuredly bediscovered in the cabin belonging to the said Dantès on board thePharaon.’”“But,” said Renée, “this letter, which, after all, is but ananonymous scrawl, is not even addressed to you, but to the king’sattorney.”“True; but that gentleman being absent, his secretary, by his orders,opened his letters; thinking this one of importance, he sent for me, but notfinding me, took upon himself to give the necessary orders for arresting theaccused party.”“Then the guilty person is absolutely in custody?” said themarquise.“Nay, dear mother, say the accused person. You know we cannot yetpronounce him guilty.”“He is in safe custody,” answered Villefort; “and rely uponit, if the letter is found, he will not be likely to be trusted abroad again,unless he goes forth under the especial protection of the headsman.”“And where is the unfortunate being?” asked Renée.“He is at my house.”“Come, come, my friend,” interrupted the marquise, “do notneglect your duty to linger with us. You are the king’s servant, and mustgo wherever that service calls you.”“Oh, Villefort!” cried Renée, clasping her hands, and lookingtowards her lover with piteous earnestness, “be merciful on this the dayof our betrothal.”The young man passed round to the side of the table where the fair pleader sat,and leaning over her chair said tenderly:“To give you pleasure, my sweet Renée, I promise to show all the lenityin my power; but if the charges brought against this Bonapartist hero provecorrect, why, then, you really must give me leave to order his head to be cutoff.”Renée shuddered at the word cut, for the growth in question had a head.“Never mind that foolish girl, Villefort,” said the marquise.“She will soon get over these things.” So saying, Madame deSaint-Méran extended her dry bony hand to Villefort, who, while imprinting ason-in-law’s respectful salute on it, looked at Renée, as much as to say,“I must try and fancy ’tis your dear hand I kiss, as it should havebeen.”“These are mournful auspices to accompany a betrothal,” sighed poorRenée.“Upon my word, child!” exclaimed the angry marquise, “yourfolly exceeds all bounds. I should be glad to know what connection there canpossibly be between your sickly sentimentality and the affairs of thestate!”“Oh, mother!” murmured Renée.“Nay, madame, I pray you pardon this little traitor. I promise you thatto make up for her want of loyalty, I will be most inflexibly severe;”then casting an expressive glance at his betrothed, which seemed to say,“Fear not, for your dear sake my justice shall be tempered withmercy,” and receiving a sweet and approving smile in return, Villefortdeparted with paradise in his heart. Chapter 7. TheExaminationNo sooner had Villefortleft the salon, than he assumed the grave air of a man who holds the balance oflife and death in his hands. Now, in spite of the nobility of his countenance,the command of which, like a finished actor, he had carefully studied beforethe glass, it was by no means easy for him to assume an air of judicialseverity. Except the recollection of the line of politics his father hadadopted, and which might interfere, unless he acted with the greatest prudence,with his own career, Gérard de Villefort was as happy as a man could be.Already rich, he held a high official situation, though only twenty-seven. Hewas about to marry a young and charming woman, whom he loved, not passionately,but reasonably, as became a deputy attorney of the king; and besides herpersonal attractions, which were very great, Mademoiselle deSaint-Méran’s family possessed considerable political influence, whichthey would, of course, exert in his favor. The dowry of his wife amounted tofifty thousand crowns, and he had, besides, the prospect of seeing her fortuneincreased to half a million at her father’s death. These considerationsnaturally gave Villefort a feeling of such complete felicity that his mind wasfairly dazzled in its contemplation.At the door he met the commissary of police, who was waiting for him. The sightof this officer recalled Villefort from the third heaven to earth; he composedhis face, as we have before described, and said, “I have read the letter,sir, and you have acted rightly in arresting this man; now inform me what youhave discovered concerning him and the conspiracy.”“We know nothing as yet of the conspiracy, monsieur; all the papers foundhave been sealed up and placed on your desk. The prisoner himself is namedEdmond Dantès, mate on board the three-master the Pharaon, trading incotton with Alexandria and Smyrna, and belonging to Morrel & Son, ofMarseilles.”“Before he entered the merchant service, had he ever served in themarines?”“Oh, no, monsieur, he is very young.”“How old?”“Nineteen or twenty at the most.”At this moment, and as Villefort had arrived at the corner of the Rue desConseils, a man, who seemed to have been waiting for him, approached; it was M.Morrel.“Ah, M. de Villefort,” cried he, “I am delighted to see you.Some of your people have committed the strangest mistake—they have justarrested Edmond Dantès, mate of my vessel.”“I know it, monsieur,” replied Villefort, “and I am now goingto examine him.”“Oh,” said Morrel, carried away by his friendship, “you donot know him, and I do. He is the most estimable, the most trustworthy creaturein the world, and I will venture to say, there is not a better seaman in allthe merchant service. Oh, M. de Villefort, I beseech your indulgence forhim.”Villefort, as we have seen, belonged to the aristocratic party at Marseilles,Morrel to the plebeian; the first was a royalist, the other suspected ofBonapartism. Villefort looked disdainfully at Morrel, and replied coldly:“You are aware, monsieur, that a man may be estimable and trustworthy inprivate life, and the best seaman in the merchant service, and yet be,politically speaking, a great criminal. Is it not true?”The magistrate laid emphasis on these words, as if he wished to apply them tothe owner himself, while his eyes seemed to plunge into the heart of one who,interceding for another, had himself need of indulgence. Morrel reddened, forhis own conscience was not quite clear on politics; besides, what Dantès hadtold him of his interview with the grand-marshal, and what the emperor had saidto him, embarrassed him. He replied, however, in a tone of deep interest:“I entreat you, M. de Villefort, be, as you always are, kind andequitable, and give him back to us soon.” This give us soundedrevolutionary in the deputy’s ears.“Ah, ah,” murmured he, “is Dantès then a member of someCarbonari society, that his protector thus employs the collective form? He was,if I recollect, arrested in a tavern, in company with a great manyothers.” Then he added, “Monsieur, you may rest assured I shallperform my duty impartially, and that if he be innocent you shall not haveappealed to me in vain; should he, however, be guilty, in this present epoch,impunity would furnish a dangerous example, and I must do my duty.”As he had now arrived at the door of his own house, which adjoined the Palaisde Justice, he entered, after having, coldly saluted the shipowner, who stood,as if petrified, on the spot where Villefort had left him. The antechamber wasfull of police agents and gendarmes, in the midst of whom, carefully watched,but calm and smiling, stood the prisoner. Villefort traversed the antechamber,cast a side glance at Dantès, and taking a packet which a gendarme offered him,disappeared, saying, “Bring in the prisoner.”Rapid as had been Villefort’s glance, it had served to give him an ideaof the man he was about to interrogate. He had recognized intelligence in thehigh forehead, courage in the dark eye and bent brow, and frankness in thethick lips that showed a set of pearly teeth. Villefort’s firstimpression was favorable; but he had been so often warned to mistrust firstimpulses, that he applied the maxim to the impression, forgetting thedifference between the two words. He stifled, therefore, the feelings ofcompassion that were rising, composed his features, and sat down, grim andsombre, at his desk. An instant after Dantès entered. He was pale, but calm andcollected, and saluting his judge with easy politeness, looked round for aseat, as if he had been in M. Morrel’s salon. It was then that heencountered for the first time Villefort’s look,—that look peculiarto the magistrate, who, while seeming to read the thoughts of others, betraysnothing of his own.“Who and what are you?” demanded Villefort, turning over a pile ofpapers, containing information relative to the prisoner, that a police agenthad given to him on his entry, and that, already, in an hour’s time, hadswelled to voluminous proportions, thanks to the corrupt espionage of which“the accused” is always made the victim.“My name is Edmond Dantès,” replied the young man calmly; “Iam mate of the Pharaon, belonging to Messrs. Morrel & Son.”“Your age?” continued Villefort.“Nineteen,” returned Dantès.“What were you doing at the moment you were arrested?”“I was at the festival of my marriage, monsieur,” said the youngman, his voice slightly tremulous, so great was the contrast between that happymoment and the painful ceremony he was now undergoing; so great was thecontrast between the sombre aspect of M. de Villefort and the radiant face ofMercédès.“You were at the festival of your marriage?” said the deputy,shuddering in spite of himself.“Yes, monsieur; I am on the point of marrying a young girl I have beenattached to for three years.” Villefort, impassive as he was, was struckwith this coincidence; and the tremulous voice of Dantès, surprised in themidst of his happiness, struck a sympathetic chord in his own bosom—healso was on the point of being married, and he was summoned from his ownhappiness to destroy that of another. “This philosophicreflection,” thought he, “will make a great sensation at M. deSaint-Méran’s;” and he arranged mentally, while Dantès awaitedfurther questions, the antithesis by which orators often create a reputationfor eloquence. When this speech was arranged, Villefort turned to Dantès.“Go on, sir,” said he.“What would you have me say?”“Give all the information in your power.”“Tell me on which point you desire information, and I will tell all Iknow; only,” added he, with a smile, “I warn you I know verylittle.”“Have you served under the usurper?”“I was about to be mustered into the Royal Marines when he fell.”“It is reported your political opinions are extreme,” saidVillefort, who had never heard anything of the kind, but was not sorry to makethis inquiry, as if it were an accusation.“My political opinions!” replied Dantès. “Alas, sir, I neverhad any opinions. I am hardly nineteen; I know nothing; I have no part to play.If I obtain the situation I desire, I shall owe it to M. Morrel. Thus all myopinions—I will not say public, but private—are confined to thesethree sentiments,—I love my father, I respect M. Morrel, and I adoreMercédès. This, sir, is all I can tell you, and you see how uninteresting itis.” As Dantès spoke, Villefort gazed at his ingenuous and opencountenance, and recollected the words of Renée, who, without knowing who theculprit was, had besought his indulgence for him. With the deputy’sknowledge of crime and criminals, every word the young man uttered convincedhim more and more of his innocence. This lad, for he was scarcely aman,—simple, natural, eloquent with that eloquence of the heart neverfound when sought for; full of affection for everybody, because he was happy,and because happiness renders even the wicked good—extended his affectioneven to his judge, spite of Villefort’s severe look and stern accent.Dantès seemed full of kindness.“Pardieu!” said Villefort, “he is a noble fellow. Ihope I shall gain Renée’s favor easily by obeying the first command sheever imposed on me. I shall have at least a pressure of the hand in public, anda sweet kiss in private.” Full of this idea, Villefort’s facebecame so joyous, that when he turned to Dantès, the latter, who had watchedthe change on his physiognomy, was smiling also.“Sir,” said Villefort, “have you any enemies, at least, thatyou know.”“I have enemies?” replied Dantès; “my position is notsufficiently elevated for that. As for my disposition, that is, perhaps,somewhat too hasty; but I have striven to repress it. I have had ten or twelvesailors under me, and if you question them, they will tell you that they loveand respect me, not as a father, for I am too young, but as an elderbrother.”“But you may have excited jealousy. You are about to become captain atnineteen—an elevated post; you are about to marry a pretty girl, wholoves you; and these two pieces of good fortune may have excited the envy ofsomeone.”“You are right; you know men better than I do, and what you say maypossibly be the case, I confess; but if such persons are among my acquaintancesI prefer not to know it, because then I should be forced to hate them.”“You are wrong; you should always strive to see clearly around you. Youseem a worthy young man; I will depart from the strict line of my duty to aidyou in discovering the author of this accusation. Here is the paper; do youknow the writing?” As he spoke, Villefort drew the letter from hispocket, and presented it to Dantès. Dantès read it. A cloud passed over hisbrow as he said:“No, monsieur, I do not know the writing, and yet it is tolerably plain.Whoever did it writes well. I am very fortunate,” added he, lookinggratefully at Villefort, “to be examined by such a man as you; for thisenvious person is a real enemy.” And by the rapid glance that the youngman’s eyes shot forth, Villefort saw how much energy lay hid beneath thismildness.“Now,” said the deputy, “answer me frankly, not as a prisonerto a judge, but as one man to another who takes an interest in him, what truthis there in the accusation contained in this anonymous letter?” AndVillefort threw disdainfully on his desk the letter Dantès had just given backto him.“None at all. I will tell you the real facts. I swear by my honor as asailor, by my love for Mercédès, by the life of my father——”“Speak, monsieur,” said Villefort. Then, internally, “IfRenée could see me, I hope she would be satisfied, and would no longer call mea decapitator.”“Well, when we quitted Naples, Captain Leclere was attacked with a brainfever. As we had no doctor on board, and he was so anxious to arrive at Elba,that he would not touch at any other port, his disorder rose to such a height,that at the end of the third day, feeling he was dying, he called me to him.‘My dear Dantès,’ said he, ‘swear to perform what I am goingto tell you, for it is a matter of the deepest importance.’“‘I swear, captain,’ replied I.“‘Well, as after my death the command devolves on you as mate,assume the command, and bear up for the Island of Elba, disembark atPorto-Ferrajo, ask for the grand-marshal, give him this letter—perhapsthey will give you another letter, and charge you with a commission. You willaccomplish what I was to have done, and derive all the honor and profit fromit.’“‘I will do it, captain; but perhaps I shall not be admitted to thegrand-marshal’s presence as easily as you expect?’“‘Here is a ring that will obtain audience of him, and remove everydifficulty,’ said the captain. At these words he gave me a ring. It wastime—two hours after he was delirious; the next day he died.”“And what did you do then?”“What I ought to have done, and what everyone would have done in myplace. Everywhere the last requests of a dying man are sacred; but with asailor the last requests of his superior are commands. I sailed for the Islandof Elba, where I arrived the next day; I ordered everybody to remain on board,and went on shore alone. As I had expected, I found some difficulty inobtaining access to the grand-marshal; but I sent the ring I had received fromthe captain to him, and was instantly admitted. He questioned me concerningCaptain Leclere’s death; and, as the latter had told me, gave me a letterto carry on to a person in Paris. I undertook it because it was what my captainhad bade me do. I landed here, regulated the affairs of the vessel, andhastened to visit my affianced bride, whom I found more lovely than ever.Thanks to M. Morrel, all the forms were got over; in a word I was, as I toldyou, at my marriage feast; and I should have been married in an hour, andtomorrow I intended to start for Paris, had I not been arrested on this chargewhich you as well as I now see to be unjust.”“Ah,” said Villefort, “this seems to me the truth. If youhave been culpable, it was imprudence, and this imprudence was in obedience tothe orders of your captain. Give up this letter you have brought from Elba, andpass your word you will appear should you be required, and go and rejoin yourfriends.“I am free, then, sir?” cried Dantès joyfully.“Yes; but first give me this letter.”“You have it already, for it was taken from me with some others which Isee in that packet.”“Stop a moment,” said the deputy, as Dantès took his hat andgloves. “To whom is it addressed?”“To Monsieur Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, Paris.” Had athunderbolt fallen into the room, Villefort could not have been more stupefied.He sank into his seat, and hastily turning over the packet, drew forth thefatal letter, at which he glanced with an expression of terror.“M. Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, No. 13,” murmured he, growing stillpaler.“Yes,” said Dantès; “do you know him?”“No,” replied Villefort; “a faithful servant of the king doesnot know conspirators.”“It is a conspiracy, then?” asked Dantès, who after believinghimself free, now began to feel a tenfold alarm. “I have, however,already told you, sir, I was entirely ignorant of the contents of theletter.”“Yes; but you knew the name of the person to whom it wasaddressed,” said Villefort.“I was forced to read the address to know to whom to give it.”“Have you shown this letter to anyone?” asked Villefort, becomingstill more pale.“To no one, on my honor.”“Everybody is ignorant that you are the bearer of a letter from theIsland of Elba, and addressed to M. Noirtier?”“Everybody, except the person who gave it to me.”“And that was too much, far too much,” murmured Villefort.Villefort’s brow darkened more and more, his white lips and clenchedteeth filled Dantès with apprehension. After reading the letter, Villefortcovered his face with his hands.“Oh,” said Dantès timidly, “what is the matter?”Villefort made no answer, but raised his head at the expiration of a fewseconds, and again perused the letter.“And you say that you are ignorant of the contents of this letter?”“I give you my word of honor, sir,” said Dantès; “but what isthe matter? You are ill—shall I ring for assistance?—shall Icall?”“No,” said Villefort, rising hastily; “stay where you are. Itis for me to give orders here, and not you.”“Monsieur,” replied Dantès proudly, “it was only to summonassistance for you.”“I want none; it was a temporary indisposition. Attend to yourself;answer me.” Dantès waited, expecting a question, but in vain. Villefortfell back on his chair, passed his hand over his brow, moist with perspiration,and, for the third time, read the letter.“Oh, if he knows the contents of this!” murmured he, “andthat Noirtier is the father of Villefort, I am lost!” And he fixed hiseyes upon Edmond as if he would have penetrated his thoughts.“Oh, it is impossible to doubt it,” cried he, suddenly.“In heaven’s name!” cried the unhappy young man, “ifyou doubt me, question me; I will answer you.” Villefort made a violenteffort, and in a tone he strove to render firm:“Sir,” said he, “I am no longer able, as I had hoped, torestore you immediately to liberty; before doing so, I must consult the trialjustice; what my own feeling is you already know.”“Oh, monsieur,” cried Dantès, “you have been rather a friendthan a judge.”“Well, I must detain you some time longer, but I will strive to make itas short as possible. The principal charge against you is this letter, and yousee——” Villefort approached the fire, cast it in, and waiteduntil it was entirely consumed.“You see, I destroy it?”“Oh,” exclaimed Dantès, “you are goodness itself.”“Listen,” continued Villefort; “you can now have confidencein me after what I have done.”“Oh, command, and I will obey.”“Listen; this is not a command, but advice I give you.”“Speak, and I will follow your advice.”“I shall detain you until this evening in the Palais de Justice. Shouldanyone else interrogate you, say to him what you have said to me, but do notbreathe a word of this letter.”“I promise.” It was Villefort who seemed to entreat, and theprisoner who reassured him.“You see,” continued he, glancing toward the grate, where fragmentsof burnt paper fluttered in the flames, “the letter is destroyed; you andI alone know of its existence; should you, therefore, be questioned, deny allknowledge of it—deny it boldly, and you are saved.”“Be satisfied; I will deny it.”“It was the only letter you had?”“It was.”“Swear it.”“I swear it.”Villefort rang. A police agent entered. Villefort whispered some words in hisear, to which the officer replied by a motion of his head.“Follow him,” said Villefort to Dantès. Dantès saluted Villefortand retired. Hardly had the door closed when Villefort threw himselfhalf-fainting into a chair.“Alas, alas,” murmured he, “if the procureur himself had beenat Marseilles I should have been ruined. This accursed letter would havedestroyed all my hopes. Oh, my father, must your past career always interferewith my successes?” Suddenly a light passed over his face, a smile playedround his set mouth, and his haggard eyes were fixed in thought.“This will do,” said he, “and from this letter, which mighthave ruined me, I will make my fortune. Now to the work I have in hand.”And after having assured himself that the prisoner was gone, the deputyprocureur hastened to the house of his betrothed. Chapter 8. The Châteaud’IfThe commissary ofpolice, as he traversed the antechamber, made a sign to two gendarmes, whoplaced themselves one on Dantès’ right and the other on his left. A doorthat communicated with the Palais de Justice was opened, and they went througha long range of gloomy corridors, whose appearance might have made even theboldest shudder. The Palais de Justice communicated with the prison,—asombre edifice, that from its grated windows looks on the clock-tower of theAccoules. After numberless windings, Dantès saw a door with an iron wicket. Thecommissary took up an iron mallet and knocked thrice, every blow seeming toDantès as if struck on his heart. The door opened, the two gendarmes gentlypushed him forward, and the door closed with a loud sound behind him. The airhe inhaled was no longer pure, but thick and mephitic,—he was in prison.He was conducted to a tolerably neat chamber, but grated and barred, and itsappearance, therefore, did not greatly alarm him; besides, the words ofVillefort, who seemed to interest himself so much, resounded still in his earslike a promise of freedom. It was four o’clock when Dantès was placed inthis chamber. It was, as we have said, the 1st of March, and the prisoner wassoon buried in darkness. The obscurity augmented the acuteness of his hearing;at the slightest sound he rose and hastened to the door, convinced they wereabout to liberate him, but the sound died away, and Dantès sank again into hisseat. At last, about ten o’clock, and just as Dantès began to despair,steps were heard in the corridor, a key turned in the lock, the bolts creaked,the massy oaken door flew open, and a flood of light from two torches pervadedthe apartment.By the torchlight Dantès saw the glittering sabres and carbines of fourgendarmes. He had advanced at first, but stopped at the sight of this displayof force.“Are you come to fetch me?” asked he.“Yes,” replied a gendarme.“By the orders of the deputy procureur?”“I believe so.” The conviction that they came from M. de Villefortrelieved all Dantès’ apprehensions; he advanced calmly, and placedhimself in the centre of the escort. A carriage waited at the door, thecoachman was on the box, and a police officer sat beside him.“Is this carriage for me?” said Dantès.“It is for you,” replied a gendarme.Dantès was about to speak; but feeling himself urged forward, and havingneither the power nor the intention to resist, he mounted the steps, and was inan instant seated inside between two gendarmes; the two others took theirplaces opposite, and the carriage rolled heavily over the stones.The prisoner glanced at the windows—they were grated; he had changed hisprison for another that was conveying him he knew not whither. Through thegrating, however, Dantès saw they were passing through the Rue Caisserie, andby the Rue Saint-Laurent and the Rue Taramis, to the quay. Soon he saw thelights of La Consigne.The carriage stopped, the officer descended, approached the guardhouse, a dozensoldiers came out and formed themselves in order; Dantès saw the reflection oftheir muskets by the light of the lamps on the quay.“Can all this force be summoned on my account?” thought he.The officer opened the door, which was locked, and, without speaking a word,answered Dantès’ question; for he saw between the ranks of the soldiers apassage formed from the carriage to the port. The two gendarmes who wereopposite to him descended first, then he was ordered to alight and thegendarmes on each side of him followed his example. They advanced towards aboat, which a custom-house officer held by a chain, near the quay.The soldiers looked at Dantès with an air of stupid curiosity. In an instant hewas placed in the stern-sheets of the boat, between the gendarmes, while theofficer stationed himself at the bow; a shove sent the boat adrift, and foursturdy oarsmen impelled it rapidly towards the Pilon. At a shout from the boat,the chain that closes the mouth of the port was lowered and in a second theywere, as Dantès knew, in the Frioul and outside the inner harbor.The prisoner’s first feeling was of joy at again breathing the pureair—for air is freedom; but he soon sighed, for he passed before LaRéserve, where he had that morning been so happy, and now through the openwindows came the laughter and revelry of a ball. Dantès folded his hands,raised his eyes to heaven, and prayed fervently.The boat continued her voyage. They had passed the Tête de Mort, were now offthe Anse du Pharo, and about to double the battery. This manœuvre wasincomprehensible to Dantès.“Whither are you taking me?” asked he.“You will soon know.”“But still——”“We are forbidden to give you any explanation.” Dantès, trained indiscipline, knew that nothing would be more absurd than to questionsubordinates, who were forbidden to reply; and so he remained silent.The most vague and wild thoughts passed through his mind. The boat they were incould not make a long voyage; there was no vessel at anchor outside the harbor;he thought, perhaps, they were going to leave him on some distant point. He wasnot bound, nor had they made any attempt to handcuff him; this seemed a goodaugury. Besides, had not the deputy, who had been so kind to him, told him thatprovided he did not pronounce the dreaded name of Noirtier, he had nothing toapprehend? Had not Villefort in his presence destroyed the fatal letter, theonly proof against him?He waited silently, striving to pierce through the darkness.They had left the Ile Ratonneau, where the lighthouse stood, on the right, andwere now opposite the Point des Catalans. It seemed to the prisoner that hecould distinguish a feminine form on the beach, for it was there Mercédèsdwelt. How was it that a presentiment did not warn Mercédès that her lover waswithin three hundred yards of her?One light alone was visible; and Dantès saw that it came from Mercédès’chamber. Mercédès was the only one awake in the whole settlement. A loud crycould be heard by her. But pride restrained him and he did not utter it. Whatwould his guards think if they heard him shout like a madman?He remained silent, his eyes fixed upon the light; the boat went on, but theprisoner thought only of Mercédès. An intervening elevation of land hid thelight. Dantès turned and perceived that they had got out to sea. While he hadbeen absorbed in thought, they had shipped their oars and hoisted sail; theboat was now moving with the wind.In spite of his repugnance to address the guards, Dantès turned to the nearestgendarme, and taking his hand,“Comrade,” said he, “I adjure you, as a Christian and asoldier, to tell me where we are going. I am Captain Dantès, a loyal Frenchman,thought accused of treason; tell me where you are conducting me, and I promiseyou on my honor I will submit to my fate.”The gendarme looked irresolutely at his companion, who returned for answer asign that said, “I see no great harm in telling him now,” and thegendarme replied:“You are a native of Marseilles, and a sailor, and yet you do not knowwhere you are going?”“On my honor, I have no idea.”“Have you no idea whatever?”“None at all.”“That is impossible.”“I swear to you it is true. Tell me, I entreat.”“But my orders.”“Your orders do not forbid your telling me what I must know in tenminutes, in half an hour, or an hour. You see I cannot escape, even if Iintended.”“Unless you are blind, or have never been outside the harbor, you mustknow.”“I do not.”“Look round you then.” Dantès rose and looked forward, when he sawrise within a hundred yards of him the black and frowning rock on which standsthe Château d’If. This gloomy fortress, which has for more than threehundred years furnished food for so many wild legends, seemed to Dantès like ascaffold to a malefactor.“The Château d’If?” cried he, “what are we going therefor?”The gendarme smiled.“I am not going there to be imprisoned,” said Dantès; “it isonly used for political prisoners. I have committed no crime. Are there anymagistrates or judges at the Château d’If?”“There are only,” said the gendarme, “a governor, a garrison,turnkeys, and good thick walls. Come, come, do not look so astonished, or youwill make me think you are laughing at me in return for my good nature.”Dantès pressed the gendarme’s hand as though he would crush it.“You think, then,” said he, “that I am taken to the Châteaud’If to be imprisoned there?”“It is probable; but there is no occasion to squeeze so hard.”“Without any inquiry, without any formality?”“All the formalities have been gone through; the inquiry is alreadymade.”“And so, in spite of M. de Villefort’s promises?”“I do not know what M. de Villefort promised you,” said thegendarme, “but I know we are taking you to the Château d’If. Butwhat are you doing? Help, comrades, help!”By a rapid movement, which the gendarme’s practiced eye had perceived,Dantès sprang forward to precipitate himself into the sea; but four vigorousarms seized him as his feet quitted the bottom of the boat. He fell backcursing with rage.“Good!” said the gendarme, placing his knee on his chest;“this is the way you keep your word as a sailor! Believe soft-spokengentlemen again! Hark ye, my friend, I have disobeyed my first order, but Iwill not disobey the second; and if you move, I will blow your brainsout.” And he levelled his carbine at Dantès, who felt the muzzle againsthis temple.For a moment the idea of struggling crossed his mind, and of so ending theunexpected evil that had overtaken him. But he bethought him of M. deVillefort’s promise; and, besides, death in a boat from the hand of agendarme seemed too terrible. He remained motionless, but gnashing his teethand wringing his hands with fury.At this moment the boat came to a landing with a violent shock. One of thesailors leaped on shore, a cord creaked as it ran through a pulley, and Dantèsguessed they were at the end of the voyage, and that they were mooring theboat.His guards, taking him by the arms and coat-collar, forced him to rise, anddragged him towards the steps that lead to the gate of the fortress, while thepolice officer carrying a musket with fixed bayonet followed behind.Dantès made no resistance; he was like a man in a dream; he saw soldiers drawnup on the embankment; he knew vaguely that he was ascending a flight of steps;he was conscious that he passed through a door, and that the door closed behindhim; but all this indistinctly as through a mist. He did not even see theocean, that terrible barrier against freedom, which the prisoners look uponwith utter despair.They halted for a minute, during which he strove to collect his thoughts. Helooked around; he was in a court surrounded by high walls; he heard themeasured tread of sentinels, and as they passed before the light he saw thebarrels of their muskets shine.They waited upwards of ten minutes. Certain Dantès could not escape, thegendarmes released him. They seemed awaiting orders. The orders came.“Where is the prisoner?” said a voice.“Here,” replied the gendarmes.“Let him follow me; I will take him to his cell.”“Go!” said the gendarmes, thrusting Dantès forward.The prisoner followed his guide, who led him into a room almost under ground,whose bare and reeking walls seemed as though impregnated with tears; a lampplaced on a stool illumined the apartment faintly, and showed Dantès thefeatures of his conductor, an under-jailer, ill-clothed, and of sullenappearance.“Here is your chamber for tonight,” said he. “It is late, andthe governor is asleep. Tomorrow, perhaps, he may change you. In the meantimethere is bread, water, and fresh straw; and that is all a prisoner can wishfor. Goodnight.” And before Dantès could open his mouth—before hehad noticed where the jailer placed his bread or the water—before he hadglanced towards the corner where the straw was, the jailer disappeared, takingwith him the lamp and closing the door, leaving stamped upon theprisoner’s mind the dim reflection of the dripping walls of his dungeon.Dantès was alone in darkness and in silence—cold as the shadows that hefelt breathe on his burning forehead. With the first dawn of day the jailerreturned, with orders to leave Dantès where he was. He found the prisoner inthe same position, as if fixed there, his eyes swollen with weeping. He hadpassed the night standing, and without sleep. The jailer advanced; Dantèsappeared not to perceive him. He touched him on the shoulder. Edmond started.“Have you not slept?” said the jailer.“I do not know,” replied Dantès. The jailer stared.“Are you hungry?” continued he.“I do not know.”“Do you wish for anything?”“I wish to see the governor.”The jailer shrugged his shoulders and left the chamber.Dantès followed him with his eyes, and stretched forth his hands towards theopen door; but the door closed. All his emotion then burst forth; he casthimself on the ground, weeping bitterly, and asking himself what crime he hadcommitted that he was thus punished.The day passed thus; he scarcely tasted food, but walked round and round thecell like a wild beast in its cage. One thought in particular tormented him:namely, that during his journey hither he had sat so still, whereas he might, adozen times, have plunged into the sea, and, thanks to his powers of swimming,for which he was famous, have gained the shore, concealed himself until thearrival of a Genoese or Spanish vessel, escaped to Spain or Italy, whereMercédès and his father could have joined him. He had no fears as to how heshould live—good seamen are welcome everywhere. He spoke Italian like aTuscan, and Spanish like a Castilian; he would have been free, and happy withMercédès and his father, whereas he was now confined in the Château d’If,that impregnable fortress, ignorant of the future destiny of his father andMercédès; and all this because he had trusted to Villefort’s promise. Thethought was maddening, and Dantès threw himself furiously down on his straw.The next morning at the same hour, the jailer came again.“Well,” said the jailer, “are you more reasonabletoday?” Dantès made no reply.“Come, cheer up; is there anything that I can do for you?”“I wish to see the governor.”“I have already told you it was impossible.”“Why so?”“Because it is against prison rules, and prisoners must not even ask forit.”“What is allowed, then?”“Better fare, if you pay for it, books, and leave to walk about.”“I do not want books, I am satisfied with my food, and do not care towalk about; but I wish to see the governor.”“If you worry me by repeating the same thing, I will not bring you anymore to eat.”“Well, then,” said Edmond, “if you do not, I shall die ofhunger—that is all.”The jailer saw by his tone he would be happy to die; and as every prisoner isworth ten sous a day to his jailer, he replied in a more subdued tone.“What you ask is impossible; but if you are very well behaved you will beallowed to walk about, and some day you will meet the governor, and if hechooses to reply, that is his affair.”“But,” asked Dantès, “how long shall I have to wait?”“Ah, a month—six months—a year.”“It is too long a time. I wish to see him at once.”“Ah,” said the jailer, “do not always brood over what isimpossible, or you will be mad in a fortnight.”“You think so?”“Yes; we have an instance here; it was by always offering a million offrancs to the governor for his liberty that an abbé became mad, who was in thischamber before you.”“How long has he left it?”“Two years.”“Was he liberated, then?”“No; he was put in a dungeon.”“Listen!” said Dantès. “I am not an abbé, I am not mad;perhaps I shall be, but at present, unfortunately, I am not. I will make youanother offer.”“What is that?”“I do not offer you a million, because I have it not; but I will give youa hundred crowns if, the first time you go to Marseilles, you will seek out ayoung girl named Mercédès, at the Catalans, and give her two lines fromme.”“If I took them, and were detected, I should lose my place, which isworth two thousand francs a year; so that I should be a great fool to run sucha risk for three hundred.”“Well,” said Dantès, “mark this; if you refuse at least totell Mercédès I am here, I will some day hide myself behind the door, and whenyou enter I will dash out your brains with this stool.”“Threats!” cried the jailer, retreating and putting himself on thedefensive; “you are certainly going mad. The abbé began like you, and inthree days you will be like him, mad enough to tie up; but, fortunately, thereare dungeons here.”Dantès whirled the stool round his head.“All right, all right,” said the jailer; “all right, sinceyou will have it so. I will send word to the governor.”“Very well,” returned Dantès, dropping the stool and sitting on itas if he were in reality mad. The jailer went out, and returned in an instantwith a corporal and four soldiers.“By the governor’s orders,” said he, “conduct theprisoner to the tier beneath.”“To the dungeon, then,” said the corporal.“Yes; we must put the madman with the madmen.” The soldiers seizedDantès, who followed passively.He descended fifteen steps, and the door of a dungeon was opened, and he wasthrust in. The door closed, and Dantès advanced with outstretched hands untilhe touched the wall; he then sat down in the corner until his eyes becameaccustomed to the darkness. The jailer was right; Dantès wanted but little ofbeing utterly mad. Chapter 9. The Evening ofthe BetrothalVillefort had, as wehave said, hastened back to Madame de Saint-Méran’s in the Place du GrandCours, and on entering the house found that the guests whom he had left attable were taking coffee in the salon. Renée was, with all the rest of thecompany, anxiously awaiting him, and his entrance was followed by a generalexclamation.“Well, Decapitator, Guardian of the State, Royalist, Brutus, what is thematter?” said one. “Speak out.”“Are we threatened with a fresh Reign of Terror?” asked another.“Has the Corsican ogre broken loose?” cried a third.“Marquise,” said Villefort, approaching his future mother-in-law,“I request your pardon for thus leaving you. Will the marquis honor me bya few moments’ private conversation?”“Ah, it is really a serious matter, then?” asked the marquis,remarking the cloud on Villefort’s brow.“So serious that I must take leave of you for a few days; so,”added he, turning to Renée, “judge for yourself if it be notimportant.”“You are going to leave us?” cried Renée, unable to hide heremotion at this unexpected announcement.“Alas,” returned Villefort, “I must!”“Where, then, are you going?” asked the marquise.“That, madame, is an official secret; but if you have any commissions forParis, a friend of mine is going there tonight, and will with pleasureundertake them.” The guests looked at each other.“You wish to speak to me alone?” said the marquis.“Yes, let us go to the library, please.” The marquis took his arm,and they left the salon.“Well,” asked he, as soon as they were by themselves, “tellme what it is?”“An affair of the greatest importance, that demands my immediate presencein Paris. Now, excuse the indiscretion, marquis, but have you any landedproperty?”“All my fortune is in the funds; seven or eight hundred thousandfrancs.”“Then sell out—sell out, marquis, or you will lose it all.”“But how can I sell out here?”“You have a broker, have you not?”“Yes.”“Then give me a letter to him, and tell him to sell out without aninstant’s delay, perhaps even now I shall arrive too late.”“The deuce you say!” replied the marquis, “let us lose notime, then!”And, sitting down, he wrote a letter to his broker, ordering him to sell out atthe market price.“Now, then,” said Villefort, placing the letter in his pocketbook,“I must have another!”“To whom?”“To the king.”“To the king?”“Yes.”“I dare not write to his majesty.”“I do not ask you to write to his majesty, but ask M. de Salvieux to doso. I want a letter that will enable me to reach the king’s presencewithout all the formalities of demanding an audience; that would occasion aloss of precious time.”“But address yourself to the keeper of the seals; he has the right ofentry at the Tuileries, and can procure you audience at any hour of the day ornight.”“Doubtless; but there is no occasion to divide the honors of my discoverywith him. The keeper would leave me in the background, and take all the gloryto himself. I tell you, marquis, my fortune is made if I only reach theTuileries the first, for the king will not forget the service I do him.”“In that case go and get ready. I will call Salvieux and make him writethe letter.”“Be as quick as possible, I must be on the road in a quarter of anhour.”“Tell your coachman to stop at the door.”“You will present my excuses to the marquise and Mademoiselle Renée, whomI leave on such a day with great regret.”“You will find them both here, and can make your farewells inperson.”“A thousand thanks—and now for the letter.”The marquis rang, a servant entered.“Say to the Comte de Salvieux that I would like to see him.”“Now, then, go,” said the marquis.“I shall be gone only a few moments.”Villefort hastily quitted the apartment, but reflecting that the sight of thedeputy procureur running through the streets would be enough to throw the wholecity into confusion, he resumed his ordinary pace. At his door he perceived afigure in the shadow that seemed to wait for him. It was Mercédès, who, hearingno news of her lover, had come unobserved to inquire after him.As Villefort drew near, she advanced and stood before him. Dantès had spoken ofMercédès, and Villefort instantly recognized her. Her beauty and high bearingsurprised him, and when she inquired what had become of her lover, it seemed tohim that she was the judge, and he the accused.“The young man you speak of,” said Villefort abruptly, “is agreat criminal, and I can do nothing for him, mademoiselle.” Mercédèsburst into tears, and, as Villefort strove to pass her, again addressed him.“But, at least, tell me where he is, that I may know whether he is aliveor dead,” said she.“I do not know; he is no longer in my hands,” replied Villefort.And desirous of putting an end to the interview, he pushed by her, and closedthe door, as if to exclude the pain he felt. But remorse is not thus banished;like Virgil’s wounded hero, he carried the arrow in his wound, and,arrived at the salon, Villefort uttered a sigh that was almost a sob, and sankinto a chair.Then the first pangs of an unending torture seized upon his heart. The man hesacrificed to his ambition, that innocent victim immolated on the altar of hisfather’s faults, appeared to him pale and threatening, leading hisaffianced bride by the hand, and bringing with him remorse, not such as theancients figured, furious and terrible, but that slow and consuming agony whosepangs are intensified from hour to hour up to the very moment of death. Then hehad a moment’s hesitation. He had frequently called for capitalpunishment on criminals, and owing to his irresistible eloquence they had beencondemned, and yet the slightest shadow of remorse had never cloudedVillefort’s brow, because they were guilty; at least, he believed so; buthere was an innocent man whose happiness he had destroyed. In this case he wasnot the judge, but the executioner.As he thus reflected, he felt the sensation we have described, and which hadhitherto been unknown to him, arise in his bosom, and fill him with vagueapprehensions. It is thus that a wounded man trembles instinctively at theapproach of the finger to his wound until it be healed, but Villefort’swas one of those that never close, or if they do, only close to reopen moreagonizing than ever. If at this moment the sweet voice of Renée had sounded inhis ears pleading for mercy, or the fair Mercédès had entered and said,“In the name of God, I conjure you to restore me my affiancedhusband,” his cold and trembling hands would have signed his release; butno voice broke the stillness of the chamber, and the door was opened only byVillefort’s valet, who came to tell him that the travelling carriage wasin readiness.Villefort rose, or rather sprang, from his chair, hastily opened one of thedrawers of his desk, emptied all the gold it contained into his pocket, stoodmotionless an instant, his hand pressed to his head, muttered a fewinarticulate sounds, and then, perceiving that his servant had placed his cloakon his shoulders, he sprang into the carriage, ordering the postilions to driveto M. de Saint-Méran’s. The hapless Dantès was doomed.As the marquis had promised, Villefort found the marquise and Renée in waiting.He started when he saw Renée, for he fancied she was again about to plead forDantès. Alas, her emotions were wholly personal: she was thinking only ofVillefort’s departure.She loved Villefort, and he left her at the moment he was about to become herhusband. Villefort knew not when he should return, and Renée, far from pleadingfor Dantès, hated the man whose crime separated her from her lover.Meanwhile what of Mercédès? She had met Fernand at the corner of the Rue de laLoge; she had returned to the Catalans, and had despairingly cast herself onher couch. Fernand, kneeling by her side, took her hand, and covered it withkisses that Mercédès did not even feel. She passed the night thus. The lampwent out for want of oil, but she paid no heed to the darkness, and dawn came,but she knew not that it was day. Grief had made her blind to all but oneobject—that was Edmond.“Ah, you are there,” said she, at length, turning towards Fernand.“I have not quitted you since yesterday,” returned Fernandsorrowfully.M. Morrel had not readily given up the fight. He had learned that Dantès hadbeen taken to prison, and he had gone to all his friends, and the influentialpersons of the city; but the report was already in circulation that Dantès wasarrested as a Bonapartist agent; and as the most sanguine looked upon anyattempt of Napoleon to remount the throne as impossible, he met with nothingbut refusal, and had returned home in despair, declaring that the matter wasserious and that nothing more could be done.Caderousse was equally restless and uneasy, but instead of seeking, like M.Morrel, to aid Dantès, he had shut himself up with two bottles of black currantbrandy, in the hope of drowning reflection. But he did not succeed, and becametoo intoxicated to fetch any more drink, and yet not so intoxicated as toforget what had happened. With his elbows on the table he sat between the twoempty bottles, while spectres danced in the light of the unsnuffedcandle—spectres such as Hoffmann strews over his punch-drenched pages,like black, fantastic dust.Danglars alone was content and joyous—he had got rid of an enemy and madehis own situation on the Pharaon secure. Danglars was one of those menborn with a pen behind the ear, and an inkstand in place of a heart. Everythingwith him was multiplication or subtraction. The life of a man was to him of farless value than a numeral, especially when, by taking it away, he couldincrease the sum total of his own desires. He went to bed at his usual hour,and slept in peace.Villefort, after having received M. de Salvieux’s letter, embraced Renée,kissed the marquise’s hand, and shaken that of the marquis, started forParis along the Aix road.Old Dantès was dying with anxiety to know what had become of Edmond. But weknow very well what had become of Edmond. Chapter 10. TheKing’s Closet at the TuileriesWe will leave Villeforton the road to Paris, travelling—thanks to trebled fees—with allspeed, and passing through two or three apartments, enter at the Tuileries thelittle room with the arched window, so well known as having been the favoritecloset of Napoleon and Louis XVIII., and now of Louis Philippe.There, seated before a walnut table he had brought with him from Hartwell, andto which, from one of those fancies not uncommon to great people, he wasparticularly attached, the king, Louis XVIII., was carelessly listening to aman of fifty or fifty-two years of age, with gray hair, aristocratic bearing,and exceedingly gentlemanly attire, and meanwhile making a marginal note in avolume of Gryphius’s rather inaccurate, but much sought-after, edition ofHorace—a work which was much indebted to the sagacious observations ofthe philosophical monarch.“You say, sir——” said the king.“That I am exceedingly disquieted, sire.”“Really, have you had a vision of the seven fat kine and the seven leankine?”“No, sire, for that would only betoken for us seven years of plenty andseven years of scarcity; and with a king as full of foresight as your majesty,scarcity is not a thing to be feared.”“Then of what other scourge are you afraid, my dear Blacas?”“Sire, I have every reason to believe that a storm is brewing in thesouth.”“Well, my dear duke,” replied Louis XVIII., “I think you arewrongly informed, and know positively that, on the contrary, it is very fineweather in that direction.” Man of ability as he was, Louis XVIII. likeda pleasant jest.“Sire,” continued M. de Blacas, “if it only be to reassure afaithful servant, will your majesty send into Languedoc, Provence, andDauphiné, trusty men, who will bring you back a faithful report as to thefeeling in these three provinces?”“Canimus surdis,” replied the king, continuing theannotations in his Horace.“Sire,” replied the courtier, laughing, in order that he might seemto comprehend the quotation, “your majesty may be perfectly right inrelying on the good feeling of France, but I fear I am not altogether wrong indreading some desperate attempt.”“By whom?”“By Bonaparte, or, at least, by his adherents.”“My dear Blacas,” said the king, “you with your alarmsprevent me from working.”“And you, sire, prevent me from sleeping with your security.”“Wait, my dear sir, wait a moment; for I have such a delightful note onthe Pastor quum traheret—wait, and I will listen to youafterwards.”There was a brief pause, during which Louis XVIII. wrote, in a hand as small aspossible, another note on the margin of his Horace, and then looking at theduke with the air of a man who thinks he has an idea of his own, while he isonly commenting upon the idea of another, said:“Go on, my dear duke, go on—I listen.”“Sire,” said Blacas, who had for a moment the hope of sacrificingVillefort to his own profit, “I am compelled to tell you that these arenot mere rumors destitute of foundation which thus disquiet me; but aserious-minded man, deserving all my confidence, and charged by me to watchover the south” (the duke hesitated as he pronounced these words),“has arrived by post to tell me that a great peril threatens the king,and so I hastened to you, sire.”“Mala ducis avi domum,” continued Louis XVIII., stillannotating.“Does your majesty wish me to drop the subject?”“By no means, my dear duke; but just stretch out your hand.”“Which?”“Whichever you please—there to the left.”“Here, sire?”“I tell you to the left, and you are looking to the right; I mean on myleft—yes, there. You will find yesterday’s report of the ministerof police. But here is M. Dandré himself;” and M. Dandré, announced bythe chamberlain-in-waiting, entered.“Come in,” said Louis XVIII., with repressed smile, “come in,Baron, and tell the duke all you know—the latest news of M. de Bonaparte;do not conceal anything, however serious,—let us see, the Island of Elbais a volcano, and we may expect to have issuing thence flaming and bristlingwar—bella, horrida bella.”M. Dandré leaned very respectfully on the back of a chair with his two hands,and said:“Has your majesty perused yesterday’s report?”“Yes, yes; but tell the duke himself, who cannot find anything, what thereport contains—give him the particulars of what the usurper is doing inhis islet.”“Monsieur,” said the baron to the duke, “all the servants ofhis majesty must approve of the latest intelligence which we have from theIsland of Elba. Bonaparte——”M. Dandré looked at Louis XVIII., who, employed in writing a note, did not evenraise his head. “Bonaparte,” continued the baron, “ismortally wearied, and passes whole days in watching his miners at work atPorto-Longone.”“And scratches himself for amusement,” added the king.“Scratches himself?” inquired the duke, “what does yourmajesty mean?”“Yes, indeed, my dear duke. Did you forget that this great man, thishero, this demigod, is attacked with a malady of the skin which worries him todeath, prurigo?”“And, moreover, my dear duke,” continued the minister of police,“we are almost assured that, in a very short time, the usurper will beinsane.”“Insane?”“Raving mad; his head becomes weaker. Sometimes he weeps bitterly,sometimes laughs boisterously, at other time he passes hours on the seashore,flinging stones in the water and when the flint makes‘duck-and-drake’ five or six times, he appears as delighted as ifhe had gained another Marengo or Austerlitz. Now, you must agree that these areindubitable symptoms of insanity.”“Or of wisdom, my dear baron—or of wisdom,” said LouisXVIII., laughing; “the greatest captains of antiquity amused themselvesby casting pebbles into the ocean—see Plutarch’s life of ScipioAfricanus.”M. de Blacas pondered deeply between the confident monarch and the truthfulminister. Villefort, who did not choose to reveal the whole secret, lestanother should reap all the benefit of the disclosure, had yet communicatedenough to cause him the greatest uneasiness.“Well, well, Dandré,” said Louis XVIII., “Blacas is not yetconvinced; let us proceed, therefore, to the usurper’s conversion.”The minister of police bowed.“The usurper’s conversion!” murmured the duke, looking at theking and Dandré, who spoke alternately, like Virgil’s shepherds.“The usurper converted!”“Decidedly, my dear duke.”“In what way converted?”“To good principles. Tell him all about it, baron.”“Why, this is the way of it,” said the minister, with the gravestair in the world: “Napoleon lately had a review, and as two or three ofhis old veterans expressed a desire to return to France, he gave them theirdismissal, and exhorted them to ‘serve the good king.’ These werehis own words, of that I am certain.”“Well, Blacas, what think you of this?” inquired the kingtriumphantly, and pausing for a moment from the voluminous scholiast beforehim.“I say, sire, that the minister of police is greatly deceived or I am;and as it is impossible it can be the minister of police as he has theguardianship of the safety and honor of your majesty, it is probable that I amin error. However, sire, if I might advise, your majesty will interrogate theperson of whom I spoke to you, and I will urge your majesty to do him thishonor.”“Most willingly, duke; under your auspices I will receive any person youplease, but you must not expect me to be too confiding. Baron, have you anyreport more recent than this, dated the 20th February, and this is the 3rd ofMarch?”“No, sire, but I am hourly expecting one; it may have arrived since Ileft my office.”“Go thither, and if there be none—well, well,” continuedLouis XVIII., “make one; that is the usual way, is it not?” and theking laughed facetiously.“Oh, sire,” replied the minister, “we have no occasion toinvent any; every day our desks are loaded with most circumstantialdenunciations, coming from hosts of people who hope for some return forservices which they seek to render, but cannot; they trust to fortune, and relyupon some unexpected event in some way to justify their predictions.”“Well, sir, go”; said Louis XVIII., “and remember that I amwaiting for you.”“I will but go and return, sire; I shall be back in ten minutes.”“And I, sire,” said M. de Blacas, “will go and find mymessenger.”“Wait, sir, wait,” said Louis XVIII. “Really, M. de Blacas, Imust change your armorial bearings; I will give you an eagle with outstretchedwings, holding in its claws a prey which tries in vain to escape, and bearingthis device—Tenax.”“Sire, I listen,” said De Blacas, biting his nails with impatience.“I wish to consult you on this passage, ‘Molli fugiensanhelitu,’ you know it refers to a stag flying from a wolf. Are younot a sportsman and a great wolf-hunter? Well, then, what do you think of themolli anhelitu?”“Admirable, sire; but my messenger is like the stag you refer to, for hehas posted two hundred and twenty leagues in scarcely three days.”“Which is undergoing great fatigue and anxiety, my dear duke, when wehave a telegraph which transmits messages in three or four hours, and thatwithout getting in the least out of breath.”“Ah, sire, you recompense but badly this poor young man, who has come sofar, and with so much ardor, to give your majesty useful information. If onlyfor the sake of M. de Salvieux, who recommends him to me, I entreat yourmajesty to receive him graciously.”“M. de Salvieux, my brother’s chamberlain?”“Yes, sire.”“He is at Marseilles.”“And writes me thence.”“Does he speak to you of this conspiracy?”“No; but strongly recommends M. de Villefort, and begs me to present himto your majesty.”“M. de Villefort!” cried the king, “is the messenger’sname M. de Villefort?”“Yes, sire.”“And he comes from Marseilles?”“In person.”“Why did you not mention his name at once?” replied the king,betraying some uneasiness.“Sire, I thought his name was unknown to your majesty.”“No, no, Blacas; he is a man of strong and elevated understanding,ambitious, too, and, pardieu! you know his father’s name!”“His father?”“Yes, Noirtier.”“Noirtier the Girondin?—Noirtier the senator?”“He himself.”“And your majesty has employed the son of such a man?”“Blacas, my friend, you have but limited comprehension. I told youVillefort was ambitious, and to attain this ambition Villefort would sacrificeeverything, even his father.”“Then, sire, may I present him?”“This instant, duke! Where is he?”“Waiting below, in my carriage.”“Seek him at once.”“I hasten to do so.”The duke left the royal presence with the speed of a young man; his reallysincere royalism made him youthful again. Louis XVIII. remained alone, andturning his eyes on his half-opened Horace, muttered:“Justum et tenacem propositi virum.”M. de Blacas returned as speedily as he had departed, but in the antechamber hewas forced to appeal to the king’s authority. Villefort’s dustygarb, his costume, which was not of courtly cut, excited the susceptibility ofM. de Brezé, who was all astonishment at finding that this young man had theaudacity to enter before the king in such attire. The duke, however, overcameall difficulties with a word—his majesty’s order; and, in spite ofthe protestations which the master of ceremonies made for the honor of hisoffice and principles, Villefort was introduced.The king was seated in the same place where the duke had left him. On openingthe door, Villefort found himself facing him, and the young magistrate’sfirst impulse was to pause.“Come in, M. de Villefort,” said the king, “come in.”Villefort bowed, and advancing a few steps, waited until the king shouldinterrogate him.“M. de Villefort,” said Louis XVIII., “the Duc de Blacasassures me you have some interesting information to communicate.”“Sire, the duke is right, and I believe your majesty will think itequally important.”“In the first place, and before everything else, sir, is the news as badin your opinion as I am asked to believe?”“Sire, I believe it to be most urgent, but I hope, by the speed I haveused, that it is not irreparable.”“Speak as fully as you please, sir,” said the king, who began togive way to the emotion which had showed itself in Blacas’s face andaffected Villefort’s voice. “Speak, sir, and pray begin at thebeginning; I like order in everything.”“Sire,” said Villefort, “I will render a faithful report toyour majesty, but I must entreat your forgiveness if my anxiety leads to someobscurity in my language.” A glance at the king after this discreet andsubtle exordium, assured Villefort of the benignity of his august auditor, andhe went on:“Sire, I have come as rapidly to Paris as possible, to inform yourmajesty that I have discovered, in the exercise of my duties, not a commonplaceand insignificant plot, such as is every day got up in the lower ranks of thepeople and in the army, but an actual conspiracy—a storm which menaces noless than your majesty’s throne. Sire, the usurper is arming three ships,he meditates some project, which, however mad, is yet, perhaps, terrible. Atthis moment he will have left Elba, to go whither I know not, but assuredly toattempt a landing either at Naples, or on the coast of Tuscany, or perhaps onthe shores of France. Your majesty is well aware that the sovereign of theIsland of Elba has maintained his relations with Italy and France?”“I am, sir,” said the king, much agitated; “and recently wehave had information that the Bonapartist clubs have had meetings in the RueSaint-Jacques. But proceed, I beg of you. How did you obtain thesedetails?”“Sire, they are the results of an examination which I have made of a manof Marseilles, whom I have watched for some time, and arrested on the day of mydeparture. This person, a sailor, of turbulent character, and whom I suspectedof Bonapartism, has been secretly to the Island of Elba. There he saw thegrand-marshal, who charged him with an oral message to a Bonapartist in Paris,whose name I could not extract from him; but this mission was to preparemen’s minds for a return (it is the man who says this, sire)—areturn which will soon occur.”“And where is this man?”“In prison, sire.”“And the matter seems serious to you?”“So serious, sire, that when the circumstance surprised me in the midstof a family festival, on the very day of my betrothal, I left my bride andfriends, postponing everything, that I might hasten to lay at yourmajesty’s feet the fears which impressed me, and the assurance of mydevotion.”“True,” said Louis XVIII., “was there not a marriageengagement between you and Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran?”“Daughter of one of your majesty’s most faithful servants.”“Yes, yes; but let us talk of this plot, M. de Villefort.”“Sire, I fear it is more than a plot; I fear it is a conspiracy.”“A conspiracy in these times,” said Louis XVIII., smiling,“is a thing very easy to meditate, but more difficult to conduct to anend, inasmuch as, re-established so recently on the throne of our ancestors, wehave our eyes open at once upon the past, the present, and the future. For thelast ten months my ministers have redoubled their vigilance, in order to watchthe shore of the Mediterranean. If Bonaparte landed at Naples, the wholecoalition would be on foot before he could even reach Piombino; if he land inTuscany, he will be in an unfriendly territory; if he land in France, it mustbe with a handful of men, and the result of that is easily foretold, execratedas he is by the population. Take courage, sir; but at the same time rely on ourroyal gratitude.”“Ah, here is M. Dandré!” cried de Blacas. At this instant theminister of police appeared at the door, pale, trembling, and as if ready tofaint. Villefort was about to retire, but M. de Blacas, taking his hand,restrained him. Chapter 11. The CorsicanOgreAt the sight of thisagitation Louis XVIII. pushed from him violently the table at which he wassitting.“What ails you, baron?” he exclaimed. “You appear quiteaghast. Has your uneasiness anything to do with what M. de Blacas has told me,and M. de Villefort has just confirmed?” M. de Blacas moved suddenlytowards the baron, but the fright of the courtier pleaded for the forbearanceof the statesman; and besides, as matters were, it was much more to hisadvantage that the prefect of police should triumph over him than that heshould humiliate the prefect.“Sire,——” stammered the baron.“Well, what is it?” asked Louis XVIII. The minister of police,giving way to an impulse of despair, was about to throw himself at the feet ofLouis XVIII., who retreated a step and frowned.“Will you speak?” he said.“Oh, sire, what a dreadful misfortune! I am, indeed, to be pitied. I cannever forgive myself!”“Monsieur,” said Louis XVIII., “I command you tospeak.”“Well, sire, the usurper left Elba on the 26th February, and landed onthe 1st of March.”“And where? In Italy?” asked the king eagerly.“In France, sire,—at a small port, near Antibes, in the Gulf ofJuan.”“The usurper landed in France, near Antibes, in the Gulf of Juan, twohundred and fifty leagues from Paris, on the 1st of March, and you onlyacquired this information today, the 3rd of March! Well, sir, what you tell meis impossible. You must have received a false report, or you have gonemad.”“Alas, sire, it is but too true!” Louis made a gesture ofindescribable anger and alarm, and then drew himself up as if this sudden blowhad struck him at the same moment in heart and countenance.“In France!” he cried, “the usurper in France! Then they didnot watch over this man. Who knows? they were, perhaps, in league withhim.”“Oh, sire,” exclaimed the Duc de Blacas, “M. Dandré is not aman to be accused of treason! Sire, we have all been blind, and the minister ofpolice has shared the general blindness, that is all.”“But——” said Villefort, and then suddenly checkinghimself, he was silent; then he continued, “Your pardon, sire,” hesaid, bowing, “my zeal carried me away. Will your majesty deign to excuseme?”“Speak, sir, speak boldly,” replied Louis. “You aloneforewarned us of the evil; now try and aid us with the remedy.”“Sire,” said Villefort, “the usurper is detested in thesouth; and it seems to me that if he ventured into the south, it would be easyto raise Languedoc and Provence against him.”“Yes, assuredly,” replied the minister; “but he is advancingby Gap and Sisteron.”“Advancing—he is advancing!” said Louis XVIII. “Is hethen advancing on Paris?” The minister of police maintained a silencewhich was equivalent to a complete avowal.“And Dauphiné, sir?” inquired the king, of Villefort. “Do youthink it possible to rouse that as well as Provence?”“Sire, I am sorry to tell your majesty a cruel fact; but the feeling inDauphiné is quite the reverse of that in Provence or Languedoc. Themountaineers are Bonapartists, sire.”“Then,” murmured Louis, “he was well informed. And how manymen had he with him?”“I do not know, sire,” answered the minister of police.“What, you do not know! Have you neglected to obtain information on thatpoint? Of course it is of no consequence,” he added, with a witheringsmile.“Sire, it was impossible to learn; the despatch simply stated the fact ofthe landing and the route taken by the usurper.”“And how did this despatch reach you?” inquired the king. Theminister bowed his head, and while a deep color overspread his cheeks, hestammered out:“By the telegraph, sire.” Louis XVIII. advanced a step, and foldedhis arms over his chest as Napoleon would have done.“So then,” he exclaimed, turning pale with anger, “sevenconjoined and allied armies overthrew that man. A miracle of heaven replaced meon the throne of my fathers after five-and-twenty years of exile. I have,during those five-and-twenty years, spared no pains to understand the people ofFrance and the interests which were confided to me; and now, when I see thefruition of my wishes almost within reach, the power I hold in my hands burstsand shatters me to atoms!”“Sire, it is fatality!” murmured the minister, feeling that thepressure of circumstances, however light a thing to destiny, was too much forany human strength to endure.“What our enemies say of us is then true. We have learnt nothing,forgotten nothing! If I were betrayed as he was, I would console myself; but tobe in the midst of persons elevated by myself to places of honor, who ought towatch over me more carefully than over themselves,—for my fortune istheirs—before me they were nothing—after me they will be nothing,and perish miserably from incapacity—ineptitude! Oh, yes, sir, you areright—it is fatality!”The minister quailed before this outburst of sarcasm. M. de Blacas wiped themoisture from his brow. Villefort smiled within himself, for he felt hisincreased importance.“To fall,” continued King Louis, who at the first glance hadsounded the abyss on which the monarchy hung suspended,—“to fall,and learn of that fall by telegraph! Oh, I would rather mount the scaffold ofmy brother, Louis XVI., than thus descend the staircase at the Tuileries drivenaway by ridicule. Ridicule, sir—why, you know not its power in France,and yet you ought to know it!”“Sire, sire,” murmured the minister, “forpity’s——”“Approach, M. de Villefort,” resumed the king, addressing the youngman, who, motionless and breathless, was listening to a conversation on whichdepended the destiny of a kingdom. “Approach, and tell monsieur that itis possible to know beforehand all that he has not known.”“Sire, it was really impossible to learn secrets which that man concealedfrom all the world.”“Really impossible! Yes—that is a great word, sir. Unfortunately,there are great words, as there are great men; I have measured them. Reallyimpossible for a minister who has an office, agents, spies, and fifteen hundredthousand francs for secret service money, to know what is going on at sixtyleagues from the coast of France! Well, then, see, here is a gentleman who hadnone of these resources at his disposal—a gentleman, only a simplemagistrate, who learned more than you with all your police, and who would havesaved my crown, if, like you, he had the power of directing a telegraph.”The look of the minister of police was turned with concentrated spite onVillefort, who bent his head in modest triumph.“I do not mean that for you, Blacas,” continued Louis XVIII.;“for if you have discovered nothing, at least you have had the good senseto persevere in your suspicions. Any other than yourself would have consideredthe disclosure of M. de Villefort insignificant, or else dictated by venalambition.” These words were an allusion to the sentiments which theminister of police had uttered with so much confidence an hour before.Villefort understood the king’s intent. Any other person would, perhaps,have been overcome by such an intoxicating draught of praise; but he feared tomake for himself a mortal enemy of the police minister, although he saw thatDandré was irrevocably lost. In fact, the minister, who, in the plenitude ofhis power, had been unable to unearth Napoleon’s secret, might in despairat his own downfall interrogate Dantès and so lay bare the motives ofVillefort’s plot. Realizing this, Villefort came to the rescue of thecrest-fallen minister, instead of aiding to crush him.“Sire,” said Villefort, “the suddenness of this event mustprove to your majesty that the issue is in the hands of Providence; what yourmajesty is pleased to attribute to me as profound perspicacity is simply owingto chance, and I have profited by that chance, like a good and devotedservant—that’s all. Do not attribute to me more than I deserve,sire, that your majesty may never have occasion to recall the first opinion youhave been pleased to form of me.” The minister of police thanked theyoung man by an eloquent look, and Villefort understood that he had succeededin his design; that is to say, that without forfeiting the gratitude of theking, he had made a friend of one on whom, in case of necessity, he might rely.“’Tis well,” resumed the king. “And now,gentlemen,” he continued, turning towards M. de Blacas and the ministerof police, “I have no further occasion for you, and you may retire; whatnow remains to do is in the department of the minister of war.”“Fortunately, sire,” said M. de Blacas, “we can rely on thearmy; your majesty knows how every report confirms their loyalty andattachment.”“Do not mention reports, duke, to me, for I know now what confidence toplace in them. Yet, speaking of reports, baron, what have you learned withregard to the affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques?”“The affair in the Rue Saint-Jacques!” exclaimed Villefort, unableto repress an exclamation. Then, suddenly pausing, he added, “Yourpardon, sire, but my devotion to your majesty has made me forget, not therespect I have, for that is too deeply engraved in my heart, but the rules ofetiquette.”“Go on, go on, sir,” replied the king; “you have today earnedthe right to make inquiries here.”“Sire,” interposed the minister of police, “I came a momentago to give your majesty fresh information which I had obtained on this head,when your majesty’s attention was attracted by the terrible event thathas occurred in the gulf, and now these facts will cease to interest yourmajesty.”“On the contrary, sir,—on the contrary,” said Louis XVIII.,“this affair seems to me to have a decided connection with that whichoccupies our attention, and the death of General Quesnel will, perhaps, put uson the direct track of a great internal conspiracy.” At the name ofGeneral Quesnel, Villefort trembled.“Everything points to the conclusion, sire,” said the minister ofpolice, “that death was not the result of suicide, as we first believed,but of assassination. General Quesnel, it appears, had just left a Bonapartistclub when he disappeared. An unknown person had been with him that morning, andmade an appointment with him in the Rue Saint-Jacques; unfortunately, thegeneral’s valet, who was dressing his hair at the moment when thestranger entered, heard the street mentioned, but did not catch thenumber.” As the police minister related this to the king, Villefort, wholooked as if his very life hung on the speaker’s lips, turned alternatelyred and pale. The king looked towards him.“Do you not think with me, M. de Villefort, that General Quesnel, whomthey believed attached to the usurper, but who was really entirely devoted tome, has perished the victim of a Bonapartist ambush?”“It is probable, sire,” replied Villefort. “But is this allthat is known?”“They are on the track of the man who appointed the meeting withhim.”“On his track?” said Villefort.“Yes, the servant has given his description. He is a man of from fifty tofifty-two years of age, dark, with black eyes covered with shaggy eyebrows, anda thick moustache. He was dressed in a blue frock-coat, buttoned up to thechin, and wore at his button-hole the rosette of an officer of the Legion ofHonor. Yesterday a person exactly corresponding with this description wasfollowed, but he was lost sight of at the corner of the Rue de la Jussienne andthe Rue Coq-Héron.” Villefort leaned on the back of an armchair, for asthe minister of police went on speaking he felt his legs bend under him; butwhen he learned that the unknown had escaped the vigilance of the agent whofollowed him, he breathed again.“Continue to seek for this man, sir,” said the king to the ministerof police; “for if, as I am all but convinced, General Quesnel, who wouldhave been so useful to us at this moment, has been murdered, his assassins,Bonapartists or not, shall be cruelly punished.” It required allVillefort’s coolness not to betray the terror with which this declarationof the king inspired him.“How strange,” continued the king, with some asperity; “thepolice think that they have disposed of the whole matter when they say,‘A murder has been committed,’ and especially so when they can add,‘And we are on the track of the guilty persons.’”“Sire, your majesty will, I trust, be amply satisfied on this point atleast.”“We shall see. I will no longer detain you, M. de Villefort, for you mustbe fatigued after so long a journey; go and rest. Of course you stopped at yourfather’s?” A feeling of faintness came over Villefort.“No, sire,” he replied, “I alighted at the Hotel de Madrid,in the Rue de Tournon.”“But you have seen him?”“Sire, I went straight to the Duc de Blacas.”“But you will see him, then?”“I think not, sire.”“Ah, I forgot,” said Louis, smiling in a manner which proved thatall these questions were not made without a motive; “I forgot you and M.Noirtier are not on the best terms possible, and that is another sacrifice madeto the royal cause, and for which you should be recompensed.”“Sire, the kindness your majesty deigns to evince towards me is arecompense which so far surpasses my utmost ambition that I have nothing moreto ask for.”“Never mind, sir, we will not forget you; make your mind easy. In themeanwhile” (the king here detached the cross of the Legion of Honor whichhe usually wore over his blue coat, near the cross of St. Louis, above theorder of Notre-Dame-du-Mont-Carmel and St. Lazare, and gave it toVillefort)—“in the meanwhile take this cross.”“Sire,” said Villefort, “your majesty mistakes; this is anofficer’s cross.”“Ma foi!” said Louis XVIII., “take it, such as it is,for I have not the time to procure you another. Blacas, let it be your care tosee that the brevet is made out and sent to M. de Villefort.”Villefort’s eyes were filled with tears of joy and pride; he took thecross and kissed it.“And now,” he said, “may I inquire what are the orders withwhich your majesty deigns to honor me?”“Take what rest you require, and remember that if you are not able toserve me here in Paris, you may be of the greatest service to me atMarseilles.”“Sire,” replied Villefort, bowing, “in an hour I shall havequitted Paris.”“Go, sir,” said the king; “and should I forget you(kings’ memories are short), do not be afraid to bring yourself to myrecollection. Baron, send for the minister of war. Blacas, remain.”“Ah, sir,” said the minister of police to Villefort, as they leftthe Tuileries, “you entered by luck’s door—your fortune ismade.”“Will it be long first?” muttered Villefort, saluting the minister,whose career was ended, and looking about him for a hackney-coach. One passedat the moment, which he hailed; he gave his address to the driver, andspringing in, threw himself on the seat, and gave loose to dreams of ambition.Ten minutes afterwards Villefort reached his hotel, ordered horses to be readyin two hours, and asked to have his breakfast brought to him. He was about tobegin his repast when the sound of the bell rang sharp and loud. The valetopened the door, and Villefort heard someone speak his name.“Who could know that I was here already?” said the young man. Thevalet entered.“Well,” said Villefort, “what is it?—Whorang?—Who asked for me?”“A stranger who will not send in his name.”“A stranger who will not send in his name! What can he want withme?”“He wishes to speak to you.”“To me?”“Yes.”“Did he mention my name?”“Yes.”“What sort of person is he?”“Why, sir, a man of about fifty.”“Short or tall?”“About your own height, sir.”“Dark or fair?”“Dark,—very dark; with black eyes, black hair, blackeyebrows.”“And how dressed?” asked Villefort quickly.“In a blue frock-coat, buttoned up close, decorated with the Legion ofHonor.”“It is he!” said Villefort, turning pale.“Eh, pardieu!” said the individual whose description we havetwice given, entering the door, “what a great deal of ceremony! Is it thecustom in Marseilles for sons to keep their fathers waiting in theiranterooms?”“Father!” cried Villefort, “then I was not deceived; I feltsure it must be you.”“Well, then, if you felt so sure,” replied the new-comer, puttinghis cane in a corner and his hat on a chair, “allow me to say, my dearGérard, that it was not very filial of you to keep me waiting at thedoor.”“Leave us, Germain,” said Villefort. The servant quitted theapartment with evident signs of astonishment. Chapter 12. Father andSonM. Noirtier—for itwas, indeed, he who entered—looked after the servant until the door wasclosed, and then, fearing, no doubt, that he might be overheard in theantechamber, he opened the door again, nor was the precaution useless, asappeared from the rapid retreat of Germain, who proved that he was not exemptfrom the sin which ruined our first parents. M. Noirtier then took the troubleto close and bolt the antechamber door, then that of the bedchamber, and thenextended his hand to Villefort, who had followed all his motions with surprisewhich he could not conceal.“Well, now, my dear Gérard,” said he to the young man, with a verysignificant look, “do you know, you seem as if you were not very glad tosee me?”“My dear father,” said Villefort, “I am, on the contrary,delighted; but I so little expected your visit, that it has somewhat overcomeme.”“But, my dear fellow,” replied M. Noirtier, seating himself,“I might say the same thing to you, when you announce to me your weddingfor the 28th of February, and on the 3rd of March you turn up here inParis.”“And if I have come, my dear father,” said Gérard, drawing closerto M. Noirtier, “do not complain, for it is for you that I came, and myjourney will be your salvation.”“Ah, indeed!” said M. Noirtier, stretching himself out at his easein the chair. “Really, pray tell me all about it, for it must beinteresting.”“Father, you have heard speak of a certain Bonapartist club in the RueSaint-Jacques?”“No. 53; yes, I am vice-president.”“Father, your coolness makes me shudder.”“Why, my dear boy, when a man has been proscribed by the mountaineers,has escaped from Paris in a hay-cart, been hunted over the plains of Bordeauxby Robespierre’s bloodhounds, he becomes accustomed to most things. Butgo on, what about the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques?”“Why, they induced General Quesnel to go there, and General Quesnel, whoquitted his own house at nine o’clock in the evening, was found the nextday in the Seine.”“And who told you this fine story?”“The king himself.”“Well, then, in return for your story,” continued Noirtier,“I will tell you another.”“My dear father, I think I already know what you are about to tellme.”“Ah, you have heard of the landing of the emperor?”“Not so loud, father, I entreat of you—for your own sake as well asmine. Yes, I heard this news, and knew it even before you could; for three daysago I posted from Marseilles to Paris with all possible speed, half-desperateat the enforced delay.”“Three days ago? You are crazy. Why, three days ago the emperor had notlanded.”“No matter, I was aware of his intention.”“How did you know about it?”“By a letter addressed to you from the Island of Elba.”“To me?”“To you; and which I discovered in the pocket-book of the messenger. Hadthat letter fallen into the hands of another, you, my dear father, wouldprobably ere this have been shot.” Villefort’s father laughed.“Come, come,” said he, “will the Restoration adopt imperialmethods so promptly? Shot, my dear boy? What an idea! Where is the letter youspeak of? I know you too well to suppose you would allow such a thing to passyou.”“I burnt it, for fear that even a fragment should remain; for that lettermust have led to your condemnation.”“And the destruction of your future prospects,” replied Noirtier;“yes, I can easily comprehend that. But I have nothing to fear while Ihave you to protect me.”“I do better than that, sir—I save you.”“You do? Why, really, the thing becomes more and moredramatic—explain yourself.”“I must refer again to the club in the Rue Saint-Jacques.”“It appears that this club is rather a bore to the police. Whydidn’t they search more vigilantly? they would havefound——”“They have not found; but they are on the track.”“Yes, that the usual phrase; I am quite familiar with it. When the policeis at fault, it declares that it is on the track; and the government patientlyawaits the day when it comes to say, with a sneaking air, that the track islost.”“Yes, but they have found a corpse; the general has been killed, and inall countries they call that a murder.”“A murder do you call it? why, there is nothing to prove that the generalwas murdered. People are found every day in the Seine, having thrown themselvesin, or having been drowned from not knowing how to swim.”“Father, you know very well that the general was not a man to drownhimself in despair, and people do not bathe in the Seine in the month ofJanuary. No, no, do not be deceived; this was murder in every sense of theword.”“And who thus designated it?”“The king himself.”“The king! I thought he was philosopher enough to allow that there was nomurder in politics. In politics, my dear fellow, you know, as well as I do,there are no men, but ideas—no feelings, but interests; in politics we donot kill a man, we only remove an obstacle, that is all. Would you like to knowhow matters have progressed? Well, I will tell you. It was thought reliancemight be placed in General Quesnel; he was recommended to us from the Island ofElba; one of us went to him, and invited him to the Rue Saint-Jacques, where hewould find some friends. He came there, and the plan was unfolded to him forleaving Elba, the projected landing, etc. When he had heard and comprehendedall to the fullest extent, he replied that he was a royalist. Then all lookedat each other,—he was made to take an oath, and did so, but with such anill grace that it was really tempting Providence to swear thus, and yet, inspite of that, the general was allowed to depart free—perfectly free. Yethe did not return home. What could that mean? why, my dear fellow, that onleaving us he lost his way, that’s all. A murder? really, Villefort, yousurprise me. You, a deputy procureur, to found an accusation on such badpremises! Did I ever say to you, when you were fulfilling your character as aroyalist, and cut off the head of one of my party, ‘My son, you havecommitted a murder?’ No, I said, ‘Very well, sir, you have gainedthe victory; tomorrow, perchance, it will be our turn.’”“But, father, take care; when our turn comes, our revenge will besweeping.”“I do not understand you.”“You rely on the usurper’s return?”“We do.”“You are mistaken; he will not advance two leagues into the interior ofFrance without being followed, tracked, and caught like a wild beast.”“My dear fellow, the emperor is at this moment on the way to Grenoble; onthe 10th or 12th he will be at Lyons, and on the 20th or 25th at Paris.”“The people will rise.”“Yes, to go and meet him.”“He has but a handful of men with him, and armies will be despatchedagainst him.”“Yes, to escort him into the capital. Really, my dear Gérard, you are buta child; you think yourself well informed because the telegraph has told you,three days after the landing, ‘The usurper has landed at Cannes withseveral men. He is pursued.’ But where is he? what is he doing? You donot know at all, and in this way they will chase him to Paris, without drawinga trigger.”“Grenoble and Lyons are faithful cities, and will oppose to him animpassable barrier.”“Grenoble will open her gates to him with enthusiasm—all Lyons willhasten to welcome him. Believe me, we are as well informed as you, and ourpolice are as good as your own. Would you like a proof of it? well, you wishedto conceal your journey from me, and yet I knew of your arrival half an hourafter you had passed the barrier. You gave your direction to no one but yourpostilion, yet I have your address, and in proof I am here the very instant youare going to sit at table. Ring, then, if you please, for a second knife, fork,and plate, and we will dine together.”“Indeed!” replied Villefort, looking at his father withastonishment, “you really do seem very well informed.”“Eh? the thing is simple enough. You who are in power have only the meansthat money produces—we who are in expectation, have those which devotionprompts.”“Devotion!” said Villefort, with a sneer.“Yes, devotion; for that is, I believe, the phrase for hopefulambition.”And Villefort’s father extended his hand to the bell-rope, to summon theservant whom his son had not called. Villefort caught his arm.“Wait, my dear father,” said the young man, “one wordmore.”“Say on.”“However stupid the royalist police may be, they do know one terriblething.”“What is that?”“The description of the man who, on the morning of the day when GeneralQuesnel disappeared, presented himself at his house.”“Oh, the admirable police have found that out, have they? And what may bethat description?”“Dark complexion; hair, eyebrows, and whiskers black; blue frock-coat,buttoned up to the chin; rosette of an officer of the Legion of Honor in hisbutton-hole; a hat with wide brim, and a cane.”“Ah, ha, that’s it, is it?” said Noirtier; “and why,then, have they not laid hands on him?”“Because yesterday, or the day before, they lost sight of him at thecorner of the Rue Coq-Héron.”“Didn’t I say that your police were good for nothing?”“Yes; but they may catch him yet.”“True,” said Noirtier, looking carelessly around him, “true,if this person were not on his guard, as he is;” and he added with asmile, “He will consequently make a few changes in his personalappearance.” At these words he rose, and put off his frock-coat andcravat, went towards a table on which lay his son’s toilet articles,lathered his face, took a razor, and, with a firm hand, cut off thecompromising whiskers. Villefort watched him with alarm not devoid ofadmiration.His whiskers cut off, Noirtier gave another turn to his hair; took, instead ofhis black cravat, a colored neckerchief which lay at the top of an openportmanteau; put on, in lieu of his blue and high-buttoned frock-coat, a coatof Villefort’s of dark brown, and cut away in front; tried on before theglass a narrow-brimmed hat of his son’s, which appeared to fit himperfectly, and, leaving his cane in the corner where he had deposited it, hetook up a small bamboo switch, cut the air with it once or twice, and walkedabout with that easy swagger which was one of his principal characteristics.“Well,” he said, turning towards his wondering son, when thisdisguise was completed, “well, do you think your police will recognize menow.”“No, father,” stammered Villefort; “at least, I hopenot.”“And now, my dear boy,” continued Noirtier, “I rely on yourprudence to remove all the things which I leave in your care.”“Oh, rely on me,” said Villefort.“Yes, yes; and now I believe you are right, and that you have reallysaved my life; be assured I will return the favor hereafter.”Villefort shook his head.“You are not convinced yet?”“I hope at least, that you may be mistaken.”“Shall you see the king again?”“Perhaps.”“Would you pass in his eyes for a prophet?”“Prophets of evil are not in favor at the court, father.”“True, but some day they do them justice; and supposing a secondrestoration, you would then pass for a great man.”“Well, what should I say to the king?”“Say this to him: ‘Sire, you are deceived as to the feeling inFrance, as to the opinions of the towns, and the prejudices of the army; hewhom in Paris you call the Corsican ogre, who at Nevers is styled the usurper,is already saluted as Bonaparte at Lyons, and emperor at Grenoble. You think heis tracked, pursued, captured; he is advancing as rapidly as his own eagles.The soldiers you believe to be dying with hunger, worn out with fatigue, readyto desert, gather like atoms of snow about the rolling ball as it hastensonward. Sire, go, leave France to its real master, to him who acquired it, notby purchase, but by right of conquest; go, sire, not that you incur any risk,for your adversary is powerful enough to show you mercy, but because it wouldbe humiliating for a grandson of Saint Louis to owe his life to the man ofArcola, Marengo, Austerlitz.’ Tell him this, Gérard; or, rather, tell himnothing. Keep your journey a secret; do not boast of what you have come toParis to do, or have done; return with all speed; enter Marseilles at night,and your house by the back-door, and there remain, quiet, submissive, secret,and, above all, inoffensive; for this time, I swear to you, we shall act likepowerful men who know their enemies. Go, my son—go, my dear Gérard, andby your obedience to my paternal orders, or, if you prefer it, friendlycounsels, we will keep you in your place. This will be,” added Noirtier,with a smile, “one means by which you may a second time save me, if thepolitical balance should some day take another turn, and cast you aloft whilehurling me down. Adieu, my dear Gérard, and at your next journey alight at mydoor.”Noirtier left the room when he had finished, with the same calmness that hadcharacterized him during the whole of this remarkable and trying conversation.Villefort, pale and agitated, ran to the window, put aside the curtain, and sawhim pass, cool and collected, by two or three ill-looking men at the corner ofthe street, who were there, perhaps, to arrest a man with black whiskers, and ablue frock-coat, and hat with broad brim.Villefort stood watching, breathless, until his father had disappeared at theRue Bussy. Then he turned to the various articles he had left behind him, putthe black cravat and blue frock-coat at the bottom of the portmanteau, threwthe hat into a dark closet, broke the cane into small bits and flung it in thefire, put on his travelling-cap, and calling his valet, checked with a look thethousand questions he was ready to ask, paid his bill, sprang into hiscarriage, which was ready, learned at Lyons that Bonaparte had enteredGrenoble, and in the midst of the tumult which prevailed along the road, atlength reached Marseilles, a prey to all the hopes and fears which enter intothe heart of man with ambition and its first successes. Chapter 13. The HundredDaysM. Noirtier was a trueprophet, and things progressed rapidly, as he had predicted. Everyone knows thehistory of the famous return from Elba, a return which was unprecedented in thepast, and will probably remain without a counterpart in the future.Louis XVIII. made but a faint attempt to parry this unexpected blow; themonarchy he had scarcely reconstructed tottered on its precarious foundation,and at a sign from the emperor the incongruous structure of ancient prejudicesand new ideas fell to the ground. Villefort, therefore, gained nothing save theking’s gratitude (which was rather likely to injure him at the presenttime) and the cross of the Legion of Honor, which he had the prudence not towear, although M. de Blacas had duly forwarded the brevet.Napoleon would, doubtless, have deprived Villefort of his office had it notbeen for Noirtier, who was all powerful at court, and thus the Girondin of’93 and the Senator of 1806 protected him who so lately had been hisprotector. All Villefort’s influence barely enabled him to stifle thesecret Dantès had so nearly divulged. The king’s procureur alone wasdeprived of his office, being suspected of royalism.However, scarcely was the imperial power established—that is, scarcelyhad the emperor re-entered the Tuileries and begun to issue orders from thecloset into which we have introduced our readers,—he found on the tablethere Louis XVIII.’s half-filled snuff-box,—scarcely had thisoccurred when Marseilles began, in spite of the authorities, to rekindle theflames of civil war, always smouldering in the south, and it required butlittle to excite the populace to acts of far greater violence than the shoutsand insults with which they assailed the royalists whenever they venturedabroad.Owing to this change, the worthy shipowner became at that moment—we willnot say all powerful, because Morrel was a prudent and rather a timid man, somuch so, that many of the most zealous partisans of Bonaparte accused him of“moderation”—but sufficiently influential to make a demand infavor of Dantès.Villefort retained his place, but his marriage was put off until a morefavorable opportunity. If the emperor remained on the throne, Gérard required adifferent alliance to aid his career; if Louis XVIII. returned, the influenceof M. de Saint-Méran, like his own, could be vastly increased, and the marriagebe still more suitable. The deputy procureur was, therefore, the firstmagistrate of Marseilles, when one morning his door opened, and M. Morrel wasannounced.Anyone else would have hastened to receive him; but Villefort was a man ofability, and he knew this would be a sign of weakness. He made Morrel wait inthe antechamber, although he had no one with him, for the simple reason thatthe king’s procureur always makes everyone wait, and after passing aquarter of an hour in reading the papers, he ordered M. Morrel to be admitted.Morrel expected Villefort would be dejected; he found him as he had found himsix weeks before, calm, firm, and full of that glacial politeness, that mostinsurmountable barrier which separates the well-bred from the vulgar man.He had entered Villefort’s office expecting that the magistrate wouldtremble at the sight of him; on the contrary, he felt a cold shudder all overhim when he saw Villefort sitting there with his elbow on his desk, and hishead leaning on his hand. He stopped at the door; Villefort gazed at him as ifhe had some difficulty in recognizing him; then, after a brief interval, duringwhich the honest shipowner turned his hat in his hands,“M. Morrel, I believe?” said Villefort.“Yes, sir.”“Come nearer,” said the magistrate, with a patronizing wave of thehand, “and tell me to what circumstance I owe the honor of thisvisit.”“Do you not guess, monsieur?” asked Morrel.“Not in the least; but if I can serve you in any way I shall bedelighted.”“Everything depends on you.”“Explain yourself, pray.”“Monsieur,” said Morrel, recovering his assurance as he proceeded,“do you recollect that a few days before the landing of his majesty theemperor, I came to intercede for a young man, the mate of my ship, who wasaccused of being concerned in correspondence with the Island of Elba? What wasthe other day a crime is today a title to favor. You then served Louis XVIII.,and you did not show any favor—it was your duty; today you serveNapoleon, and you ought to protect him—it is equally your duty; I come,therefore, to ask what has become of him?”Villefort by a strong effort sought to control himself. “What is hisname?” said he. “Tell me his name.”“Edmond Dantès.”Villefort would probably have rather stood opposite the muzzle of a pistol atfive-and-twenty paces than have heard this name spoken; but he did not blanch.“Dantès,” repeated he, “Edmond Dantès.”“Yes, monsieur.” Villefort opened a large register, then went to atable, from the table turned to his registers, and then, turning to Morrel,“Are you quite sure you are not mistaken, monsieur?” said he, inthe most natural tone in the world.Had Morrel been a more quick-sighted man, or better versed in these matters, hewould have been surprised at the king’s procureur answering him on such asubject, instead of referring him to the governors of the prison or the prefectof the department. But Morrel, disappointed in his expectations of excitingfear, was conscious only of the other’s condescension. Villefort hadcalculated rightly.“No,” said Morrel; “I am not mistaken. I have known him forten years, the last four of which he was in my service. Do not you recollect, Icame about six weeks ago to plead for clemency, as I come today to plead forjustice. You received me very coldly. Oh, the royalists were very severe withthe Bonapartists in those days.”“Monsieur,” returned Villefort, “I was then a royalist,because I believed the Bourbons not only the heirs to the throne, but thechosen of the nation. The miraculous return of Napoleon has conquered me, thelegitimate monarch is he who is loved by his people.”“That’s right!” cried Morrel. “I like to hear you speakthus, and I augur well for Edmond from it.”“Wait a moment,” said Villefort, turning over the leaves of aregister; “I have it—a sailor, who was about to marry a youngCatalan girl. I recollect now; it was a very serious charge.”“How so?”“You know that when he left here he was taken to the Palais deJustice.”“Well?”“I made my report to the authorities at Paris, and a week after he wascarried off.”“Carried off!” said Morrel. “What can they have done withhim?”“Oh, he has been taken to Fenestrelles, to Pignerol, or to theSainte-Marguérite islands. Some fine morning he will return to take command ofyour vessel.”“Come when he will, it shall be kept for him. But how is it he is notalready returned? It seems to me the first care of government should be to setat liberty those who have suffered for their adherence to it.”“Do not be too hasty, M. Morrel,” replied Villefort. “Theorder of imprisonment came from high authority, and the order for hisliberation must proceed from the same source; and, as Napoleon has scarcelybeen reinstated a fortnight, the letters have not yet been forwarded.”“But,” said Morrel, “is there no way of expediting all theseformalities—of releasing him from arrest?”“There has been no arrest.”“How?”“It is sometimes essential to government to cause a man’sdisappearance without leaving any traces, so that no written forms or documentsmay defeat their wishes.”“It might be so under the Bourbons, but at present——”“It has always been so, my dear Morrel, since the reign of Louis XIV. Theemperor is more strict in prison discipline than even Louis himself, and thenumber of prisoners whose names are not on the register is incalculable.”Had Morrel even any suspicions, so much kindness would have dispelled them.“Well, M. de Villefort, how would you advise me to act?” asked he.“Petition the minister.”“Oh, I know what that is; the minister receives two hundred petitionsevery day, and does not read three.”“That is true; but he will read a petition countersigned and presented byme.”“And will you undertake to deliver it?”“With the greatest pleasure. Dantès was then guilty, and now he isinnocent, and it is as much my duty to free him as it was to condemnhim.” Villefort thus forestalled any danger of an inquiry, which, howeverimprobable it might be, if it did take place would leave him defenceless.“But how shall I address the minister?”“Sit down there,” said Villefort, giving up his place to Morrel,“and write what I dictate.”“Will you be so good?”“Certainly. But lose no time; we have lost too much already.”“That is true. Only think what the poor fellow may even now besuffering.”Villefort shuddered at the suggestion; but he had gone too far to draw back.Dantès must be crushed to gratify Villefort’s ambition.Villefort dictated a petition, in which, from an excellent intention, no doubt,Dantès’ patriotic services were exaggerated, and he was made out one ofthe most active agents of Napoleon’s return. It was evident that at thesight of this document the minister would instantly release him. The petitionfinished, Villefort read it aloud.“That will do,” said he; “leave the rest to me.”“Will the petition go soon?”“Today.”“Countersigned by you?”“The best thing I can do will be to certify the truth of the contents ofyour petition.” And, sitting down, Villefort wrote the certificate at thebottom.“What more is to be done?”“I will do whatever is necessary.” This assurance delighted Morrel,who took leave of Villefort, and hastened to announce to old Dantès that hewould soon see his son.As for Villefort, instead of sending to Paris, he carefully preserved thepetition that so fearfully compromised Dantès, in the hopes of an event thatseemed not unlikely,—that is, a second restoration. Dantès remained aprisoner, and heard not the noise of the fall of Louis XVIII.’s throne,or the still more tragic destruction of the empire.Twice during the Hundred Days had Morrel renewed his demand, and twice hadVillefort soothed him with promises. At last there was Waterloo, and Morrelcame no more; he had done all that was in his power, and any fresh attemptwould only compromise himself uselessly.Louis XVIII. remounted the throne; Villefort, to whom Marseilles had becomefilled with remorseful memories, sought and obtained the situation ofking’s procureur at Toulouse, and a fortnight afterwards he marriedMademoiselle de Saint-Méran, whose father now stood higher at court than ever.And so Dantès, after the Hundred Days and after Waterloo, remained in hisdungeon, forgotten of earth and heaven.Danglars comprehended the full extent of the wretched fate that overwhelmedDantès; and, when Napoleon returned to France, he, after the manner of mediocreminds, termed the coincidence, a decree of Providence. But when Napoleonreturned to Paris, Danglars’ heart failed him, and he lived in constantfear of Dantès’ return on a mission of vengeance. He therefore informedM. Morrel of his wish to quit the sea, and obtained a recommendation from himto a Spanish merchant, into whose service he entered at the end of March, thatis, ten or twelve days after Napoleon’s return. He then left for Madrid,and was no more heard of.Fernand understood nothing except that Dantès was absent. What had become ofhim he cared not to inquire. Only, during the respite the absence of his rivalafforded him, he reflected, partly on the means of deceiving Mercédès as to thecause of his absence, partly on plans of emigration and abduction, as from timeto time he sat sad and motionless on the summit of Cape Pharo, at the spot fromwhence Marseilles and the Catalans are visible, watching for the apparition ofa young and handsome man, who was for him also the messenger of vengeance.Fernand’s mind was made up; he would shoot Dantès, and then kill himself.But Fernand was mistaken; a man of his disposition never kills himself, for heconstantly hopes.During this time the empire made its last conscription, and every man in Francecapable of bearing arms rushed to obey the summons of the emperor. Fernanddeparted with the rest, bearing with him the terrible thought that while he wasaway, his rival would perhaps return and marry Mercédès. Had Fernand reallymeant to kill himself, he would have done so when he parted from Mercédès. Hisdevotion, and the compassion he showed for her misfortunes, produced the effectthey always produce on noble minds—Mercédès had always had a sincereregard for Fernand, and this was now strengthened by gratitude.“My brother,” said she, as she placed his knapsack on hisshoulders, “be careful of yourself, for if you are killed, I shall bealone in the world.” These words carried a ray of hope intoFernand’s heart. Should Dantès not return, Mercédès might one day be his.Mercédès was left alone face to face with the vast plain that had never seemedso barren, and the sea that had never seemed so vast. Bathed in tears shewandered about the Catalan village. Sometimes she stood mute and motionless asa statue, looking towards Marseilles, at other times gazing on the sea, anddebating as to whether it were not better to cast herself into the abyss of theocean, and thus end her woes. It was not want of courage that prevented herputting this resolution into execution; but her religious feelings came to heraid and saved her.Caderousse was, like Fernand, enrolled in the army, but, being married andeight years older, he was merely sent to the frontier. Old Dantès, who was onlysustained by hope, lost all hope at Napoleon’s downfall. Five monthsafter he had been separated from his son, and almost at the hour of his arrest,he breathed his last in Mercédès’ arms. M. Morrel paid the expenses ofhis funeral, and a few small debts the poor old man had contracted.There was more than benevolence in this action; there was courage; the southwas aflame, and to assist, even on his death-bed, the father of so dangerous aBonapartist as Dantès, was stigmatized as a crime. Chapter 14. The TwoPrisonersA year after LouisXVIII.’s restoration, a visit was made by the inspector-general ofprisons. Dantès in his cell heard the noise of preparation,—sounds thatat the depth where he lay would have been inaudible to any but the ear of aprisoner, who could hear the splash of the drop of water that every hour fellfrom the roof of his dungeon. He guessed something uncommon was passing amongthe living; but he had so long ceased to have any intercourse with the world,that he looked upon himself as dead.The inspector visited, one after another, the cells and dungeons of several ofthe prisoners, whose good behavior or stupidity recommended them to theclemency of the government. He inquired how they were fed, and if they had anyrequest to make. The universal response was, that the fare was detestable, andthat they wanted to be set free.The inspector asked if they had anything else to ask for. They shook theirheads. What could they desire beyond their liberty? The inspector turnedsmilingly to the governor.“I do not know what reason government can assign for these uselessvisits; when you see one prisoner, you see all,—always the samething,—ill fed and innocent. Are there any others?”“Yes; the dangerous and mad prisoners are in the dungeons.”“Let us visit them,” said the inspector with an air of fatigue.“We must play the farce to the end. Let us see the dungeons.”“Let us first send for two soldiers,” said the governor. “Theprisoners sometimes, through mere uneasiness of life, and in order to besentenced to death, commit acts of useless violence, and you might fall avictim.”“Take all needful precautions,” replied the inspector.Two soldiers were accordingly sent for, and the inspector descended a stairway,so foul, so humid, so dark, as to be loathsome to sight, smell, andrespiration.“Oh,” cried the inspector, “who can live here?”“A most dangerous conspirator, a man we are ordered to keep the moststrict watch over, as he is daring and resolute.”“He is alone?”“Certainly.”“How long has he been there?”“Nearly a year.”“Was he placed here when he first arrived?”“No; not until he attempted to kill the turnkey, who took his food tohim.”“To kill the turnkey?”“Yes, the very one who is lighting us. Is it not true, Antoine?”asked the governor.“True enough; he wanted to kill me!” returned the turnkey.“He must be mad,” said the inspector.“He is worse than that,—he is a devil!” returned the turnkey.“Shall I complain of him?” demanded the inspector.“Oh, no; it is useless. Besides, he is almost mad now, and in anotheryear he will be quite so.”“So much the better for him,—he will suffer less,” said theinspector. He was, as this remark shows, a man full of philanthropy, and inevery way fit for his office.“You are right, sir,” replied the governor; “and this remarkproves that you have deeply considered the subject. Now we have in a dungeonabout twenty feet distant, and to which you descend by another stair, an oldabbé, formerly leader of a party in Italy, who has been here since 1811, and in1813 he went mad, and the change is astonishing. He used to weep, he nowlaughs; he grew thin, he now grows fat. You had better see him, for his madnessis amusing.”“I will see them both,” returned the inspector; “I mustconscientiously perform my duty.”This was the inspector’s first visit; he wished to display his authority.“Let us visit this one first,” added he.“By all means,” replied the governor, and he signed to the turnkeyto open the door. At the sound of the key turning in the lock, and the creakingof the hinges, Dantès, who was crouched in a corner of the dungeon, whence hecould see the ray of light that came through a narrow iron grating above,raised his head. Seeing a stranger, escorted by two turnkeys holding torchesand accompanied by two soldiers, and to whom the governor spoke bareheaded,Dantès, who guessed the truth, and that the moment to address himself to thesuperior authorities was come, sprang forward with clasped hands.The soldiers interposed their bayonets, for they thought that he was about toattack the inspector, and the latter recoiled two or three steps. Dantès sawthat he was looked upon as dangerous. Then, infusing all the humility hepossessed into his eyes and voice, he addressed the inspector, and sought toinspire him with pity.The inspector listened attentively; then, turning to the governor, observed,“He will become religious—he is already more gentle; he is afraid,and retreated before the bayonets—madmen are not afraid of anything; Imade some curious observations on this at Charenton.” Then, turning tothe prisoner, “What is it you want?” said he.“I want to know what crime I have committed—to be tried; and if Iam guilty, to be shot; if innocent, to be set at liberty.”“Are you well fed?” said the inspector.“I believe so; I don’t know; it’s of no consequence. Whatmatters really, not only to me, but to officers of justice and the king, isthat an innocent man should languish in prison, the victim of an infamousdenunciation, to die here cursing his executioners.”“You are very humble today,” remarked the governor; “you arenot so always; the other day, for instance, when you tried to kill theturnkey.”“It is true, sir, and I beg his pardon, for he has always been very goodto me, but I was mad.”“And you are not so any longer?”“No; captivity has subdued me—I have been here so long.”“So long?—when were you arrested, then?” asked the inspector.“The 28th of February, 1815, at half-past two in the afternoon.”“Today is the 30th of July, 1816,—why, it is but seventeenmonths.”“Only seventeen months,” replied Dantès. “Oh, you do not knowwhat is seventeen months in prison!—seventeen ages rather, especially toa man who, like me, had arrived at the summit of his ambition—to a man,who, like me, was on the point of marrying a woman he adored, who saw anhonorable career opened before him, and who loses all in an instant—whosees his prospects destroyed, and is ignorant of the fate of his affiancedwife, and whether his aged father be still living! Seventeen months’captivity to a sailor accustomed to the boundless ocean, is a worse punishmentthan human crime ever merited. Have pity on me, then, and ask for me, notintelligence, but a trial; not pardon, but a verdict—a trial, sir, I askonly for a trial; that, surely, cannot be denied to one who is accused!”“We shall see,” said the inspector; then, turning to the governor,“On my word, the poor devil touches me. You must show me the proofsagainst him.”“Certainly; but you will find terrible charges.”“Monsieur,” continued Dantès, “I know it is not in your powerto release me; but you can plead for me—you can have me tried—andthat is all I ask. Let me know my crime, and the reason why I was condemned.Uncertainty is worse than all.”“Go on with the lights,” said the inspector.“Monsieur,” cried Dantès, “I can tell by your voice you aretouched with pity; tell me at least to hope.”“I cannot tell you that,” replied the inspector; “I can onlypromise to examine into your case.”“Oh, I am free—then I am saved!”“Who arrested you?”“M. Villefort. See him, and hear what he says.”“M. Villefort is no longer at Marseilles; he is now at Toulouse.”“I am no longer surprised at my detention,” murmured Dantès,“since my only protector is removed.”“Had M. de Villefort any cause of personal dislike to you?”“None; on the contrary, he was very kind to me.”“I can, then, rely on the notes he has left concerning you?”“Entirely.”“That is well; wait patiently, then.”Dantès fell on his knees, and prayed earnestly. The door closed; but this timea fresh inmate was left with Dantès—Hope.“Will you see the register at once,” asked the governor, “orproceed to the other cell?”“Let us visit them all,” said the inspector. “If I once wentup those stairs. I should never have the courage to come down again.”“Ah, this one is not like the other, and his madness is less affectingthan this one’s display of reason.”“What is his folly?”“He fancies he possesses an immense treasure. The first year he offeredgovernment a million of francs for his release; the second, two; the third,three; and so on progressively. He is now in his fifth year of captivity; hewill ask to speak to you in private, and offer you five millions.”“How curious!—what is his name?”“The Abbé Faria.”“No. 27,” said the inspector.“It is here; unlock the door, Antoine.”The turnkey obeyed, and the inspector gazed curiously into the chamber of themad abbé, as the prisoner was usually called.In the centre of the cell, in a circle traced with a fragment of plasterdetached from the wall, sat a man whose tattered garments scarcely covered him.He was drawing in this circle geometrical lines, and seemed as much absorbed inhis problem as Archimedes was when the soldier of Marcellus slew him. He didnot move at the sound of the door, and continued his calculations until theflash of the torches lighted up with an unwonted glare the sombre walls of hiscell; then, raising his head, he perceived with astonishment the number ofpersons present. He hastily seized the coverlet of his bed, and wrapped itround him.“What is it you want?” said the inspector.“I, monsieur,” replied the abbé with an air ofsurprise,—“I want nothing.”“You do not understand,” continued the inspector; “I am senthere by government to visit the prison, and hear the requests of theprisoners.”“Oh, that is different,” cried the abbé; “and we shallunderstand each other, I hope.”“There, now,” whispered the governor, “it is just as I toldyou.”“Monsieur,” continued the prisoner, “I am the Abbé Faria,born at Rome. I was for twenty years Cardinal Spada’s secretary; I wasarrested, why, I know not, toward the beginning of the year 1811; since then Ihave demanded my liberty from the Italian and French government.”“Why from the French government?”“Because I was arrested at Piombino, and I presume that, like Milan andFlorence, Piombino has become the capital of some French department.”“Ah,” said the inspector, “you have not the latest news fromItaly?”“My information dates from the day on which I was arrested,”returned the Abbé Faria; “and as the emperor had created the kingdom ofRome for his infant son, I presume that he has realized the dream ofMachiavelli and Cæsar Borgia, which was to make Italy a united kingdom.”“Monsieur,” returned the inspector, “Providence has changedthis gigantic plan you advocate so warmly.”“It is the only means of rendering Italy strong, happy, andindependent.”“Very possibly; only I am not come to discuss politics, but to inquire ifyou have anything to ask or to complain of.”“The food is the same as in other prisons,—that is, very bad; thelodging is very unhealthful, but, on the whole, passable for a dungeon; but itis not that which I wish to speak of, but a secret I have to reveal of thegreatest importance.”“We are coming to the point,” whispered the governor.“It is for that reason I am delighted to see you,” continued theabbé, “although you have disturbed me in a most important calculation,which, if it succeeded, would possibly change Newton’s system. Could youallow me a few words in private.”“What did I tell you?” said the governor.“You knew him,” returned the inspector with a smile.“What you ask is impossible, monsieur,” continued he, addressingFaria.“But,” said the abbé, “I would speak to you of a large sum,amounting to five millions.”“The very sum you named,” whispered the inspector in his turn.“However,” continued Faria, seeing that the inspector was about todepart, “it is not absolutely necessary for us to be alone; the governorcan be present.”“Unfortunately,” said the governor, “I know beforehand whatyou are about to say; it concerns your treasures, does it not?” Fariafixed his eyes on him with an expression that would have convinced anyone elseof his sanity.“Of course,” said he; “of what else should I speak?”“Mr. Inspector,” continued the governor, “I can tell you thestory as well as he, for it has been dinned in my ears for the last four orfive years.”“That proves,” returned the abbé, “that you are like those ofHoly Writ, who having eyes see not, and having ears hear not.”“My dear sir, the government is rich and does not want yourtreasures,” replied the inspector; “keep them until you areliberated.” The abbé’s eyes glistened; he seized theinspector’s hand.“But what if I am not liberated,” cried he, “and am detainedhere until my death? this treasure will be lost. Had not government betterprofit by it? I will offer six millions, and I will content myself with therest, if they will only give me my liberty.”“On my word,” said the inspector in a low tone, “had I notbeen told beforehand that this man was mad, I should believe what hesays.”“I am not mad,” replied Faria, with that acuteness of hearingpeculiar to prisoners. “The treasure I speak of really exists, and Ioffer to sign an agreement with you, in which I promise to lead you to the spotwhere you shall dig; and if I deceive you, bring me here again,—I ask nomore.”The governor laughed. “Is the spot far from here?”“A hundred leagues.”“It is not ill-planned,” said the governor. “If all theprisoners took it into their heads to travel a hundred leagues, and theirguardians consented to accompany them, they would have a capital chance ofescaping.”“The scheme is well known,” said the inspector; “and theabbé’s plan has not even the merit of originality.”Then turning to Faria, “I inquired if you are well fed?” said he.“Swear to me,” replied Faria, “to free me if what I tell youprove true, and I will stay here while you go to the spot.”“Are you well fed?” repeated the inspector.“Monsieur, you run no risk, for, as I told you, I will stay here; sothere is no chance of my escaping.”“You do not reply to my question,” replied the inspectorimpatiently.“Nor you to mine,” cried the abbé. “You will not accept mygold; I will keep it for myself. You refuse me my liberty; God will give itme.” And the abbé, casting away his coverlet, resumed his place, andcontinued his calculations.“What is he doing there?” said the inspector.“Counting his treasures,” replied the governor.Faria replied to this sarcasm with a glance of profound contempt. They wentout. The turnkey closed the door behind them.“He was wealthy once, perhaps?” said the inspector.“Or dreamed he was, and awoke mad.”“After all,” said the inspector, “if he had been rich, hewould not have been here.”So the matter ended for the Abbé Faria. He remained in his cell, and this visitonly increased the belief in his insanity.Caligula or Nero, those treasure-seekers, those desirers of the impossible,would have accorded to the poor wretch, in exchange for his wealth, the libertyhe so earnestly prayed for. But the kings of modern times, restrained by thelimits of mere probability, have neither courage nor desire. They fear the earthat hears their orders, and the eye that scrutinizes their actions. Formerlythey believed themselves sprung from Jupiter, and shielded by their birth; butnowadays they are not inviolable.It has always been against the policy of despotic governments to suffer thevictims of their persecutions to reappear. As the Inquisition rarely allowedits victims to be seen with their limbs distorted and their flesh lacerated bytorture, so madness is always concealed in its cell, from whence, should itdepart, it is conveyed to some gloomy hospital, where the doctor has no thoughtfor man or mind in the mutilated being the jailer delivers to him. The verymadness of the Abbé Faria, gone mad in prison, condemned him to perpetualcaptivity.The inspector kept his word with Dantès; he examined the register, and foundthe following note concerning him:Edmond Dantès:Violent Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from Elba.The greatest watchfulness and care to be exercised.This note was in a different hand from the rest, which showed that it had beenadded since his confinement. The inspector could not contend against thisaccusation; he simply wrote, Nothing to be done.This visit had infused new vigor into Dantès; he had, till then, forgotten thedate; but now, with a fragment of plaster, he wrote the date, 30th July, 1816,and made a mark every day, in order not to lose his reckoning again. Days andweeks passed away, then months—Dantès still waited; he at first expectedto be freed in a fortnight. This fortnight expired, he decided that theinspector would do nothing until his return to Paris, and that he would notreach there until his circuit was finished, he therefore fixed three months;three months passed away, then six more. Finally ten months and a half had goneby and no favorable change had taken place, and Dantès began to fancy theinspector’s visit but a dream, an illusion of the brain.At the expiration of a year the governor was transferred; he had obtainedcharge of the fortress at Ham. He took with him several of his subordinates,and amongst them Dantès’ jailer. A new governor arrived; it would havebeen too tedious to acquire the names of the prisoners; he learned theirnumbers instead. This horrible place contained fifty cells; their inhabitantswere designated by the numbers of their cell, and the unhappy young man was nolonger called Edmond Dantès—he was now number 34. Chapter 15. Number 34 andNumber 27Dantès passed throughall the stages of torture natural to prisoners in suspense. He was sustained atfirst by that pride of conscious innocence which is the sequence to hope; thenhe began to doubt his own innocence, which justified in some measure thegovernor’s belief in his mental alienation; and then, relaxing hissentiment of pride, he addressed his supplications, not to God, but to man. Godis always the last resource. Unfortunates, who ought to begin with God, do nothave any hope in him till they have exhausted all other means of deliverance.Dantès asked to be removed from his present dungeon into another, even if itwere darker and deeper, for a change, however disadvantageous, was still achange, and would afford him some amusement. He entreated to be allowed to walkabout, to have fresh air, books, and writing materials. His requests were notgranted, but he went on asking all the same. He accustomed himself to speakingto the new jailer, although the latter was, if possible, more taciturn than theold one; but still, to speak to a man, even though mute, was something. Dantèsspoke for the sake of hearing his own voice; he had tried to speak when alone,but the sound of his voice terrified him.Often, before his captivity, Dantès’ mind had revolted at the idea ofassemblages of prisoners, made up of thieves, vagabonds, and murderers. He nowwished to be amongst them, in order to see some other face besides that of hisjailer; he sighed for the galleys, with the infamous costume, the chain, andthe brand on the shoulder. The galley-slaves breathed the fresh air of heaven,and saw each other. They were very happy.He besought the jailer one day to let him have a companion, were it even themad abbé. The jailer, though rough and hardened by the constant sight of somuch suffering, was yet a man. At the bottom of his heart he had often had afeeling of pity for this unhappy young man who suffered so; and he laid therequest of number 34 before the governor; but the latter sapiently imaginedthat Dantès wished to conspire or attempt an escape, and refused his request.Dantès had exhausted all human resources, and he then turned to God.All the pious ideas that had been so long forgotten, returned; he recollectedthe prayers his mother had taught him, and discovered a new meaning in everyword; for in prosperity prayers seem but a mere medley of words, untilmisfortune comes and the unhappy sufferer first understands the meaning of thesublime language in which he invokes the pity of heaven! He prayed, and prayedaloud, no longer terrified at the sound of his own voice, for he fell into asort of ecstasy. He laid every action of his life before the Almighty, proposedtasks to accomplish, and at the end of every prayer introduced the entreatyoftener addressed to man than to God: “Forgive us our trespasses as weforgive them that trespass against us.” Yet in spite of his earnestprayers, Dantès remained a prisoner.Then gloom settled heavily upon him. Dantès was a man of great simplicity ofthought, and without education; he could not, therefore, in the solitude of hisdungeon, traverse in mental vision the history of the ages, bring to life thenations that had perished, and rebuild the ancient cities so vast andstupendous in the light of the imagination, and that pass before the eyeglowing with celestial colors in Martin’s Babylonian pictures. He couldnot do this, he whose past life was so short, whose present so melancholy, andhis future so doubtful. Nineteen years of light to reflect upon in eternaldarkness! No distraction could come to his aid; his energetic spirit, thatwould have exalted in thus revisiting the past, was imprisoned like an eagle ina cage. He clung to one idea—that of his happiness, destroyed, withoutapparent cause, by an unheard-of fatality; he considered and reconsidered thisidea, devoured it (so to speak), as the implacable Ugolino devours the skull ofArchbishop Roger in the Inferno of Dante.Rage supplanted religious fervor. Dantès uttered blasphemies that made hisjailer recoil with horror, dashed himself furiously against the walls of hisprison, wreaked his anger upon everything, and chiefly upon himself, so thatthe least thing,—a grain of sand, a straw, or a breath of air thatannoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. Then the letter that Villefort hadshowed to him recurred to his mind, and every line gleamed forth in fieryletters on the wall like the mene, mene, tekel upharsin of Belshazzar.He told himself that it was the enmity of man, and not the vengeance of Heaven,that had thus plunged him into the deepest misery. He consigned his unknownpersecutors to the most horrible tortures he could imagine, and found them allinsufficient, because after torture came death, and after death, if not repose,at least the boon of unconsciousness.By dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillity was death, and ifpunishment were the end in view other tortures than death must be invented, hebegan to reflect on suicide. Unhappy he, who, on the brink of misfortune,broods over ideas like these!Before him is a dead sea that stretches in azure calm before the eye; but hewho unwarily ventures within its embrace finds himself struggling with amonster that would drag him down to perdition. Once thus ensnared, unless theprotecting hand of God snatch him thence, all is over, and his struggles buttend to hasten his destruction. This state of mental anguish is, however, lessterrible than the sufferings that precede or the punishment that possibly willfollow. There is a sort of consolation at the contemplation of the yawningabyss, at the bottom of which lie darkness and obscurity.Edmond found some solace in these ideas. All his sorrows, all his sufferings,with their train of gloomy spectres, fled from his cell when the angel of deathseemed about to enter. Dantès reviewed his past life with composure, and,looking forward with terror to his future existence, chose that middle linethat seemed to afford him a refuge.“Sometimes,” said he, “in my voyages, when I was a man andcommanded other men, I have seen the heavens overcast, the sea rage and foam,the storm arise, and, like a monstrous bird, beating the two horizons with itswings. Then I felt that my vessel was a vain refuge, that trembled and shookbefore the tempest. Soon the fury of the waves and the sight of the sharp rocksannounced the approach of death, and death then terrified me, and I used all myskill and intelligence as a man and a sailor to struggle against the wrath ofGod. But I did so because I was happy, because I had not courted death, becauseto be cast upon a bed of rocks and seaweed seemed terrible, because I wasunwilling that I, a creature made for the service of God, should serve for foodto the gulls and ravens. But now it is different; I have lost all that bound meto life, death smiles and invites me to repose; I die after my own manner, Idie exhausted and broken-spirited, as I fall asleep when I have paced threethousand times round my cell,—that is thirty thousand steps, or about tenleagues.”No sooner had this idea taken possession of him than he became more composed,arranged his couch to the best of his power, ate little and slept less, andfound existence almost supportable, because he felt that he could throw it offat pleasure, like a worn-out garment. Two methods of self-destruction were athis disposal. He could hang himself with his handkerchief to the window bars,or refuse food and die of starvation. But the first was repugnant to him.Dantès had always entertained the greatest horror of pirates, who are hung upto the yard-arm; he would not die by what seemed an infamous death. He resolvedto adopt the second, and began that day to carry out his resolve.Nearly four years had passed away; at the end of the second he had ceased tomark the lapse of time. Dantès said, “I wish to die,” and hadchosen the manner of his death, and fearful of changing his mind, he had takenan oath to die. “When my morning and evening meals are brought,”thought he, “I will cast them out of the window, and they will think thatI have eaten them.”He kept his word; twice a day he cast out, through the barred aperture, theprovisions his jailer brought him—at first gayly, then with deliberation,and at last with regret. Nothing but the recollection of his oath gave himstrength to proceed. Hunger made viands once repugnant, now acceptable; he heldthe plate in his hand for an hour at a time, and gazed thoughtfully at themorsel of bad meat, of tainted fish, of black and mouldy bread. It was the lastyearning for life contending with the resolution of despair; then his dungeonseemed less sombre, his prospects less desperate. He was still young—hewas only four or five-and-twenty—he had nearly fifty years to live. Whatunforseen events might not open his prison door, and restore him to liberty?Then he raised to his lips the repast that, like a voluntary Tantalus, herefused himself; but he thought of his oath, and he would not break it. Hepersisted until, at last, he had not sufficient strength to rise and cast hissupper out of the loophole. The next morning he could not see or hear; thejailer feared he was dangerously ill. Edmond hoped he was dying.Thus the day passed away. Edmond felt a sort of stupor creeping over him whichbrought with it a feeling almost of content; the gnawing pain at his stomachhad ceased; his thirst had abated; when he closed his eyes he saw myriads oflights dancing before them like the will-o’-the-wisps that play about themarshes. It was the twilight of that mysterious country called Death!Suddenly, about nine o’clock in the evening, Edmond heard a hollow soundin the wall against which he was lying.So many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that their noise did not, ingeneral, awake him; but whether abstinence had quickened his faculties, orwhether the noise was really louder than usual, Edmond raised his head andlistened. It was a continual scratching, as if made by a huge claw, a powerfultooth, or some iron instrument attacking the stones.Although weakened, the young man’s brain instantly responded to the ideathat haunts all prisoners—liberty! It seemed to him that heaven had atlength taken pity on him, and had sent this noise to warn him on the very brinkof the abyss. Perhaps one of those beloved ones he had so often thought of wasthinking of him, and striving to diminish the distance that separated them.No, no, doubtless he was deceived, and it was but one of those dreams thatforerun death!Edmond still heard the sound. It lasted nearly three hours; he then heard anoise of something falling, and all was silent.Some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and more distinct. Edmond wasintensely interested. Suddenly the jailer entered.For a week since he had resolved to die, and during the four days that he hadbeen carrying out his purpose, Edmond had not spoken to the attendant, had notanswered him when he inquired what was the matter with him, and turned his faceto the wall when he looked too curiously at him; but now the jailer might hearthe noise and put an end to it, and so destroy a ray of something like hopethat soothed his last moments.The jailer brought him his breakfast. Dantès raised himself up and began totalk about everything; about the bad quality of the food, about the coldness ofhis dungeon, grumbling and complaining, in order to have an excuse for speakinglouder, and wearying the patience of his jailer, who out of kindness of hearthad brought broth and white bread for his prisoner.Fortunately, he fancied that Dantès was delirious; and placing the food on therickety table, he withdrew. Edmond listened, and the sound became more and moredistinct.“There can be no doubt about it,” thought he; “it is someprisoner who is striving to obtain his freedom. Oh, if I were only there tohelp him!”Suddenly another idea took possession of his mind, so used to misfortune, thatit was scarcely capable of hope—the idea that the noise was made byworkmen the governor had ordered to repair the neighboring dungeon.It was easy to ascertain this; but how could he risk the question? It was easyto call his jailer’s attention to the noise, and watch his countenance ashe listened; but might he not by this means destroy hopes far more importantthan the short-lived satisfaction of his own curiosity? Unfortunately,Edmond’s brain was still so feeble that he could not bend his thoughts toanything in particular. He saw but one means of restoring lucidity andclearness to his judgment. He turned his eyes towards the soup which the jailerhad brought, rose, staggered towards it, raised the vessel to his lips, anddrank off the contents with a feeling of indescribable pleasure.He had the resolution to stop with this. He had often heard that shipwreckedpersons had died through having eagerly devoured too much food. Edmond replacedon the table the bread he was about to devour, and returned to hiscouch—he did not wish to die. He soon felt that his ideas became againcollected—he could think, and strengthen his thoughts by reasoning. Thenhe said to himself:“I must put this to the test, but without compromising anybody. If it isa workman, I need but knock against the wall, and he will cease to work, inorder to find out who is knocking, and why he does so; but as his occupation issanctioned by the governor, he will soon resume it. If, on the contrary, it isa prisoner, the noise I make will alarm him, he will cease, and not begin againuntil he thinks everyone is asleep.”Edmond rose again, but this time his legs did not tremble, and his sight wasclear; he went to a corner of his dungeon, detached a stone, and with itknocked against the wall where the sound came. He struck thrice.At the first blow the sound ceased, as if by magic.Edmond listened intently; an hour passed, two hours passed, and no sound washeard from the wall—all was silent there.Full of hope, Edmond swallowed a few mouthfuls of bread and water, and, thanksto the vigor of his constitution, found himself well-nigh recovered.The day passed away in utter silence—night came without recurrence of thenoise.“It is a prisoner,” said Edmond joyfully. His brain was on fire,and life and energy returned.The night passed in perfect silence. Edmond did not close his eyes.In the morning the jailer brought him fresh provisions—he had alreadydevoured those of the previous day; he ate these listening anxiously for thesound, walking round and round his cell, shaking the iron bars of the loophole,restoring vigor and agility to his limbs by exercise, and so preparing himselffor his future destiny. At intervals he listened to learn if the noise had notbegun again, and grew impatient at the prudence of the prisoner, who did notguess he had been disturbed by a captive as anxious for liberty as himself.Three days passed—seventy-two long tedious hours which he counted off byminutes!At length one evening, as the jailer was visiting him for the last time thatnight, Dantès, with his ear for the hundredth time at the wall, fancied heheard an almost imperceptible movement among the stones. He moved away, walkedup and down his cell to collect his thoughts, and then went back and listened.The matter was no longer doubtful. Something was at work on the other side ofthe wall; the prisoner had discovered the danger, and had substituted a leverfor a chisel.Encouraged by this discovery, Edmond determined to assist the indefatigablelaborer. He began by moving his bed, and looked around for anything with whichhe could pierce the wall, penetrate the moist cement, and displace a stone.He saw nothing, he had no knife or sharp instrument, the window grating was ofiron, but he had too often assured himself of its solidity. All his furnitureconsisted of a bed, a chair, a table, a pail, and a jug. The bed had ironclamps, but they were screwed to the wood, and it would have required ascrew-driver to take them off. The table and chair had nothing, the pail hadonce possessed a handle, but that had been removed.Dantès had but one resource, which was to break the jug, and with one of thesharp fragments attack the wall. He let the jug fall on the floor, and it brokein pieces.Dantès concealed two or three of the sharpest fragments in his bed, leaving therest on the floor. The breaking of his jug was too natural an accident toexcite suspicion. Edmond had all the night to work in, but in the darkness hecould not do much, and he soon felt that he was working against something veryhard; he pushed back his bed, and waited for day.All night he heard the subterranean workman, who continued to mine his way. Daycame, the jailer entered. Dantès told him that the jug had fallen from hishands while he was drinking, and the jailer went grumblingly to fetch another,without giving himself the trouble to remove the fragments of the broken one.He returned speedily, advised the prisoner to be more careful, and departed.Dantès heard joyfully the key grate in the lock; he listened until the sound ofsteps died away, and then, hastily displacing his bed, saw by the faint lightthat penetrated into his cell, that he had labored uselessly the previousevening in attacking the stone instead of removing the plaster that surroundedit.The damp had rendered it friable, and Dantès was able to break it off—insmall morsels, it is true, but at the end of half an hour he had scraped off ahandful; a mathematician might have calculated that in two years, supposingthat the rock was not encountered, a passage twenty feet long and two feetbroad, might be formed.The prisoner reproached himself with not having thus employed the hours he hadpassed in vain hopes, prayer, and despondency. During the six years that he hadbeen imprisoned, what might he not have accomplished?This idea imparted new energy, and in three days he had succeeded, with theutmost precaution, in removing the cement, and exposing the stone-work. Thewall was built of rough stones, among which, to give strength to the structure,blocks of hewn stone were at intervals imbedded. It was one of these he haduncovered, and which he must remove from its socket.Dantès strove to do this with his nails, but they were too weak. The fragmentsof the jug broke, and after an hour of useless toil, Dantès paused with anguishon his brow.Was he to be thus stopped at the beginning, and was he to wait inactive untilhis fellow workman had completed his task? Suddenly an idea occurred tohim—he smiled, and the perspiration dried on his forehead.The jailer always brought Dantès’ soup in an iron saucepan; this saucepancontained soup for both prisoners, for Dantès had noticed that it was eitherquite full, or half empty, according as the turnkey gave it to him or to hiscompanion first.The handle of this saucepan was of iron; Dantès would have given ten years ofhis life in exchange for it.The jailer was accustomed to pour the contents of the saucepan intoDantès’ plate, and Dantès, after eating his soup with a wooden spoon,washed the plate, which thus served for every day. Now when evening came Dantèsput his plate on the ground near the door; the jailer, as he entered, steppedon it and broke it.This time he could not blame Dantès. He was wrong to leave it there, but thejailer was wrong not to have looked before him. The jailer, therefore, onlygrumbled. Then he looked about for something to pour the soup into;Dantès’ entire dinner service consisted of one plate—there was noalternative.“Leave the saucepan,” said Dantès; “you can take it away whenyou bring me my breakfast.”This advice was to the jailer’s taste, as it spared him the necessity ofmaking another trip. He left the saucepan.Dantès was beside himself with joy. He rapidly devoured his food, and afterwaiting an hour, lest the jailer should change his mind and return, he removedhis bed, took the handle of the saucepan, inserted the point between the hewnstone and rough stones of the wall, and employed it as a lever. A slightoscillation showed Dantès that all went well. At the end of an hour the stonewas extricated from the wall, leaving a cavity a foot and a half in diameter.Dantès carefully collected the plaster, carried it into the corner of his cell,and covered it with earth. Then, wishing to make the best use of his time whilehe had the means of labor, he continued to work without ceasing. At the dawn ofday he replaced the stone, pushed his bed against the wall, and lay down. Thebreakfast consisted of a piece of bread; the jailer entered and placed thebread on the table.“Well, don’t you intend to bring me another plate?” saidDantès.“No,” replied the turnkey; “you destroy everything. First youbreak your jug, then you make me break your plate; if all the prisonersfollowed your example, the government would be ruined. I shall leave you thesaucepan, and pour your soup into that. So for the future I hope you will notbe so destructive.”Dantès raised his eyes to heaven and clasped his hands beneath the coverlet. Hefelt more gratitude for the possession of this piece of iron than he had everfelt for anything. He had noticed, however, that the prisoner on the other sidehad ceased to labor; no matter, this was a greater reason forproceeding—if his neighbor would not come to him, he would go to hisneighbor. All day he toiled on untiringly, and by the evening he had succeededin extracting ten handfuls of plaster and fragments of stone. When the hour forhis jailer’s visit arrived, Dantès straightened the handle of thesaucepan as well as he could, and placed it in its accustomed place. Theturnkey poured his ration of soup into it, together with the fish—forthrice a week the prisoners were deprived of meat. This would have been amethod of reckoning time, had not Dantès long ceased to do so. Having pouredout the soup, the turnkey retired.Dantès wished to ascertain whether his neighbor had really ceased to work. Helistened—all was silent, as it had been for the last three days. Dantèssighed; it was evident that his neighbor distrusted him. However, he toiled onall the night without being discouraged; but after two or three hours heencountered an obstacle. The iron made no impression, but met with a smoothsurface; Dantès touched it, and found that it was a beam. This beam crossed, orrather blocked up, the hole Dantès had made; it was necessary, therefore, todig above or under it. The unhappy young man had not thought of this.“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured he, “I have so earnestlyprayed to you, that I hoped my prayers had been heard. After having deprived meof my liberty, after having deprived me of death, after having recalled me toexistence, my God, have pity on me, and do not let me die in despair!”“Who talks of God and despair at the same time?” said a voice thatseemed to come from beneath the earth, and, deadened by the distance, soundedhollow and sepulchral in the young man’s ears. Edmond’s hair stoodon end, and he rose to his knees.“Ah,” said he, “I hear a human voice.” Edmond had notheard anyone speak save his jailer for four or five years; and a jailer is noman to a prisoner—he is a living door, a barrier of flesh and bloodadding strength to restraints of oak and iron.“In the name of Heaven,” cried Dantès, “speak again, thoughthe sound of your voice terrifies me. Who are you?”“Who are you?” said the voice.“An unhappy prisoner,” replied Dantès, who made no hesitation inanswering.“Of what country?”“A Frenchman.”“Your name?”“Edmond Dantès.”“Your profession?”“A sailor.”“How long have you been here?”“Since the 28th of February, 1815.”“Your crime?”“I am innocent.”“But of what are you accused?”“Of having conspired to aid the emperor’s return.”“What! For the emperor’s return?—the emperor is no longer onthe throne, then?”“He abdicated at Fontainebleau in 1814, and was sent to the Island ofElba. But how long have you been here that you are ignorant of all this?”“Since 1811.”Dantès shuddered; this man had been four years longer than himself in prison.“Do not dig any more,” said the voice; “only tell me how highup is your excavation?”“On a level with the floor.”“How is it concealed?”“Behind my bed.”“Has your bed been moved since you have been a prisoner?”“No.”“What does your chamber open on?”“A corridor.”“And the corridor?”“On a court.”“Alas!” murmured the voice.“Oh, what is the matter?” cried Dantès.“I have made a mistake owing to an error in my plans. I took the wrongangle, and have come out fifteen feet from where I intended. I took the wallyou are mining for the outer wall of the fortress.”“But then you would be close to the sea?”“That is what I hoped.”“And supposing you had succeeded?”“I should have thrown myself into the sea, gained one of the islands nearhere—the Isle de Daume or the Isle de Tiboulen—and then I shouldhave been safe.”“Could you have swum so far?”“Heaven would have given me strength; but now all is lost.”“All?”“Yes; stop up your excavation carefully, do not work any more, and waituntil you hear from me.”“Tell me, at least, who you are?”“I am—I am No. 27.”“You mistrust me, then,” said Dantès. Edmond fancied he heard abitter laugh resounding from the depths.“Oh, I am a Christian,” cried Dantès, guessing instinctively thatthis man meant to abandon him. “I swear to you by him who died for usthat naught shall induce me to breathe one syllable to my jailers; but Iconjure you do not abandon me. If you do, I swear to you, for I have got to theend of my strength, that I will dash my brains out against the wall, and youwill have my death to reproach yourself with.”“How old are you? Your voice is that of a young man.”“I do not know my age, for I have not counted the years I have been here.All I do know is, that I was just nineteen when I was arrested, the 28th ofFebruary, 1815.”“Not quite twenty-six!” murmured the voice; “at that age hecannot be a traitor.”“Oh, no, no,” cried Dantès. “I swear to you again, ratherthan betray you, I would allow myself to be hacked in pieces!”“You have done well to speak to me, and ask for my assistance, for I wasabout to form another plan, and leave you; but your age reassures me. I willnot forget you. Wait.”“How long?”“I must calculate our chances; I will give you the signal.”“But you will not leave me; you will come to me, or you will let me cometo you. We will escape, and if we cannot escape we will talk; you of those whomyou love, and I of those whom I love. You must love somebody?”“No, I am alone in the world.”“Then you will love me. If you are young, I will be your comrade; if youare old, I will be your son. I have a father who is seventy if he yet lives; Ionly love him and a young girl called Mercédès. My father has not yet forgottenme, I am sure, but God alone knows if she loves me still; I shall love you as Iloved my father.”“It is well,” returned the voice; “tomorrow.”These few words were uttered with an accent that left no doubt of hissincerity; Dantès rose, dispersed the fragments with the same precaution asbefore, and pushed his bed back against the wall. He then gave himself up tohis happiness. He would no longer be alone. He was, perhaps, about to regainhis liberty; at the worst, he would have a companion, and captivity that isshared is but half captivity. Plaints made in common are almost prayers, andprayers where two or three are gathered together invoke the mercy of heaven.All day Dantès walked up and down his cell. He sat down occasionally on hisbed, pressing his hand on his heart. At the slightest noise he bounded towardsthe door. Once or twice the thought crossed his mind that he might be separatedfrom this unknown, whom he loved already; and then his mind was madeup—when the jailer moved his bed and stooped to examine the opening, hewould kill him with his water jug. He would be condemned to die, but he wasabout to die of grief and despair when this miraculous noise recalled him tolife.The jailer came in the evening. Dantès was on his bed. It seemed to him thatthus he better guarded the unfinished opening. Doubtless there was a strangeexpression in his eyes, for the jailer said, “Come, are you going madagain?”Dantès did not answer; he feared that the emotion of his voice would betrayhim. The jailer went away shaking his head. Night came; Dantès hoped that hisneighbor would profit by the silence to address him, but he was mistaken. Thenext morning, however, just as he removed his bed from the wall, he heard threeknocks; he threw himself on his knees.“Is it you?” said he; “I am here.”“Is your jailer gone?”“Yes,” said Dantès; “he will not return until the evening; sothat we have twelve hours before us.”“I can work, then?” said the voice.“Oh, yes, yes; this instant, I entreat you.”In a moment that part of the floor on which Dantès was resting his two hands,as he knelt with his head in the opening, suddenly gave way; he drew backsmartly, while a mass of stones and earth disappeared in a hole that openedbeneath the aperture he himself had formed. Then from the bottom of thispassage, the depth of which it was impossible to measure, he saw appear, firstthe head, then the shoulders, and lastly the body of a man, who sprang lightlyinto his cell. Chapter 16. A LearnedItalianSeizing in his arms thefriend so long and ardently desired, Dantès almost carried him towards thewindow, in order to obtain a better view of his features by the aid of theimperfect light that struggled through the grating.He was a man of small stature, with hair blanched rather by suffering andsorrow than by age. He had a deep-set, penetrating eye, almost buried beneaththe thick gray eyebrow, and a long (and still black) beard reaching down to hisbreast. His thin face, deeply furrowed by care, and the bold outline of hisstrongly marked features, betokened a man more accustomed to exercise hismental faculties than his physical strength. Large drops of perspiration werenow standing on his brow, while the garments that hung about him were so raggedthat one could only guess at the pattern upon which they had originally beenfashioned.The stranger might have numbered sixty or sixty-five years; but a certainbriskness and appearance of vigor in his movements made it probable that he wasaged more from captivity than the course of time. He received the enthusiasticgreeting of his young acquaintance with evident pleasure, as though his chilledaffections were rekindled and invigorated by his contact with one so warm andardent. He thanked him with grateful cordiality for his kindly welcome,although he must at that moment have been suffering bitterly to find anotherdungeon where he had fondly reckoned on discovering a means of regaining hisliberty.“Let us first see,” said he, “whether it is possible toremove the traces of my entrance here—our future tranquillity dependsupon our jailers being entirely ignorant of it.”Advancing to the opening, he stooped and raised the stone easily in spite ofits weight; then, fitting it into its place, he said:“You removed this stone very carelessly; but I suppose you had no toolsto aid you.”“Why,” exclaimed Dantès, with astonishment, “do you possessany?”“I made myself some; and with the exception of a file, I have all thatare necessary,—a chisel, pincers, and lever.”“Oh, how I should like to see these products of your industry andpatience.”“Well, in the first place, here is my chisel.”So saying, he displayed a sharp strong blade, with a handle made of beechwood.“And with what did you contrive to make that?” inquired Dantès.“With one of the clamps of my bedstead; and this very tool has sufficedme to hollow out the road by which I came hither, a distance of about fiftyfeet.”“Fifty feet!” responded Dantès, almost terrified.“Do not speak so loud, young man—don’t speak so loud. Itfrequently occurs in a state prison like this, that persons are stationedoutside the doors of the cells purposely to overhear the conversation of theprisoners.”“But they believe I am shut up alone here.”“That makes no difference.”“And you say that you dug your way a distance of fifty feet to gethere?”“I do; that is about the distance that separates your chamber from mine;only, unfortunately, I did not curve aright; for want of the necessarygeometrical instruments to calculate my scale of proportion, instead of takingan ellipsis of forty feet, I made it fifty. I expected, as I told you, to reachthe outer wall, pierce through it, and throw myself into the sea; I have,however, kept along the corridor on which your chamber opens, instead of goingbeneath it. My labor is all in vain, for I find that the corridor looks into acourtyard filled with soldiers.”“That’s true,” said Dantès; “but the corridor you speakof only bounds one side of my cell; there are three others—do youknow anything of their situation?”“This one is built against the solid rock, and it would take tenexperienced miners, duly furnished with the requisite tools, as many years toperforate it. This adjoins the lower part of the governor’s apartments,and were we to work our way through, we should only get into some lock-upcellars, where we must necessarily be recaptured. The fourth and last side ofyour cell faces on—faces on—stop a minute, now where does itface?”The wall of which he spoke was the one in which was fixed the loophole by whichlight was admitted to the chamber. This loophole, which gradually diminished insize as it approached the outside, to an opening through which a child couldnot have passed, was, for better security, furnished with three iron bars, soas to quiet all apprehensions even in the mind of the most suspicious jailer asto the possibility of a prisoner’s escape. As the stranger asked thequestion, he dragged the table beneath the window.“Climb up,” said he to Dantès.The young man obeyed, mounted on the table, and, divining the wishes of hiscompanion, placed his back securely against the wall and held out both hands.The stranger, whom as yet Dantès knew only by the number of his cell, sprang upwith an agility by no means to be expected in a person of his years, and, lightand steady on his feet as a cat or a lizard, climbed from the table to theoutstretched hands of Dantès, and from them to his shoulders; then, bendingdouble, for the ceiling of the dungeon prevented him from holding himselferect, he managed to slip his head between the upper bars of the window, so asto be able to command a perfect view from top to bottom.An instant afterwards he hastily drew back his head, saying, “I thoughtso!” and sliding from the shoulders of Dantès as dextrously as he hadascended, he nimbly leaped from the table to the ground.“What was it that you thought?” asked the young man anxiously, inhis turn descending from the table.The elder prisoner pondered the matter. “Yes,” said he at length,“it is so. This side of your chamber looks out upon a kind of opengallery, where patrols are continually passing, and sentries keep watch day andnight.”“Are you quite sure of that?”“Certain. I saw the soldier’s shape and the top of his musket; thatmade me draw in my head so quickly, for I was fearful he might also seeme.”“Well?” inquired Dantès.“You perceive then the utter impossibility of escaping through yourdungeon?”“Then——” pursued the young man eagerly.“Then,” answered the elder prisoner, “the will of God bedone!” And as the old man slowly pronounced those words, an air ofprofound resignation spread itself over his careworn countenance. Dantès gazedon the man who could thus philosophically resign hopes so long and ardentlynourished with an astonishment mingled with admiration.“Tell me, I entreat of you, who and what you are?” said he atlength. “Never have I met with so remarkable a person as yourself.”“Willingly,” answered the stranger; “if, indeed, you feel anycuriosity respecting one, now, alas, powerless to aid you in any way.”“Say not so; you can console and support me by the strength of your ownpowerful mind. Pray let me know who you really are?”The stranger smiled a melancholy smile. “Then listen,” said he.“I am the Abbé Faria, and have been imprisoned as you know in thisChâteau d’If since the year 1811; previously to which I had been confinedfor three years in the fortress of Fenestrelle. In the year 1811 I wastransferred to Piedmont in France. It was at this period I learned that thedestiny which seemed subservient to every wish formed by Napoleon, had bestowedon him a son, named king of Rome even in his cradle. I was very far then fromexpecting the change you have just informed me of; namely, that four yearsafterwards, this colossus of power would be overthrown. Then who reigns inFrance at this moment—Napoleon II.?”“No, Louis XVIII.”“The brother of Louis XVI.! How inscrutable are the ways ofProvidence—for what great and mysterious purpose has it pleased Heaven toabase the man once so elevated, and raise up him who was so abased?”Dantès’ whole attention was riveted on a man who could thus forget hisown misfortunes while occupying himself with the destinies of others.“Yes, yes,” continued he, “’Twill be the same as it wasin England. After Charles I., Cromwell; after Cromwell, Charles II., and thenJames II., and then some son-in-law or relation, some Prince of Orange, astadtholder who becomes a king. Then new concessions to the people, then aconstitution, then liberty. Ah, my friend!” said the abbé, turningtowards Dantès, and surveying him with the kindling gaze of a prophet,“you are young, you will see all this come to pass.”“Probably, if ever I get out of prison!”“True,” replied Faria, “we are prisoners; but I forget thissometimes, and there are even moments when my mental vision transports mebeyond these walls, and I fancy myself at liberty.”“But wherefore are you here?”“Because in 1807 I dreamed of the very plan Napoleon tried to realize in1811; because, like Machiavelli, I desired to alter the political face ofItaly, and instead of allowing it to be split up into a quantity of pettyprincipalities, each held by some weak or tyrannical ruler, I sought to formone large, compact, and powerful empire; and, lastly, because I fancied I hadfound my Cæsar Borgia in a crowned simpleton, who feigned to enter into myviews only to betray me. It was the plan of Alexander VI. and Clement VII., butit will never succeed now, for they attempted it fruitlessly, and Napoleon wasunable to complete his work. Italy seems fated to misfortune.” And theold man bowed his head.Dantès could not understand a man risking his life for such matters. Napoleoncertainly he knew something of, inasmuch as he had seen and spoken with him;but of Clement VII. and Alexander VI. he knew nothing.“Are you not,” he asked, “the priest who here in the Châteaud’If is generally thought to be—ill?”“Mad, you mean, don’t you?”“I did not like to say so,” answered Dantès, smiling.“Well, then,” resumed Faria with a bitter smile, “let meanswer your question in full, by acknowledging that I am the poor mad prisonerof the Château d’If, for many years permitted to amuse the differentvisitors with what is said to be my insanity; and, in all probability, I shouldbe promoted to the honor of making sport for the children, if such innocentbeings could be found in an abode devoted like this to suffering anddespair.”Dantès remained for a short time mute and motionless; at length he said:“Then you abandon all hope of escape?”“I perceive its utter impossibility; and I consider it impious to attemptthat which the Almighty evidently does not approve.”“Nay, be not discouraged. Would it not be expecting too much to hope tosucceed at your first attempt? Why not try to find an opening in anotherdirection from that which has so unfortunately failed?”“Alas, it shows how little notion you can have of all it has cost me toeffect a purpose so unexpectedly frustrated, that you talk of beginning overagain. In the first place, I was four years making the tools I possess, andhave been two years scraping and digging out earth, hard as granite itself;then what toil and fatigue has it not been to remove huge stones I should oncehave deemed impossible to loosen. Whole days have I passed in these Titanicefforts, considering my labor well repaid if, by night-time I had contrived tocarry away a square inch of this hard-bound cement, changed by ages into asubstance unyielding as the stones themselves; then to conceal the mass ofearth and rubbish I dug up, I was compelled to break through a staircase, andthrow the fruits of my labor into the hollow part of it; but the well is now socompletely choked up, that I scarcely think it would be possible to add anotherhandful of dust without leading to discovery. Consider also that I fullybelieved I had accomplished the end and aim of my undertaking, for which I hadso exactly husbanded my strength as to make it just hold out to the terminationof my enterprise; and now, at the moment when I reckoned upon success, my hopesare forever dashed from me. No, I repeat again, that nothing shall induce me torenew attempts evidently at variance with the Almighty’s pleasure.”Dantès held down his head, that the other might not see how joy at the thoughtof having a companion outweighed the sympathy he felt for the failure of theabbé’s plans.The abbé sank upon Edmond’s bed, while Edmond himself remained standing.Escape had never once occurred to him. There are, indeed, some things whichappear so impossible that the mind does not dwell on them for an instant. Toundermine the ground for fifty feet—to devote three years to a laborwhich, if successful, would conduct you to a precipice overhanging thesea—to plunge into the waves from the height of fifty, sixty, perhaps ahundred feet, at the risk of being dashed to pieces against the rocks, shouldyou have been fortunate enough to have escaped the fire of the sentinels; andeven, supposing all these perils past, then to have to swim for your life adistance of at least three miles ere you could reach the shore—weredifficulties so startling and formidable that Dantès had never even dreamed ofsuch a scheme, resigning himself rather to death.But the sight of an old man clinging to life with so desperate a courage, gavea fresh turn to his ideas, and inspired him with new courage. Another, olderand less strong than he, had attempted what he had not had sufficientresolution to undertake, and had failed only because of an error incalculation. This same person, with almost incredible patience andperseverance, had contrived to provide himself with tools requisite for sounparalleled an attempt. Another had done all this; why, then, was itimpossible to Dantès? Faria had dug his way through fifty feet, Dantès woulddig a hundred; Faria, at the age of fifty, had devoted three years to the task;he, who was but half as old, would sacrifice six; Faria, a priest and savant,had not shrunk from the idea of risking his life by trying to swim a distanceof three miles to one of the islands—Daume, Rattonneau, or Lemaire;should a hardy sailor, an experienced diver, like himself, shrink from asimilar task; should he, who had so often for mere amusement’s sakeplunged to the bottom of the sea to fetch up the bright coral branch, hesitateto entertain the same project? He could do it in an hour, and how many timeshad he, for pure pastime, continued in the water for more than twice as long!At once Dantès resolved to follow the brave example of his energetic companion,and to remember that what has once been done may be done again.After continuing some time in profound meditation, the young man suddenlyexclaimed, “I have found what you were in search of!”Faria started: “Have you, indeed?” cried he, raising his head withquick anxiety; “pray, let me know what it is you have discovered?”“The corridor through which you have bored your way from the cell youoccupy here, extends in the same direction as the outer gallery, does itnot?”“It does.”“And is not above fifteen feet from it?”“About that.”“Well, then, I will tell you what we must do. We must pierce through thecorridor by forming a side opening about the middle, as it were the top part ofa cross. This time you will lay your plans more accurately; we shall get outinto the gallery you have described; kill the sentinel who guards it, and makeour escape. All we require to insure success is courage, and that you possess,and strength, which I am not deficient in; as for patience, you have abundantlyproved yours—you shall now see me prove mine.”“One instant, my dear friend,” replied the abbé; “it is clearyou do not understand the nature of the courage with which I am endowed, andwhat use I intend making of my strength. As for patience, I consider that Ihave abundantly exercised that in beginning every morning the task of the nightbefore, and every night renewing the task of the day. But then, young man (andI pray of you to give me your full attention), then I thought I could not bedoing anything displeasing to the Almighty in trying to set an innocent beingat liberty—one who had committed no offence, and merited notcondemnation.”“And have your notions changed?” asked Dantès with much surprise;“do you think yourself more guilty in making the attempt since you haveencountered me?”“No; neither do I wish to incur guilt. Hitherto I have fancied myselfmerely waging war against circumstances, not men. I have thought it no sin tobore through a wall, or destroy a staircase; but I cannot so easily persuademyself to pierce a heart or take away a life.”A slight movement of surprise escaped Dantès.“Is it possible,” said he, “that where your liberty is atstake you can allow any such scruple to deter you from obtaining it?”“Tell me,” replied Faria, “what has hindered you fromknocking down your jailer with a piece of wood torn from your bedstead,dressing yourself in his clothes, and endeavoring to escape?”“Simply the fact that the idea never occurred to me,” answeredDantès.“Because,” said the old man, “the natural repugnance to thecommission of such a crime prevented you from thinking of it; and so it ever isbecause in simple and allowable things our natural instincts keep us fromdeviating from the strict line of duty. The tiger, whose nature teaches him todelight in shedding blood, needs but the sense of smell to show him when hisprey is within his reach, and by following this instinct he is enabled tomeasure the leap necessary to permit him to spring on his victim; but man, onthe contrary, loathes the idea of blood—it is not alone that the laws ofsocial life inspire him with a shrinking dread of taking life; his naturalconstruction and physiological formation——”Dantès was confused and silent at this explanation of the thoughts which hadunconsciously been working in his mind, or rather soul; for there are twodistinct sorts of ideas, those that proceed from the head and those thatemanate from the heart.“Since my imprisonment,” said Faria, “I have thought over allthe most celebrated cases of escape on record. They have rarely beensuccessful. Those that have been crowned with full success have been longmeditated upon, and carefully arranged; such, for instance, as the escape ofthe Duc de Beaufort from the Château de Vincennes, that of the Abbé Dubuquoifrom For l’Evêque; of Latude from the Bastille. Then there are those forwhich chance sometimes affords opportunity, and those are the best of all. Letus, therefore, wait patiently for some favorable moment, and when it presentsitself, profit by it.”“Ah,” said Dantès, “you might well endure the tedious delay;you were constantly employed in the task you set yourself, and when weary withtoil, you had your hopes to refresh and encourage you.”“I assure you,” replied the old man, “I did not turn to thatsource for recreation or support.”“What did you do then?”“I wrote or studied.”“Were you then permitted the use of pens, ink, and paper?”“Oh, no,” answered the abbé; “I had none but what I made formyself.”“You made paper, pens and ink?”“Yes.”Dantès gazed with admiration, but he had some difficulty in believing. Fariasaw this.“When you pay me a visit in my cell, my young friend,” said he,“I will show you an entire work, the fruits of the thoughts andreflections of my whole life; many of them meditated over in the shades of theColosseum at Rome, at the foot of St. Mark’s column at Venice, and on theborders of the Arno at Florence, little imagining at the time that they wouldbe arranged in order within the walls of the Château d’If. The work Ispeak of is called A Treatise on the Possibility of a General Monarchy inItaly, and will make one large quarto volume.”“And on what have you written all this?”“On two of my shirts. I invented a preparation that makes linen as smoothand as easy to write on as parchment.”“You are, then, a chemist?”“Somewhat; I know Lavoisier, and was the intimate friend ofCabanis.”“But for such a work you must have needed books—had you any?”“I had nearly five thousand volumes in my library at Rome; but afterreading them over many times, I found out that with one hundred and fiftywell-chosen books a man possesses, if not a complete summary of all humanknowledge, at least all that a man need really know. I devoted three years ofmy life to reading and studying these one hundred and fifty volumes, till Iknew them nearly by heart; so that since I have been in prison, a very slighteffort of memory has enabled me to recall their contents as readily as thoughthe pages were open before me. I could recite you the whole of Thucydides,Xenophon, Plutarch, Titus Livius, Tacitus, Strada, Jornandes, Dante, Montaigne,Shakespeare, Spinoza, Machiavelli, and Bossuet. I name only the mostimportant.”“You are, doubtless, acquainted with a variety of languages, so as tohave been able to read all these?”“Yes, I speak five of the modern tongues—that is to say, German,French, Italian, English, and Spanish; by the aid of ancient Greek I learnedmodern Greek—I don’t speak it so well as I could wish, but I amstill trying to improve myself.”“Improve yourself!” repeated Dantès; “why, how can you manageto do so?”“Why, I made a vocabulary of the words I knew; turned, returned, andarranged them, so as to enable me to express my thoughts through their medium.I know nearly one thousand words, which is all that is absolutely necessary,although I believe there are nearly one hundred thousand in the dictionaries. Icannot hope to be very fluent, but I certainly should have no difficulty inexplaining my wants and wishes; and that would be quite as much as I shouldever require.”Stronger grew the wonder of Dantès, who almost fancied he had to do with onegifted with supernatural powers; still hoping to find some imperfection whichmight bring him down to a level with human beings, he added, “Then if youwere not furnished with pens, how did you manage to write the work you speakof?”“I made myself some excellent ones, which would be universally preferredto all others if once known. You are aware what huge whitings are served to uson maigre days. Well, I selected the cartilages of the heads of thesefishes, and you can scarcely imagine the delight with which I welcomed thearrival of each Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday, as affording me the means ofincreasing my stock of pens; for I will freely confess that my historicallabors have been my greatest solace and relief. While retracing the past, Iforget the present; and traversing at will the path of history I cease toremember that I am myself a prisoner.”“But the ink,” said Dantès; “of what did you make yourink?”“There was formerly a fireplace in my dungeon,” replied Faria,“but it was closed up long ere I became an occupant of this prison.Still, it must have been many years in use, for it was thickly covered with acoating of soot; this soot I dissolved in a portion of the wine brought to meevery Sunday, and I assure you a better ink cannot be desired. For veryimportant notes, for which closer attention is required, I pricked one of myfingers, and wrote with my own blood.”“And when,” asked Dantès, “may I see all this?”“Whenever you please,” replied the abbé.“Oh, then let it be directly!” exclaimed the young man.“Follow me, then,” said the abbé, as he re-entered the subterraneanpassage, in which he soon disappeared, followed by Dantès. Chapter 17. TheAbbé’s ChamberAfter having passed withtolerable ease through the subterranean passage, which, however, did not admitof their holding themselves erect, the two friends reached the further end ofthe corridor, into which the abbé’s cell opened; from that point thepassage became much narrower, and barely permitted one to creep through onhands and knees. The floor of the abbé’s cell was paved, and it had beenby raising one of the stones in the most obscure corner that Faria had beenable to commence the laborious task of which Dantès had witnessed thecompletion.As he entered the chamber of his friend, Dantès cast around one eager andsearching glance in quest of the expected marvels, but nothing more than commonmet his view.“It is well,” said the abbé; “we have some hours beforeus—it is now just a quarter past twelve o’clock.”Instinctively Dantès turned round to observe by what watch or clock the abbéhad been able so accurately to specify the hour.“Look at this ray of light which enters by my window,” said theabbé, “and then observe the lines traced on the wall. Well, by means ofthese lines, which are in accordance with the double motion of the earth, andthe ellipse it describes round the sun, I am enabled to ascertain the precisehour with more minuteness than if I possessed a watch; for that might be brokenor deranged in its movements, while the sun and earth never vary in theirappointed paths.”This last explanation was wholly lost upon Dantès, who had always imagined,from seeing the sun rise from behind the mountains and set in theMediterranean, that it moved, and not the earth. A double movement of the globehe inhabited, and of which he could feel nothing, appeared to him perfectlyimpossible. Each word that fell from his companion’s lips seemed fraughtwith the mysteries of science, as worthy of digging out as the gold anddiamonds in the mines of Guzerat and Golconda, which he could just recollecthaving visited during a voyage made in his earliest youth.“Come,” said he to the abbé, “I am anxious to see yourtreasures.”The abbé smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, raised, by the helpof his chisel, a long stone, which had doubtless been the hearth, beneath whichwas a cavity of considerable depth, serving as a safe depository of thearticles mentioned to Dantès.“What do you wish to see first?” asked the abbé.“Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!”Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of linen, laidone over the other, like folds of papyrus. These rolls consisted of slips ofcloth about four inches wide and eighteen long; they were all carefullynumbered and closely covered with writing, so legible that Dantès could easilyread it, as well as make out the sense—it being in Italian, a languagehe, as a Provençal, perfectly understood.“There,” said he, “there is the work complete. I wrote theword finis at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about a week ago. I havetorn up two of my shirts, and as many handkerchiefs as I was master of, tocomplete the precious pages. Should I ever get out of prison and find in allItaly a printer courageous enough to publish what I have composed, my literaryreputation is forever secured.”“I see,” answered Dantès. “Now let me behold the curious penswith which you have written your work.”“Look!” said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stick aboutsix inches long, and much resembling the size of the handle of a finepainting-brush, to the end of which was tied, by a piece of thread, one ofthose cartilages of which the abbé had before spoken to Dantès; it was pointed,and divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantès examined it with intenseadmiration, then looked around to see the instrument with which it had beenshaped so correctly into form.“Ah, yes,” said Faria; “the penknife. That’s mymasterpiece. I made it, as well as this larger knife, out of an old ironcandlestick.” The penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as for theother knife, it would serve a double purpose, and with it one could cut andthrust.Dantès examined the various articles shown to him with the same attention thathe had bestowed on the curiosities and strange tools exhibited in the shops atMarseilles as the works of the savages in the South Seas from whence they hadbeen brought by the different trading vessels.“As for the ink,” said Faria, “I told you how I managed toobtain that—and I only just make it from time to time, as I requireit.”“One thing still puzzles me,” observed Dantès, “and that ishow you managed to do all this by daylight?”“I worked at night also,” replied Faria.“Night!—why, for Heaven’s sake, are your eyes likecats’, that you can see to work in the dark?”“Indeed they are not; but God has supplied man with the intelligence thatenables him to overcome the limitations of natural conditions. I furnishedmyself with a light.”“You did? Pray tell me how.”“I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so madeoil—here is my lamp.” So saying, the abbé exhibited a sort of torchvery similar to those used in public illuminations.“But how do you procure a light?”“Oh, here are two flints and a piece of burnt linen.”“And matches?”“I pretended that I had a disorder of the skin, and asked for a littlesulphur, which was readily supplied.”Dantès laid the different things he had been looking at on the table, and stoodwith his head drooping on his breast, as though overwhelmed by the perseveranceand strength of Faria’s mind.“You have not seen all yet,” continued Faria, “for I did notthink it wise to trust all my treasures in the same hiding-place. Let us shutthis one up.” They put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled alittle dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed, rubbedhis foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the other, andthen, going towards his bed, he removed it from the spot it stood in. Behindthe head of the bed, and concealed by a stone fitting in so closely as to defyall suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this space a ladder of cords betweentwenty-five and thirty feet in length. Dantès closely and eagerly examined it;he found it firm, solid, and compact enough to bear any weight.“Who supplied you with the materials for making this wonderfulwork?”“I tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams in the sheetsof my bed, during my three years’ imprisonment at Fenestrelle; and when Iwas removed to the Château d’If, I managed to bring the ravellings withme, so that I have been able to finish my work here.”“And was it not discovered that your sheets were unhemmed?”“Oh, no, for when I had taken out the thread I required, I hemmed theedges over again.”“With what?”“With this needle,” said the abbé, as, opening his raggedvestments, he showed Dantès a long, sharp fish-bone, with a small perforatedeye for the thread, a small portion of which still remained in it.“I once thought,” continued Faria, “of removing these ironbars, and letting myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhatwider than yours, although I should have enlarged it still more preparatory tomy flight; however, I discovered that I should merely have dropped into a sortof inner court, and I therefore renounced the project altogether as too full ofrisk and danger. Nevertheless, I carefully preserved my ladder against one ofthose unforeseen opportunities of which I spoke just now, and which suddenchance frequently brings about.”While affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the mind ofDantès was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that a person so intelligent,ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be able to solve thedark mystery of his own misfortunes, where he himself could see nothing.“What are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing thedeep abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe andwonder.“I was reflecting, in the first place,” replied Dantès, “uponthe enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to reachthe high perfection to which you have attained. What would you not haveaccomplished if you had been free?”“Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in astate of freedom, have evaporated in a thousand follies; misfortune is neededto bring to light the treasures of the human intellect. Compression is neededto explode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my mental faculties to a focus; andyou are well aware that from the collision of clouds electricity isproduced—from electricity, lightning, from lightning,illumination.”“No,” replied Dantès. “I know nothing. Some of your words areto me quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed indeed to possess theknowledge you have.”The abbé smiled. “Well,” said he, “but you had anothersubject for your thoughts; did you not say so just now?”“I did!”“You have told me as yet but one of them—let me hear theother.”“It was this,—that while you had related to me all the particularsof your past life, you were perfectly unacquainted with mine.”“Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length to admitof your having passed through any very important events.”“It has been long enough to inflict on me a great and undeservedmisfortune. I would fain fix the source of it on man that I may no longer ventreproaches upon Heaven.”“Then you profess ignorance of the crime with which you arecharged?”“I do, indeed; and this I swear by the two beings most dear to me uponearth,—my father and Mercédès.”“Come,” said the abbé, closing his hiding-place, and pushing thebed back to its original situation, “let me hear your story.”Dantès obeyed, and commenced what he called his history, but which consistedonly of the account of a voyage to India, and two or three voyages to theLevant, until he arrived at the recital of his last cruise, with the death ofCaptain Leclere, and the receipt of a packet to be delivered by himself to thegrand marshal; his interview with that personage, and his receiving, in placeof the packet brought, a letter addressed to a Monsieur Noirtier—hisarrival at Marseilles, and interview with his father—his affection forMercédès, and their nuptual feast—his arrest and subsequent examination,his temporary detention at the Palais de Justice, and his final imprisonment inthe Château d’If. From this point everything was a blank toDantès—he knew nothing more, not even the length of time he had beenimprisoned. His recital finished, the abbé reflected long and earnestly.“There is,” said he, at the end of his meditations, “a clevermaxim, which bears upon what I was saying to you some little while ago, andthat is, that unless wicked ideas take root in a naturally depraved mind, humannature, in a right and wholesome state, revolts at crime. Still, from anartificial civilization have originated wants, vices, and false tastes, whichoccasionally become so powerful as to stifle within us all good feelings, andultimately to lead us into guilt and wickedness. From this view of things,then, comes the axiom that if you visit to discover the author of any badaction, seek first to discover the person to whom the perpetration of that badaction could be in any way advantageous. Now, to apply it in yourcase,—to whom could your disappearance have been serviceable?”“To no one, by Heaven! I was a very insignificant person.”“Do not speak thus, for your reply evinces neither logic nor philosophy;everything is relative, my dear young friend, from the king who stands in theway of his successor, to the employee who keeps his rival out of a place. Now,in the event of the king’s death, his successor inherits acrown,—when the employee dies, the supernumerary steps into his shoes,and receives his salary of twelve thousand livres. Well, these twelve thousandlivres are his civil list, and are as essential to him as the twelve millionsof a king. Everyone, from the highest to the lowest degree, has his place onthe social ladder, and is beset by stormy passions and conflicting interests,as in Descartes’ theory of pressure and impulsion. But these forcesincrease as we go higher, so that we have a spiral which in defiance of reasonrests upon the apex and not on the base. Now let us return to your particularworld. You say you were on the point of being made captain of thePharaon?”“Yes.”“And about to become the husband of a young and lovely girl?”“Yes.”“Now, could anyone have had any interest in preventing the accomplishmentof these two things? But let us first settle the question as to its being theinterest of anyone to hinder you from being captain of the Pharaon. Whatsay you?”“I cannot believe such was the case. I was generally liked on board, andhad the sailors possessed the right of selecting a captain themselves, I feelconvinced their choice would have fallen on me. There was only one person amongthe crew who had any feeling of ill-will towards me. I had quarelled with himsome time previously, and had even challenged him to fight me; but herefused.”“Now we are getting on. And what was this man’s name?”“Danglars.”“What rank did he hold on board?”“He was supercargo.”“And had you been captain, should you have retained him in hisemployment?”“Not if the choice had remained with me, for I had frequently observedinaccuracies in his accounts.”“Good again! Now then, tell me, was any person present during your lastconversation with Captain Leclere?”“No; we were quite alone.”“Could your conversation have been overheard by anyone?”“It might, for the cabin door was open—and—stay; now Irecollect,—Danglars himself passed by just as Captain Leclere was givingme the packet for the grand marshal.”“That’s better,” cried the abbé; “now we are on theright scent. Did you take anybody with you when you put into the port ofElba?”“Nobody.”“Somebody there received your packet, and gave you a letter in place ofit, I think?”“Yes; the grand marshal did.”“And what did you do with that letter?”“Put it into my portfolio.”“You had your portfolio with you, then? Now, how could a sailor find roomin his pocket for a portfolio large enough to contain an officialletter?”“You are right; it was left on board.”“Then it was not till your return to the ship that you put the letter inthe portfolio?”“No.”“And what did you do with this same letter while returning fromPorto-Ferrajo to the vessel?”“I carried it in my hand.”“So that when you went on board the Pharaon, everybody could seethat you held a letter in your hand?”“Yes.”“Danglars, as well as the rest?”“Danglars, as well as others.”“Now, listen to me, and try to recall every circumstance attending yourarrest. Do you recollect the words in which the information against you wasformulated?”“Oh yes, I read it over three times, and the words sank deeply into mymemory.”“Repeat it to me.”Dantès paused a moment, then said, “This is it, word for word: ‘Theking’s attorney is informed by a friend to the throne and religion, thatone Edmond Dantès, mate on board the Pharaon, this day arrived fromSmyrna, after having touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo, has been intrusted byMurat with a packet for the usurper; again, by the usurper, with a letter forthe Bonapartist Club in Paris. This proof of his guilt may be procured by hisimmediate arrest, as the letter will be found either about his person, at hisfather’s residence, or in his cabin on board thePharaon.’”The abbé shrugged his shoulders. “The thing is clear as day,” saidhe; “and you must have had a very confiding nature, as well as a goodheart, not to have suspected the origin of the whole affair.”“Do you really think so? Ah, that would indeed be infamous.”“How did Danglars usually write?”“In a handsome, running hand.”“And how was the anonymous letter written?”“Backhanded.”Again the abbé smiled. “Disguised.”“It was very boldly written, if disguised.”“Stop a bit,” said the abbé, taking up what he called his pen, and,after dipping it into the ink, he wrote on a piece of prepared linen, with hisleft hand, the first two or three words of the accusation. Dantès drew back,and gazed on the abbé with a sensation almost amounting to terror.“How very astonishing!” cried he at length. “Why your writingexactly resembles that of the accusation.”“Simply because that accusation had been written with the left hand; andI have noticed that——”“What?”“That while the writing of different persons done with the right handvaries, that performed with the left hand is invariably uniform.”“You have evidently seen and observed everything.”“Let us proceed.”“Oh, yes, yes!”“Now as regards the second question.”“I am listening.”“Was there any person whose interest it was to prevent your marriage withMercédès?”“Yes; a young man who loved her.”“And his name was——”“Fernand.”“That is a Spanish name, I think?”“He was a Catalan.”“You imagine him capable of writing the letter?”“Oh, no; he would more likely have got rid of me by sticking a knife intome.”“That is in strict accordance with the Spanish character; anassassination they will unhesitatingly commit, but an act of cowardice,never.”“Besides,” said Dantès, “the various circumstances mentionedin the letter were wholly unknown to him.”“You had never spoken of them yourself to anyone?”“To no one.”“Not even to your mistress?”“No, not even to my betrothed.”“Then it is Danglars.”“I feel quite sure of it now.”“Wait a little. Pray, was Danglars acquainted with Fernand?”“No—yes, he was. Now I recollect——”“What?”“To have seen them both sitting at table together under an arbor at PèrePamphile’s the evening before the day fixed for my wedding. They were inearnest conversation. Danglars was joking in a friendly way, but Fernand lookedpale and agitated.”“Were they alone?”“There was a third person with them whom I knew perfectly well, and whohad, in all probability made their acquaintance; he was a tailor namedCaderousse, but he was very drunk. Stay!—stay!—How strange that itshould not have occurred to me before! Now I remember quite well, that on thetable round which they were sitting were pens, ink, and paper. Oh, theheartless, treacherous scoundrels!” exclaimed Dantès, pressing his handto his throbbing brows.“Is there anything else I can assist you in discovering, besides thevillany of your friends?” inquired the abbé with a laugh.“Yes, yes,” replied Dantès eagerly; “I would beg of you, whosee so completely to the depths of things, and to whom the greatest mysteryseems but an easy riddle, to explain to me how it was that I underwent nosecond examination, was never brought to trial, and, above all, was condemnedwithout ever having had sentence passed on me?”“That is altogether a different and more serious matter,” respondedthe abbé. “The ways of justice are frequently too dark and mysterious tobe easily penetrated. All we have hitherto done in the matter has beenchild’s play. If you wish me to enter upon the more difficult part of thebusiness, you must assist me by the most minute information on everypoint.”“Pray ask me whatever questions you please; for, in good truth, you seemore clearly into my life than I do myself.”“In the first place, then, who examined you,—the king’sattorney, his deputy, or a magistrate?”“The deputy.”“Was he young or old?”“About six or seven-and-twenty years of age, I should say.”“So,” answered the abbé. “Old enough to be ambitious, but tooyoung to be corrupt. And how did he treat you?”“With more of mildness than severity.”“Did you tell him your whole story?”“I did.”“And did his conduct change at all in the course of yourexamination?”“He did appear much disturbed when he read the letter that had brought meinto this scrape. He seemed quite overcome by my misfortune.”“By your misfortune?”“Yes.”“Then you feel quite sure that it was your misfortune he deplored?”“He gave me one great proof of his sympathy, at any rate.”“And that?”“He burnt the sole evidence that could at all have criminated me.”“What? the accusation?”“No; the letter.”“Are you sure?”“I saw it done.”“That alters the case. This man might, after all, be a greater scoundrelthan you have thought possible.”“Upon my word,” said Dantès, “you make me shudder. Is theworld filled with tigers and crocodiles?”“Yes; and remember that two-legged tigers and crocodiles are moredangerous than the others.”“Never mind; let us go on.”“With all my heart! You tell me he burned the letter?”“He did; saying at the same time, ‘You see I thus destroy the onlyproof existing against you.’”“This action is somewhat too sublime to be natural.”“You think so?”“I am sure of it. To whom was this letter addressed?”“To M. Noirtier, Rue Coq-Héron, No. 13, Paris.”“Now can you conceive of any interest that your heroic deputy couldpossibly have had in the destruction of that letter?”“Why, it is not altogether impossible he might have had, for he made mepromise several times never to speak of that letter to anyone, assuring me heso advised me for my own interest; and, more than this, he insisted on mytaking a solemn oath never to utter the name mentioned in the address.”“Noirtier!” repeated the abbé; “Noirtier!—I knew aperson of that name at the court of the Queen of Etruria,—a Noirtier, whohad been a Girondin during the Revolution! What was your deputy called?”“De Villefort!” The abbé burst into a fit of laughter, while Dantèsgazed on him in utter astonishment.“What ails you?” said he at length.“Do you see that ray of sunlight?”“I do.”“Well, the whole thing is more clear to me than that sunbeam is to you.Poor fellow! poor young man! And you tell me this magistrate expressed greatsympathy and commiseration for you?”“He did.”“And the worthy man destroyed your compromising letter?”“Yes.”“And then made you swear never to utter the name of Noirtier?”“Yes.”“Why, you poor short-sighted simpleton, can you not guess who thisNoirtier was, whose very name he was so careful to keep concealed? ThisNoirtier was his father!”Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of Dantès, or hell opened its yawning gulfbefore him, he could not have been more completely transfixed with horror thanhe was at the sound of these unexpected words. Starting up, he clasped hishands around his head as though to prevent his very brain from bursting, andexclaimed, “His father! his father!”“Yes, his father,” replied the abbé; “his right name wasNoirtier de Villefort.”At this instant a bright light shot through the mind of Dantès, and cleared upall that had been dark and obscure before. The change that had come overVillefort during the examination, the destruction of the letter, the exactedpromise, the almost supplicating tones of the magistrate, who seemed rather toimplore mercy than to pronounce punishment,—all returned with a stunningforce to his memory. He cried out, and staggered against the wall like adrunken man, then he hurried to the opening that led from the abbé’s cellto his own, and said, “I must be alone, to think over all this.”When he regained his dungeon, he threw himself on his bed, where the turnkeyfound him in the evening visit, sitting with fixed gaze and contractedfeatures, dumb and motionless as a statue. During these hours of profoundmeditation, which to him had seemed only minutes, he had formed a fearfulresolution, and bound himself to its fulfilment by a solemn oath.Dantès was at length roused from his reverie by the voice of Faria, who, havingalso been visited by his jailer, had come to invite his fellow-sufferer toshare his supper. The reputation of being out of his mind, though harmlesslyand even amusingly so, had procured for the abbé unusual privileges. He wassupplied with bread of a finer, whiter quality than the usual prison fare, andeven regaled each Sunday with a small quantity of wine. Now this was a Sunday,and the abbé had come to ask his young companion to share the luxuries withhim.Dantès followed him; his features were no longer contracted, and now wore theirusual expression, but there was that in his whole appearance that bespoke onewho had come to a fixed and desperate resolve. Faria bent on him hispenetrating eye.“I regret now,” said he, “having helped you in your lateinquiries, or having given you the information I did.”“Why so?” inquired Dantès.“Because it has instilled a new passion in your heart—that ofvengeance.”Dantès smiled. “Let us talk of something else,” said he.Again the abbé looked at him, then mournfully shook his head; but in accordancewith Dantès’ request, he began to speak of other matters. The elderprisoner was one of those persons whose conversation, like that of all who haveexperienced many trials, contained many useful and important hints as well assound information; but it was never egotistical, for the unfortunate man neveralluded to his own sorrows. Dantès listened with admiring attention to all hesaid; some of his remarks corresponded with what he already knew, or applied tothe sort of knowledge his nautical life had enabled him to acquire. A part ofthe good abbé’s words, however, were wholly incomprehensible to him; but,like the aurora which guides the navigator in northern latitudes, opened newvistas to the inquiring mind of the listener, and gave fantastic glimpses ofnew horizons, enabling him justly to estimate the delight an intellectual mindwould have in following one so richly gifted as Faria along the heights oftruth, where he was so much at home.“You must teach me a small part of what you know,” said Dantès,“if only to prevent your growing weary of me. I can well believe that solearned a person as yourself would prefer absolute solitude to being tormentedwith the company of one as ignorant and uninformed as myself. If you will onlyagree to my request, I promise you never to mention another word aboutescaping.”The abbé smiled.“Alas, my boy,” said he, “human knowledge is confined withinvery narrow limits; and when I have taught you mathematics, physics, history,and the three or four modern languages with which I am acquainted, you willknow as much as I do myself. Now, it will scarcely require two years for me tocommunicate to you the stock of learning I possess.”“Two years!” exclaimed Dantès; “do you really believe I canacquire all these things in so short a time?”“Not their application, certainly, but their principles you may; to learnis not to know; there are the learners and the learned. Memory makes the one,philosophy the other.”“But cannot one learn philosophy?”“Philosophy cannot be taught; it is the application of the sciences totruth; it is like the golden cloud in which the Messiah went up intoheaven.”“Well, then,” said Dantès, “What shall you teach me first? Iam in a hurry to begin. I want to learn.”“Everything,” said the abbé. And that very evening the prisonerssketched a plan of education, to be entered upon the following day. Dantèspossessed a prodigious memory, combined with an astonishing quickness andreadiness of conception; the mathematical turn of his mind rendered him apt atall kinds of calculation, while his naturally poetical feelings threw a lightand pleasing veil over the dry reality of arithmetical computation, or therigid severity of geometry. He already knew Italian, and had also picked up alittle of the Romaic dialect during voyages to the East; and by the aid ofthese two languages he easily comprehended the construction of all the others,so that at the end of six months he began to speak Spanish, English, andGerman.In strict accordance with the promise made to the abbé, Dantès spoke no more ofescape. Perhaps the delight his studies afforded him left no room for suchthoughts; perhaps the recollection that he had pledged his word (on which hissense of honor was keen) kept him from referring in any way to thepossibilities of flight. Days, even months, passed by unheeded in one rapid andinstructive course. At the end of a year Dantès was a new man. Dantès observed,however, that Faria, in spite of the relief his society afforded, daily grewsadder; one thought seemed incessantly to harass and distract his mind.Sometimes he would fall into long reveries, sigh heavily and involuntarily,then suddenly rise, and, with folded arms, begin pacing the confined space ofhis dungeon. One day he stopped all at once, and exclaimed:“Ah, if there were no sentinel!”“There shall not be one a minute longer than you please,” saidDantès, who had followed the working of his thoughts as accurately as thoughhis brain were enclosed in crystal so clear as to display its minutestoperations.“I have already told you,” answered the abbé, “that I loathethe idea of shedding blood.”“And yet the murder, if you choose to call it so, would be simply ameasure of self-preservation.”“No matter! I could never agree to it.”“Still, you have thought of it?”“Incessantly, alas!” cried the abbé.“And you have discovered a means of regaining our freedom, have younot?” asked Dantès eagerly.“I have; if it were only possible to place a deaf and blind sentinel inthe gallery beyond us.”“He shall be both blind and deaf,” replied the young man, with anair of determination that made his companion shudder.“No, no,” cried the abbé; “impossible!”Dantès endeavored to renew the subject; the abbé shook his head in token ofdisapproval, and refused to make any further response. Three months passedaway.“Are you strong?” the abbé asked one day of Dantès. The young man,in reply, took up the chisel, bent it into the form of a horseshoe, and then asreadily straightened it.“And will you engage not to do any harm to the sentry, except as a lastresort?”“I promise on my honor.”“Then,” said the abbé, “we may hope to put our design intoexecution.”“And how long shall we be in accomplishing the necessary work?”“At least a year.”“And shall we begin at once?”“At once.”“We have lost a year to no purpose!” cried Dantès.“Do you consider the last twelve months to have been wasted?” askedthe abbé.“Forgive me!” cried Edmond, blushing deeply.“Tut, tut!” answered the abbé, “man is but man after all, andyou are about the best specimen of the genus I have ever known. Come, let meshow you my plan.”The abbé then showed Dantès the sketch he had made for their escape. Itconsisted of a plan of his own cell and that of Dantès, with the passage whichunited them. In this passage he proposed to drive a level as they do in mines;this level would bring the two prisoners immediately beneath the gallery wherethe sentry kept watch; once there, a large excavation would be made, and one ofthe flag-stones with which the gallery was paved be so completely loosened thatat the desired moment it would give way beneath the feet of the soldier, who,stunned by his fall, would be immediately bound and gagged by Dantès before hehad power to offer any resistance. The prisoners were then to make their waythrough one of the gallery windows, and to let themselves down from the outerwalls by means of the abbé’s ladder of cords.Dantès’ eyes sparkled with joy, and he rubbed his hands with delight atthe idea of a plan so simple, yet apparently so certain to succeed. That veryday the miners began their labors, with a vigor and alacrity proportionate totheir long rest from fatigue and their hopes of ultimate success. Nothinginterrupted the progress of the work except the necessity that each was underof returning to his cell in anticipation of the turnkey’s visits. Theyhad learned to distinguish the almost imperceptible sound of his footsteps ashe descended towards their dungeons, and happily, never failed of beingprepared for his coming. The fresh earth excavated during their present work,and which would have entirely blocked up the old passage, was thrown, bydegrees and with the utmost precaution, out of the window in eitherFaria’s or Dantès’ cell, the rubbish being first pulverized sofinely that the night wind carried it far away without permitting the smallesttrace to remain.More than a year had been consumed in this undertaking, the only tools forwhich had been a chisel, a knife, and a wooden lever; Faria still continuing toinstruct Dantès by conversing with him, sometimes in one language, sometimes inanother; at others, relating to him the history of nations and great men whofrom time to time have risen to fame and trodden the path of glory. The abbéwas a man of the world, and had, moreover, mixed in the first society of theday; he wore an air of melancholy dignity which Dantès, thanks to the imitativepowers bestowed on him by nature, easily acquired, as well as that outwardpolish and politeness he had before been wanting in, and which is seldompossessed except by those who have been placed in constant intercourse withpersons of high birth and breeding.At the end of fifteen months the level was finished, and the excavationcompleted beneath the gallery, and the two workmen could distinctly hear themeasured tread of the sentinel as he paced to and fro over their heads.Compelled, as they were, to await a night sufficiently dark to favor theirflight, they were obliged to defer their final attempt till that auspiciousmoment should arrive; their greatest dread now was lest the stone through whichthe sentry was doomed to fall should give way before its right time, and thisthey had in some measure provided against by propping it up with a small beamwhich they had discovered in the walls through which they had worked their way.Dantès was occupied in arranging this piece of wood when he heard Faria, whohad remained in Edmond’s cell for the purpose of cutting a peg to securetheir rope-ladder, call to him in a tone indicative of great suffering. Dantèshastened to his dungeon, where he found him standing in the middle of the room,pale as death, his forehead streaming with perspiration, and his hands clenchedtightly together.“Gracious heavens!” exclaimed Dantès, “what is the matter?what has happened?”“Quick! quick!” returned the abbé, “listen to what I have tosay.”Dantès looked in fear and wonder at the livid countenance of Faria, whose eyes,already dull and sunken, were surrounded by purple circles, while his lips werewhite as those of a corpse, and his very hair seemed to stand on end.“Tell me, I beseech you, what ails you?” cried Dantès, letting hischisel fall to the floor.“Alas,” faltered out the abbé, “all is over with me. I amseized with a terrible, perhaps mortal illness; I can feel that the paroxysm isfast approaching. I had a similar attack the year previous to my imprisonment.This malady admits but of one remedy; I will tell you what that is. Go into mycell as quickly as you can; draw out one of the feet that support the bed; youwill find it has been hollowed out for the purpose of containing a small phialyou will see there half-filled with a red-looking fluid. Bring it tome—or rather—no, no!—I may be found here, therefore help meback to my room while I have the strength to drag myself along. Who knows whatmay happen, or how long the attack may last?”In spite of the magnitude of the misfortune which thus suddenly frustrated hishopes, Dantès did not lose his presence of mind, but descended into thepassage, dragging his unfortunate companion with him; then, half-carrying,half-supporting him, he managed to reach the abbé’s chamber, when heimmediately laid the sufferer on his bed.“Thanks,” said the poor abbé, shivering as though his veins werefilled with ice. “I am about to be seized with a fit of catalepsy; whenit comes to its height I shall probably lie still and motionless as thoughdead, uttering neither sigh nor groan. On the other hand, the symptoms may bemuch more violent, and cause me to fall into fearful convulsions, foam at themouth, and cry out loudly. Take care my cries are not heard, for if they are itis more than probable I should be removed to another part of the prison, and webe separated forever. When I become quite motionless, cold, and rigid as acorpse, then, and not before,—be careful about this,—force open myteeth with the knife, pour from eight to ten drops of the liquor contained inthe phial down my throat, and I may perhaps revive.”“Perhaps!” exclaimed Dantès in grief-stricken tones.“Help! help!” cried the abbé,“I—I—die—I——”So sudden and violent was the fit that the unfortunate prisoner was unable tocomplete the sentence; a violent convulsion shook his whole frame, his eyesstarted from their sockets, his mouth was drawn on one side, his cheeks becamepurple, he struggled, foamed, dashed himself about, and uttered the mostdreadful cries, which, however, Dantès prevented from being heard by coveringhis head with the blanket. The fit lasted two hours; then, more helpless thanan infant, and colder and paler than marble, more crushed and broken than areed trampled under foot, he fell back, doubled up in one last convulsion, andbecame as rigid as a corpse.Edmond waited till life seemed extinct in the body of his friend, then, takingup the knife, he with difficulty forced open the closely fixed jaws, carefullyadministered the appointed number of drops, and anxiously awaited the result.An hour passed away and the old man gave no sign of returning animation. Dantèsbegan to fear he had delayed too long ere he administered the remedy, and,thrusting his hands into his hair, continued gazing on the lifeless features ofhis friend. At length a slight color tinged the livid cheeks, consciousnessreturned to the dull, open eyeballs, a faint sigh issued from the lips, and thesufferer made a feeble effort to move.“He is saved! he is saved!” cried Dantès in a paroxysm of delight.The sick man was not yet able to speak, but he pointed with evident anxietytowards the door. Dantès listened, and plainly distinguished the approachingsteps of the jailer. It was therefore near seven o’clock; butEdmond’s anxiety had put all thoughts of time out of his head.The young man sprang to the entrance, darted through it, carefully drawing thestone over the opening, and hurried to his cell. He had scarcely done so beforethe door opened, and the jailer saw the prisoner seated as usual on the side ofhis bed. Almost before the key had turned in the lock, and before the departingsteps of the jailer had died away in the long corridor he had to traverse,Dantès, whose restless anxiety concerning his friend left him no desire totouch the food brought him, hurried back to the abbé’s chamber, andraising the stone by pressing his head against it, was soon beside the sickman’s couch. Faria had now fully regained his consciousness, but he stilllay helpless and exhausted on his miserable bed.“I did not expect to see you again,” said he feebly, to Dantès.“And why not?” asked the young man. “Did you fancy yourselfdying?”“No, I had no such idea; but, knowing that all was ready for flight, Ithought you might have made your escape.”The deep glow of indignation suffused the cheeks of Dantès.“Without you? Did you really think me capable of that?”“At least,” said the abbé, “I now see how wrong such anopinion would have been. Alas, alas! I am fearfully exhausted and debilitatedby this attack.”“Be of good cheer,” replied Dantès; “your strength willreturn.” And as he spoke he seated himself near the bed beside Faria, andtook his hands. The abbé shook his head.“The last attack I had,” said he, “lasted but half an hour,and after it I was hungry, and got up without help; now I can move neither myright arm nor leg, and my head seems uncomfortable, which shows that there hasbeen a suffusion of blood on the brain. The third attack will either carry meoff, or leave me paralyzed for life.”“No, no,” cried Dantès; “you are mistaken—you will notdie! And your third attack (if, indeed, you should have another) will find youat liberty. We shall save you another time, as we have done this, only with abetter chance of success, because we shall be able to command every requisiteassistance.”“My good Edmond,” answered the abbé, “be not deceived. Theattack which has just passed away, condemns me forever to the walls of aprison. None can fly from a dungeon who cannot walk.”“Well, we will wait,—a week, a month, two months, if needbe,—and meanwhile your strength will return. Everything is in readinessfor our flight, and we can select any time we choose. As soon as you feel ableto swim we will go.”“I shall never swim again,” replied Faria. “This arm isparalyzed; not for a time, but forever. Lift it, and judge if I ammistaken.”The young man raised the arm, which fell back by its own weight, perfectlyinanimate and helpless. A sigh escaped him.“You are convinced now, Edmond, are you not?” asked the abbé.“Depend upon it, I know what I say. Since the first attack I experiencedof this malady, I have continually reflected on it. Indeed, I expected it, forit is a family inheritance; both my father and grandfather died of it in athird attack. The physician who prepared for me the remedy I have twicesuccessfully taken, was no other than the celebrated Cabanis, and he predicteda similar end for me.”“The physician may be mistaken!” exclaimed Dantès. “And asfor your poor arm, what difference will that make? I can take you on myshoulders, and swim for both of us.”“My son,” said the abbé, “you, who are a sailor and aswimmer, must know as well as I do that a man so loaded would sink before hehad done fifty strokes. Cease, then, to allow yourself to be duped by vainhopes, that even your own excellent heart refuses to believe in. Here I shallremain till the hour of my deliverance arrives, and that, in all humanprobability, will be the hour of my death. As for you, who are young andactive, delay not on my account, but fly—go—I give you back yourpromise.”“It is well,” said Dantès. “Then I shall also remain.”Then, rising and extending his hand with an air of solemnity over the oldman’s head, he slowly added, “By the blood of Christ I swear neverto leave you while you live.”Faria gazed fondly on his noble-minded, single-hearted, high-principled youngfriend, and read in his countenance ample confirmation of the sincerity of hisdevotion and the loyalty of his purpose.“Thanks,” murmured the invalid, extending one hand. “Iaccept. You may one of these days reap the reward of your disinteresteddevotion. But as I cannot, and you will not, quit this place, it becomesnecessary to fill up the excavation beneath the soldier’s gallery; hemight, by chance, hear the hollow sound of his footsteps, and call theattention of his officer to the circumstance. That would bring about adiscovery which would inevitably lead to our being separated. Go, then, and setabout this work, in which, unhappily, I can offer you no assistance; keep at itall night, if necessary, and do not return here tomorrow till after the jailerhas visited me. I shall have something of the greatest importance tocommunicate to you.”Dantès took the hand of the abbé in his, and affectionately pressed it. Fariasmiled encouragingly on him, and the young man retired to his task, in thespirit of obedience and respect which he had sworn to show towards his agedfriend. Chapter 18. TheTreasureWhen Dantès returnednext morning to the chamber of his companion in captivity, he found Fariaseated and looking composed. In the ray of light which entered by the narrowwindow of his cell, he held open in his left hand, of which alone, it will berecollected, he retained the use, a sheet of paper, which, from beingconstantly rolled into a small compass, had the form of a cylinder, and was noteasily kept open. He did not speak, but showed the paper to Dantès.“What is that?” he inquired.“Look at it,” said the abbé with a smile.“I have looked at it with all possible attention,” said Dantès,“and I only see a half-burnt paper, on which are traces of Gothiccharacters inscribed with a peculiar kind of ink.”“This paper, my friend,” said Faria, “I may now avow to you,since I have the proof of your fidelity—this paper is my treasure, ofwhich, from this day forth, one-half belongs to you.”The sweat started forth on Dantès’ brow. Until this day and for how longa time!—he had refrained from talking of the treasure, which had broughtupon the abbé the accusation of madness. With his instinctive delicacy Edmondhad preferred avoiding any touch on this painful chord, and Faria had beenequally silent. He had taken the silence of the old man for a return to reason;and now these few words uttered by Faria, after so painful a crisis, seemed toindicate a serious relapse into mental alienation.“Your treasure?” stammered Dantès. Faria smiled.“Yes,” said he. “You have, indeed, a noble nature, Edmond,and I see by your paleness and agitation what is passing in your heart at thismoment. No, be assured, I am not mad. This treasure exists, Dantès, and if Ihave not been allowed to possess it, you will. Yes—you. No one wouldlisten or believe me, because everyone thought me mad; but you, who must knowthat I am not, listen to me, and believe me so afterwards if you will.”“Alas,” murmured Edmond to himself, “this is a terriblerelapse! There was only this blow wanting.” Then he said aloud, “Mydear friend, your attack has, perhaps, fatigued you; had you not better reposeawhile? Tomorrow, if you will, I will hear your narrative; but today I wish tonurse you carefully. Besides,” he said, “a treasure is not a thingwe need hurry about.”“On the contrary, it is a matter of the utmost importance, Edmond!”replied the old man. “Who knows if tomorrow, or the next day after, thethird attack may not come on? and then must not all be over? Yes, indeed, Ihave often thought with a bitter joy that these riches, which would make thewealth of a dozen families, will be forever lost to those men who persecute me.This idea was one of vengeance to me, and I tasted it slowly in the night of mydungeon and the despair of my captivity. But now I have forgiven the world forthe love of you; now that I see you, young and with a promisingfuture,—now that I think of all that may result to you in the goodfortune of such a disclosure, I shudder at any delay, and tremble lest I shouldnot assure to one as worthy as yourself the possession of so vast an amount ofhidden wealth.”Edmond turned away his head with a sigh.“You persist in your incredulity, Edmond,” continued Faria.“My words have not convinced you. I see you require proofs. Well, then,read this paper, which I have never shown to anyone.”“Tomorrow, my dear friend,” said Edmond, desirous of not yieldingto the old man’s madness. “I thought it was understood that weshould not talk of that until tomorrow.”“Then we will not talk of it until tomorrow; but read this papertoday.”“I will not irritate him,” thought Edmond, and taking the paper, ofwhich half was wanting,—having been burnt, no doubt, by someaccident,—he read:“this treasure, which may amount to two...of Roman crowns in the most distant a...of the second opening wh...declare to belong to him alo...heir.                    “25th April, 149’”“Well!” said Faria, when the young man had finished reading it.“Why,” replied Dantès, “I see nothing but broken lines andunconnected words, which are rendered illegible by fire.”“Yes, to you, my friend, who read them for the first time; but not forme, who have grown pale over them by many nights’ study, and havereconstructed every phrase, completed every thought.”“And do you believe you have discovered the hidden meaning?”“I am sure I have, and you shall judge for yourself; but first listen tothe history of this paper.”“Silence!” exclaimed Dantès. “Steps approach—Igo—adieu!”And Dantès, happy to escape the history and explanation which would be sure toconfirm his belief in his friend’s mental instability, glided like asnake along the narrow passage; while Faria, restored by his alarm to a certainamount of activity, pushed the stone into place with his foot, and covered itwith a mat in order the more effectually to avoid discovery.It was the governor, who, hearing of Faria’s illness from the jailer, hadcome in person to see him.Faria sat up to receive him, avoiding all gestures in order that he mightconceal from the governor the paralysis that had already half stricken him withdeath. His fear was lest the governor, touched with pity, might order him to beremoved to better quarters, and thus separate him from his young companion. Butfortunately this was not the case, and the governor left him, convinced thatthe poor madman, for whom in his heart he felt a kind of affection, was onlytroubled with a slight indisposition.During this time, Edmond, seated on his bed with his head in his hands, triedto collect his scattered thoughts. Faria, since their first acquaintance, hadbeen on all points so rational and logical, so wonderfully sagacious, in fact,that he could not understand how so much wisdom on all points could be alliedwith madness. Was Faria deceived as to his treasure, or was all the worlddeceived as to Faria?Dantès remained in his cell all day, not daring to return to his friend,thinking thus to defer the moment when he should be convinced, once for all,that the abbé was mad—such a conviction would be so terrible!But, towards the evening after the hour for the customary visit had gone by,Faria, not seeing the young man appear, tried to move and get over the distancewhich separated them. Edmond shuddered when he heard the painful efforts whichthe old man made to drag himself along; his leg was inert, and he could nolonger make use of one arm. Edmond was obliged to assist him, for otherwise hewould not have been able to enter by the small aperture which led toDantès’ chamber.“Here I am, pursuing you remorselessly,” he said with a benignantsmile. “You thought to escape my munificence, but it is in vain. Listento me.”Edmond saw there was no escape, and placing the old man on his bed, he seatedhimself on the stool beside him.“You know,” said the abbé, “that I was the secretary andintimate friend of Cardinal Spada, the last of the princes of that name. I oweto this worthy lord all the happiness I ever knew. He was not rich, althoughthe wealth of his family had passed into a proverb, and I heard the phrase veryoften, ‘As rich as a Spada.’ But he, like public rumor, lived onthis reputation for wealth; his palace was my paradise. I was tutor to hisnephews, who are dead; and when he was alone in the world, I tried by absolutedevotion to his will, to make up to him all he had done for me during ten yearsof unremitting kindness. The cardinal’s house had no secrets for me. Ihad often seen my noble patron annotating ancient volumes, and eagerlysearching amongst dusty family manuscripts. One day when I was reproaching himfor his unavailing searches, and deploring the prostration of mind thatfollowed them, he looked at me, and, smiling bitterly, opened a volume relatingto the History of the City of Rome. There, in the twentieth chapter of the Lifeof Pope Alexander VI., were the following lines, which I can neverforget:—“‘The great wars of Romagna had ended; Cæsar Borgia, who hadcompleted his conquest, had need of money to purchase all Italy. The pope hadalso need of money to bring matters to an end with Louis XII. King of France,who was formidable still in spite of his recent reverses; and it was necessary,therefore, to have recourse to some profitable scheme, which was a matter ofgreat difficulty in the impoverished condition of exhausted Italy. His holinesshad an idea. He determined to make two cardinals.’“By choosing two of the greatest personages of Rome, especially richmen—this was the return the Holy Father looked for. In the firstplace, he could sell the great appointments and splendid offices which thecardinals already held; and then he had the two hats to sell besides. There wasa third point in view, which will appear hereafter.“The pope and Cæsar Borgia first found the two future cardinals; theywere Giovanni Rospigliosi, who held four of the highest dignities of the HolySee, and Cæsar Spada, one of the noblest and richest of the Roman nobility;both felt the high honor of such a favor from the pope. They were ambitious,and Cæsar Borgia soon found purchasers for their appointments. The result was,that Rospigliosi and Spada paid for being cardinals, and eight other personspaid for the offices the cardinals held before their elevation, and thus eighthundred thousand crowns entered into the coffers of the speculators.“It is time now to proceed to the last part of the speculation. The popeheaped attentions upon Rospigliosi and Spada, conferred upon them the insigniaof the cardinalate, and induced them to arrange their affairs and take up theirresidence at Rome. Then the pope and Cæsar Borgia invited the two cardinals todinner. This was a matter of dispute between the Holy Father and his son. Cæsarthought they could make use of one of the means which he always had ready forhis friends, that is to say, in the first place, the famous key which was givento certain persons with the request that they go and open a designatedcupboard. This key was furnished with a small iron point,—a negligence onthe part of the locksmith. When this was pressed to effect the opening of thecupboard, of which the lock was difficult, the person was pricked by this smallpoint, and died next day. Then there was the ring with the lion’s head,which Cæsar wore when he wanted to greet his friends with a clasp of the hand.The lion bit the hand thus favored, and at the end of twenty-four hours, thebite was mortal.“Cæsar proposed to his father, that they should either ask the cardinalsto open the cupboard, or shake hands with them; but Alexander VI. replied:‘Now as to the worthy cardinals, Spada and Rospigliosi, let us ask bothof them to dinner, something tells me that we shall get that money back.Besides, you forget, Cæsar, an indigestion declares itself immediately, while aprick or a bite occasions a delay of a day or two.’ Cæsar gave way beforesuch cogent reasoning, and the cardinals were consequently invited to dinner.“The table was laid in a vineyard belonging to the pope, near SanPierdarena, a charming retreat which the cardinals knew very well by report.Rospigliosi, quite set up with his new dignities, went with a good appetite andhis most ingratiating manner. Spada, a prudent man, and greatly attached to hisonly nephew, a young captain of the highest promise, took paper and pen, andmade his will. He then sent word to his nephew to wait for him near thevineyard; but it appeared the servant did not find him.“Spada knew what these invitations meant; since Christianity, soeminently civilizing, had made progress in Rome, it was no longer a centurionwho came from the tyrant with a message, ‘Cæsar wills that youdie.’ but it was a legate à latere, who came with a smile on hislips to say from the pope, ‘His holiness requests you to dine withhim.’“Spada set out about two o’clock to San Pierdarena. The popeawaited him. The first sight that attracted the eyes of Spada was that of hisnephew, in full costume, and Cæsar Borgia paying him most marked attentions.Spada turned pale, as Cæsar looked at him with an ironical air, which provedthat he had anticipated all, and that the snare was well spread.“They began dinner and Spada was only able to inquire of his nephew if hehad received his message. The nephew replied no; perfectly comprehending themeaning of the question. It was too late, for he had already drunk a glass ofexcellent wine, placed for him expressly by the pope’s butler. Spada atthe same moment saw another bottle approach him, which he was pressed to taste.An hour afterwards a physician declared they were both poisoned through eatingmushrooms. Spada died on the threshold of the vineyard; the nephew expired athis own door, making signs which his wife could not comprehend.“Then Cæsar and the pope hastened to lay hands on the heritage, underpretense of seeking for the papers of the dead man. But the inheritanceconsisted in this only, a scrap of paper on which Spada hadwritten:—‘I bequeath to my beloved nephew my coffers, my books,and, amongst others, my breviary with the gold corners, which I beg he willpreserve in remembrance of his affectionate uncle.’“The heirs sought everywhere, admired the breviary, laid hands on thefurniture, and were greatly astonished that Spada, the rich man, was really themost miserable of uncles—no treasures—unless they were those ofscience, contained in the library and laboratories. That was all. Cæsar and hisfather searched, examined, scrutinized, but found nothing, or at least verylittle; not exceeding a few thousand crowns in plate, and about the same inready money; but the nephew had time to say to his wife before he expired:‘Look well among my uncle’s papers; there is a will.’“They sought even more thoroughly than the august heirs had done, but itwas fruitless. There were two palaces and a vineyard behind the Palatine Hill;but in these days landed property had not much value, and the two palaces andthe vineyard remained to the family since they were beneath the rapacity of thepope and his son. Months and years rolled on. Alexander VI. died,poisoned,—you know by what mistake. Cæsar, poisoned at the same time,escaped by shedding his skin like a snake; but the new skin was spotted by thepoison till it looked like a tiger’s. Then, compelled to quit Rome, hewent and got himself obscurely killed in a night skirmish, scarcely noticed inhistory.“After the pope’s death and his son’s exile, it was supposedthat the Spada family would resume the splendid position they had held beforethe cardinal’s time; but this was not the case. The Spadas remained indoubtful ease, a mystery hung over this dark affair, and the public rumor was,that Cæsar, a better politician than his father, had carried off from the popethe fortune of the two cardinals. I say the two, because Cardinal Rospigliosi,who had not taken any precaution, was completely despoiled.“Up to this point,” said Faria, interrupting the thread of hisnarrative, “this seems to you very meaningless, no doubt, eh?”“Oh, my friend,” cried Dantès, “on the contrary, it seems asif I were reading a most interesting narrative; go on, I beg of you.”“I will. The family began to get accustomed to their obscurity. Yearsrolled on, and amongst the descendants some were soldiers, others diplomatists;some churchmen, some bankers; some grew rich, and some were ruined. I come nowto the last of the family, whose secretary I was—the Count of Spada. Ihad often heard him complain of the disproportion of his rank with his fortune;and I advised him to invest all he had in an annuity. He did so, and thusdoubled his income. The celebrated breviary remained in the family, and was inthe count’s possession. It had been handed down from father to son; forthe singular clause of the only will that had been found, had caused it to beregarded as a genuine relic, preserved in the family with superstitiousveneration. It was an illuminated book, with beautiful Gothic characters, andso weighty with gold, that a servant always carried it before the cardinal ondays of great solemnity.“At the sight of papers of all sorts,—titles, contracts,parchments, which were kept in the archives of the family, all descending fromthe poisoned cardinal, I in my turn examined the immense bundles of documents,like twenty servitors, stewards, secretaries before me; but in spite of themost exhaustive researches, I found—nothing. Yet I had read, I had evenwritten a precise history of the Borgia family, for the sole purpose ofassuring myself whether any increase of fortune had occurred to them on thedeath of the Cardinal Cæsar Spada; but could only trace the acquisition of theproperty of the Cardinal Rospigliosi, his companion in misfortune.“I was then almost assured that the inheritance had neither profited theBorgias nor the family, but had remained unpossessed like the treasures of theArabian Nights, which slept in the bosom of the earth under the eyes of thegenie. I searched, ransacked, counted, calculated a thousand and a thousandtimes the income and expenditure of the family for three hundred years. It wasuseless. I remained in my ignorance, and the Count of Spada in his poverty.“My patron died. He had reserved from his annuity his family papers, hislibrary, composed of five thousand volumes, and his famous breviary. All thesehe bequeathed to me, with a thousand Roman crowns, which he had in ready money,on condition that I would have anniversary masses said for the repose of hissoul, and that I would draw up a genealogical tree and history of his house.All this I did scrupulously. Be easy, my dear Edmond, we are near theconclusion.“In 1807, a month before I was arrested, and a fortnight after the deathof the Count of Spada, on the 25th of December (you will see presently how thedate became fixed in my memory), I was reading, for the thousandth time, thepapers I was arranging, for the palace was sold to a stranger, and I was goingto leave Rome and settle at Florence, intending to take with me twelve thousandfrancs I possessed, my library, and the famous breviary, when, tired with myconstant labor at the same thing, and overcome by a heavy dinner I had eaten,my head dropped on my hands, and I fell asleep about three o’clock in theafternoon.“I awoke as the clock was striking six. I raised my head; I was in utterdarkness. I rang for a light, but, as no one came, I determined to find one formyself. It was indeed but anticipating the simple manners which I should soonbe under the necessity of adopting. I took a wax-candle in one hand, and withthe other groped about for a piece of paper (my match-box being empty), withwhich I proposed to get a light from the small flame still playing on theembers. Fearing, however, to make use of any valuable piece of paper, Ihesitated for a moment, then recollected that I had seen in the famousbreviary, which was on the table beside me, an old paper quite yellow with age,and which had served as a marker for centuries, kept there by the request ofthe heirs. I felt for it, found it, twisted it up together, and putting it intothe expiring flame, set light to it.“But beneath my fingers, as if by magic, in proportion as the fireascended, I saw yellowish characters appear on the paper. I grasped it in myhand, put out the flame as quickly as I could, lighted my taper in the fireitself, and opened the crumpled paper with inexpressible emotion, recognizing,when I had done so, that these characters had been traced in mysterious andsympathetic ink, only appearing when exposed to the fire; nearly one-third ofthe paper had been consumed by the flame. It was that paper you read thismorning; read it again, Dantès, and then I will complete for you the incompletewords and unconnected sense.”Faria, with an air of triumph, offered the paper to Dantès, who this time readthe following words, traced with an ink of a reddish color resembling rust:     “This 25th day of April, 1498, be...     Alexander VI., and fearing that not...     he may desire to become my heir, and re...     and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...     my sole heir, that I have bu...     and has visited with me, that is, in...     Island of Monte Cristo, all I poss...     jewels, diamonds, gems; that I alone...     may amount to nearly two mil...     will find on raising the twentieth ro...     creek to the east in a right line. Two open...     in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...     which treasure I bequeath and leave en...     as my sole heir.     “25th April, 1498.     “Cæs...“And now,” said the abbé, “read this other paper;” andhe presented to Dantès a second leaf with fragments of lines written on it,which Edmond read as follows:           “...ing invited to dine by his Holiness        ...content with making me pay for my hat,   ...serves for me the fate of Cardinals Caprara           ...I declare to my nephew, Guido Spada                      ...ried in a place he knows                        ...the caves of the small                 ...essed of ingots, gold, money, ...know of the existence of this treasure, which           ...lions of Roman crowns, and which he                             ...ck from the small                           ...ings have been made                           ...ngle in the second;                                   ...tire to him                                    ...ar † Spada.”Faria followed him with an excited look.“And now,” he said, when he saw that Dantès had read the last line,“put the two fragments together, and judge for yourself.” Dantèsobeyed, and the conjointed pieces gave the following:“This 25th day of April, 1498, be...ing invited to dine by his HolinessAlexander VI., and fearing that not...content with making me pay for my hat, hemay desire to become my heir, and re...serves for me the fate of CardinalsCaprara and Bentivoglio, who were poisoned,...I declare to my nephew, GuidoSpada, my sole heir, that I have bu...ried in a place he knows and has visitedwith me, that is, in...the caves of the small Island of Monte Cristo, all Iposs...essed of ingots, gold, money, jewels, diamonds, gems; that Ialone...know of the existence of this treasure, which may amount to nearly twomil...lions of Roman crowns, and which he will find on raising the twentiethro...ck from the small creek to the east in a right line. Two open...ings havebeen made in these caves; the treasure is in the furthest a...ngle in thesecond; which treasure I bequeath and leave en...tire to him as my sole heir.“25th April, 1498. “Cæs...ar † Spada.”“Well, do you comprehend now?” inquired Faria.“It is the declaration of Cardinal Spada, and the will so long soughtfor,” replied Edmond, still incredulous.“Yes; a thousand times, yes!”“And who completed it as it now is?”“I did. Aided by the remaining fragment, I guessed the rest; measuringthe length of the lines by those of the paper, and divining the hidden meaningby means of what was in part revealed, as we are guided in a cavern by thesmall ray of light above us.”“And what did you do when you arrived at this conclusion?”“I resolved to set out, and did set out at that very instant, carryingwith me the beginning of my great work, the unity of the Italian kingdom; butfor some time the imperial police (who at this period, quite contrary to whatNapoleon desired so soon as he had a son born to him, wished for a partition ofprovinces) had their eyes on me; and my hasty departure, the cause of whichthey were unable to guess, having aroused their suspicions, I was arrested atthe very moment I was leaving Piombino.“Now,” continued Faria, addressing Dantès with an almost paternalexpression, “now, my dear fellow, you know as much as I do myself. If weever escape together, half this treasure is yours; if I die here, and youescape alone, the whole belongs to you.”“But,” inquired Dantès hesitating, “has this treasure no morelegitimate possessor in the world than ourselves?”“No, no, be easy on that score; the family is extinct. The last Count ofSpada, moreover, made me his heir, bequeathing to me this symbolic breviary, hebequeathed to me all it contained; no, no, make your mind satisfied on thatpoint. If we lay hands on this fortune, we may enjoy it without remorse.”“And you say this treasure amounts to——”“Two millions of Roman crowns; nearly thirteen millions of ourmoney.”[2]“Impossible!” said Dantès, staggered at the enormous amount.“Impossible? and why?” asked the old man. “The Spada familywas one of the oldest and most powerful families of the fifteenth century; andin those times, when other opportunities for investment were wanting, suchaccumulations of gold and jewels were by no means rare; there are at this dayRoman families perishing of hunger, though possessed of nearly a million indiamonds and jewels, handed down by entail, and which they cannot touch.”Edmond thought he was in a dream—he wavered between incredulity and joy.“I have only kept this secret so long from you,” continued Faria,“that I might test your character, and then surprise you. Had we escapedbefore my attack of catalepsy, I should have conducted you to Monte Cristo;now,” he added, with a sigh, “it is you who will conduct methither. Well, Dantès, you do not thank me?”“This treasure belongs to you, my dear friend,” replied Dantès,“and to you only. I have no right to it. I am no relation ofyours.”“You are my son, Dantès,” exclaimed the old man. “You are thechild of my captivity. My profession condemns me to celibacy. God has sent youto me to console, at one and the same time, the man who could not be a father,and the prisoner who could not get free.”And Faria extended the arm of which alone the use remained to him to the youngman, who threw himself upon his neck and wept. Chapter 19. The ThirdAttackNow that this treasure,which had so long been the object of the abbé’s meditations, could insurethe future happiness of him whom Faria really loved as a son, it had doubledits value in his eyes, and every day he expatiated on the amount, explaining toDantès all the good which, with thirteen or fourteen millions of francs, a mancould do in these days to his friends; and then Dantès’ countenancebecame gloomy, for the oath of vengeance he had taken recurred to his memory,and he reflected how much ill, in these times, a man with thirteen or fourteenmillions could do to his enemies.The abbé did not know the Island of Monte Cristo; but Dantès knew it, and hadoften passed it, situated twenty-five miles from Pianosa, between Corsica andthe Island of Elba, and had once touched there. This island was, always hadbeen, and still is, completely deserted. It is a rock of almost conical form,which looks as though it had been thrust up by volcanic force from the depth tothe surface of the ocean. Dantès drew a plan of the island for Faria, and Fariagave Dantès advice as to the means he should employ to recover the treasure.But Dantès was far from being as enthusiastic and confident as the old man. Itwas past a question now that Faria was not a lunatic, and the way in which hehad achieved the discovery, which had given rise to the suspicion of hismadness, increased Edmond’s admiration of him; but at the same timeDantès could not believe that the deposit, supposing it had ever existed, stillexisted; and though he considered the treasure as by no means chimerical, heyet believed it was no longer there.However, as if fate resolved on depriving the prisoners of their last chance,and making them understand that they were condemned to perpetual imprisonment,a new misfortune befell them; the gallery on the sea side, which had long beenin ruins, was rebuilt. They had repaired it completely, and stopped up withvast masses of stone the hole Dantès had partly filled in. But for thisprecaution, which, it will be remembered, the abbé had made to Edmond, themisfortune would have been still greater, for their attempt to escape wouldhave been detected, and they would undoubtedly have been separated. Thus a new,a stronger, and more inexorable barrier was interposed to cut off therealization of their hopes.“You see,” said the young man, with an air of sorrowfulresignation, to Faria, “that God deems it right to take from me any claimto merit for what you call my devotion to you. I have promised to remainforever with you, and now I could not break my promise if I would. The treasurewill be no more mine than yours, and neither of us will quit this prison. Butmy real treasure is not that, my dear friend, which awaits me beneath thesombre rocks of Monte Cristo, it is your presence, our living together five orsix hours a day, in spite of our jailers; it is the rays of intelligence youhave elicited from my brain, the languages you have implanted in my memory, andwhich have taken root there with all their philological ramifications. Thesedifferent sciences that you have made so easy to me by the depth of theknowledge you possess of them, and the clearness of the principles to which youhave reduced them—this is my treasure, my beloved friend, and with thisyou have made me rich and happy. Believe me, and take comfort, this is betterfor me than tons of gold and cases of diamonds, even were they not asproblematical as the clouds we see in the morning floating over the sea, whichwe take for terra firma, and which evaporate and vanish as we draw nearto them. To have you as long as possible near me, to hear your eloquentspeech,—which embellishes my mind, strengthens my soul, and makes mywhole frame capable of great and terrible things, if I should ever befree,—so fills my whole existence, that the despair to which I was juston the point of yielding when I knew you, has no longer any hold over me; andthis—this is my fortune—not chimerical, but actual. I owe you myreal good, my present happiness; and all the sovereigns of the earth, evenCæsar Borgia himself, could not deprive me of this.”Thus, if not actually happy, yet the days these two unfortunates passedtogether went quickly. Faria, who for so long a time had kept silence as to thetreasure, now perpetually talked of it. As he had prophesied would be the case,he remained paralyzed in the right arm and the left leg, and had given up allhope of ever enjoying it himself. But he was continually thinking over somemeans of escape for his young companion, and anticipating the pleasure he wouldenjoy. For fear the letter might be some day lost or stolen, he compelledDantès to learn it by heart; and Dantès knew it from the first to the lastword. Then he destroyed the second portion, assured that if the first wereseized, no one would be able to discover its real meaning. Whole hourssometimes passed while Faria was giving instructions toDantès,—instructions which were to serve him when he was at liberty.Then, once free, from the day and hour and moment when he was so, he could havebut one only thought, which was, to gain Monte Cristo by some means, and remainthere alone under some pretext which would arouse no suspicions; and oncethere, to endeavor to find the wonderful caverns, and search in the appointedspot,—the appointed spot, be it remembered, being the farthest angle inthe second opening.In the meanwhile the hours passed, if not rapidly, at least tolerably. Faria,as we have said, without having recovered the use of his hand and foot, hadregained all the clearness of his understanding, and had gradually, besides themoral instructions we have detailed, taught his youthful companion the patientand sublime duty of a prisoner, who learns to make something from nothing. Theywere thus perpetually employed,—Faria, that he might not see himself growold; Dantès, for fear of recalling the almost extinct past which now onlyfloated in his memory like a distant light wandering in the night. So life wenton for them as it does for those who are not victims of misfortune and whoseactivities glide along mechanically and tranquilly beneath the eye ofProvidence.But beneath this superficial calm there were in the heart of the young man, andperhaps in that of the old man, many repressed desires, many stifled sighs,which found vent when Faria was left alone, and when Edmond returned to hiscell.One night Edmond awoke suddenly, believing that he heard someone calling him.He opened his eyes upon utter darkness. His name, or rather a plaintive voicewhich essayed to pronounce his name, reached him. He sat up in bed and a coldsweat broke out upon his brow. Undoubtedly the call came from Faria’sdungeon.“Alas,” murmured Edmond; “can it be?”He moved his bed, drew up the stone, rushed into the passage, and reached theopposite extremity; the secret entrance was open. By the light of the wretchedand wavering lamp, of which we have spoken, Dantès saw the old man, pale, butyet erect, clinging to the bedstead. His features were writhing with thosehorrible symptoms which he already knew, and which had so seriously alarmed himwhen he saw them for the first time.“Alas, my dear friend,” said Faria in a resigned tone, “youunderstand, do you not, and I need not attempt to explain to you?”Edmond uttered a cry of agony, and, quite out of his senses, rushed towards thedoor, exclaiming, “Help, help!”Faria had just sufficient strength to restrain him.“Silence,” he said, “or you are lost. We must now only thinkof you, my dear friend, and so act as to render your captivity supportable oryour flight possible. It would require years to do again what I have done here,and the results would be instantly destroyed if our jailers knew we hadcommunicated with each other. Besides, be assured, my dear Edmond, the dungeonI am about to leave will not long remain empty; some other unfortunate beingwill soon take my place, and to him you will appear like an angel of salvation.Perhaps he will be young, strong, and enduring, like yourself, and will aid youin your escape, while I have been but a hindrance. You will no longer have halfa dead body tied to you as a drag to all your movements. At length Providencehas done something for you; he restores to you more than he takes away, and itwas time I should die.”Edmond could only clasp his hands and exclaim, “Oh, my friend, my friend,speak not thus!” and then resuming all his presence of mind, which hadfor a moment staggered under this blow, and his strength, which had failed atthe words of the old man, he said, “Oh, I have saved you once, and I willsave you a second time!” And raising the foot of the bed, he drew out thephial, still a third filled with the red liquor.“See,” he exclaimed, “there remains still some of the magicdraught. Quick, quick! tell me what I must do this time; are there any freshinstructions? Speak, my friend; I listen.”“There is not a hope,” replied Faria, shaking his head, “butno matter; God wills it that man whom he has created, and in whose heart he hasso profoundly rooted the love of life, should do all in his power to preservethat existence, which, however painful it may be, is yet always so dear.”“Oh, yes, yes!” exclaimed Dantès; “and I tell you that I willsave you yet.”“Well, then, try. The cold gains upon me. I feel the blood flowingtowards my brain. These horrible chills, which make my teeth chatter and seemto dislocate my bones, begin to pervade my whole frame; in five minutes themalady will reach its height, and in a quarter of an hour there will be nothingleft of me but a corpse.”“Oh!” exclaimed Dantès, his heart wrung with anguish.“Do as you did before, only do not wait so long, all the springs of lifeare now exhausted in me, and death,” he continued, looking at hisparalyzed arm and leg, “has but half its work to do. If, after havingmade me swallow twelve drops instead of ten, you see that I do not recover,then pour the rest down my throat. Now lift me on my bed, for I can no longersupport myself.”Edmond took the old man in his arms, and laid him on the bed.“And now, my dear friend,” said Faria, “sole consolation ofmy wretched existence,—you whom Heaven gave me somewhat late, but stillgave me, a priceless gift, and for which I am most grateful,—at themoment of separating from you forever, I wish you all the happiness and all theprosperity you so well deserve. My son, I bless thee!”The young man cast himself on his knees, leaning his head against the oldman’s bed.“Listen, now, to what I say in this my dying moment. The treasure of theSpadas exists. God grants me the boon of vision unrestricted by time or space.I see it in the depths of the inner cavern. My eyes pierce the inmost recessesof the earth, and are dazzled at the sight of so much riches. If you do escape,remember that the poor abbé, whom all the world called mad, was not so. Hastento Monte Cristo—avail yourself of the fortune—for you have indeedsuffered long enough.”A violent convulsion attacked the old man. Dantès raised his head and sawFaria’s eyes injected with blood. It seemed as if a flow of blood hadascended from the chest to the head.“Adieu, adieu!” murmured the old man, clasping Edmond’s handconvulsively—“adieu!”“Oh, no,—no, not yet,” he cried; “do not forsake me!Oh, succor him! Help—help—help!”“Hush! hush!” murmured the dying man, “that they may notseparate us if you save me!”“You are right. Oh, yes, yes; be assured I shall save you! Besides,although you suffer much, you do not seem to be in such agony as you werebefore.”“Do not mistake! I suffer less because there is in me less strength toendure. At your age we have faith in life; it is the privilege of youth tobelieve and hope, but old men see death more clearly. Oh, ’tishere—’tis here—’tis over—my sight isgone—my senses fail! Your hand, Dantès! Adieu! adieu!”And raising himself by a final effort, in which he summoned all his faculties,he said,—“Monte Cristo, forget not Monte Cristo!” And he fellback on the bed.The crisis was terrible, and a rigid form with twisted limbs, swollen eyelids,and lips flecked with bloody foam, lay on the bed of torture, in place of theintellectual being who so lately rested there.Dantès took the lamp, placed it on a projecting stone above the bed, whence itstremulous light fell with strange and fantastic ray on the distortedcountenance and motionless, stiffened body. With steady gaze he awaitedconfidently the moment for administering the restorative.When he believed that the right moment had arrived, he took the knife, priedopen the teeth, which offered less resistance than before, counted one afterthe other twelve drops, and watched; the phial contained, perhaps, twice asmuch more. He waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour, half an hour,—nochange took place. Trembling, his hair erect, his brow bathed withperspiration, he counted the seconds by the beating of his heart. Then hethought it was time to make the last trial, and he put the phial to the purplelips of Faria, and without having occasion to force open his jaws, which hadremained extended, he poured the whole of the liquid down his throat.The draught produced a galvanic effect, a violent trembling pervaded the oldman’s limbs, his eyes opened until it was fearful to gaze upon them, heheaved a sigh which resembled a shriek, and then his convulsed body returnedgradually to its former immobility, the eyes remaining open.Half an hour, an hour, an hour and a half elapsed, and during this period ofanguish, Edmond leaned over his friend, his hand applied to his heart, and feltthe body gradually grow cold, and the heart’s pulsation become more andmore deep and dull, until at length it stopped; the last movement of the heartceased, the face became livid, the eyes remained open, but the eyeballs wereglazed.It was six o’clock in the morning, the dawn was just breaking, and itsfeeble ray came into the dungeon, and paled the ineffectual light of the lamp.Strange shadows passed over the countenance of the dead man, and at times gaveit the appearance of life. While the struggle between day and night lasted,Dantès still doubted; but as soon as the daylight gained the pre-eminence, hesaw that he was alone with a corpse. Then an invincible and extreme terrorseized upon him, and he dared not again press the hand that hung out of bed, hedared no longer to gaze on those fixed and vacant eyes, which he tried manytimes to close, but in vain—they opened again as soon as shut. Heextinguished the lamp, carefully concealed it, and then went away, closing aswell as he could the entrance to the secret passage by the large stone as hedescended.It was time, for the jailer was coming. On this occasion he began his rounds atDantès’ cell, and on leaving him he went on to Faria’s dungeon,taking thither breakfast and some linen. Nothing betokened that the man knewanything of what had occurred. He went on his way.Dantès was then seized with an indescribable desire to know what was going onin the dungeon of his unfortunate friend. He therefore returned by thesubterraneous gallery, and arrived in time to hear the exclamations of theturnkey, who called out for help. Other turnkeys came, and then was heard theregular tramp of soldiers. Last of all came the governor.Edmond heard the creaking of the bed as they moved the corpse, heard the voiceof the governor, who asked them to throw water on the dead man’s face;and seeing that, in spite of this application, the prisoner did not recover,they sent for the doctor. The governor then went out, and words of pity fell onDantès’ listening ears, mingled with brutal laughter.“Well, well,” said one, “the madman has gone to look afterhis treasure. Good journey to him!”“With all his millions, he will not have enough to pay for hisshroud!” said another.“Oh,” added a third voice, “the shrouds of the Châteaud’If are not dear!”“Perhaps,” said one of the previous speakers, “as he was achurchman, they may go to some expense in his behalf.”“They may give him the honors of the sack.”Edmond did not lose a word, but comprehended very little of what was said. Thevoices soon ceased, and it seemed to him as if everyone had left the cell.Still he dared not to enter, as they might have left some turnkey to watch thedead. He remained, therefore, mute and motionless, hardly venturing to breathe.At the end of an hour, he heard a faint noise, which increased. It was thegovernor who returned, followed by the doctor and other attendants. There was amoment’s silence,—it was evident that the doctor was examining thedead body. The inquiries soon commenced.The doctor analyzed the symptoms of the malady to which the prisoner hadsuccumbed, and declared that he was dead. Questions and answers followed in anonchalant manner that made Dantès indignant, for he felt that all the worldshould have for the poor abbé a love and respect equal to his own.“I am very sorry for what you tell me,” said the governor, replyingto the assurance of the doctor, “that the old man is really dead; for hewas a quiet, inoffensive prisoner, happy in his folly, and required nowatching.”“Ah,” added the turnkey, “there was no occasion for watchinghim; he would have stayed here fifty years, I’ll answer for it, withoutany attempt to escape.”“Still,” said the governor, “I believe it will be requisite,notwithstanding your certainty, and not that I doubt your science, but indischarge of my official duty, that we should be perfectly assured that theprisoner is dead.”There was a moment of complete silence, during which Dantès, still listening,knew that the doctor was examining the corpse a second time.“You may make your mind easy,” said the doctor; “he is dead.I will answer for that.”“You know, sir,” said the governor, persisting, “that we arenot content in such cases as this with such a simple examination. In spite ofall appearances, be so kind, therefore, as to finish your duty by fulfillingthe formalities described by law.”“Let the irons be heated,” said the doctor; “but really it isa useless precaution.”This order to heat the irons made Dantès shudder. He heard hasty steps, thecreaking of a door, people going and coming, and some minutes afterwards aturnkey entered, saying:“Here is the brazier, lighted.”There was a moment’s silence, and then was heard the crackling of burningflesh, of which the peculiar and nauseous smell penetrated even behind the wallwhere Dantès was listening in horror. The perspiration poured forth upon theyoung man’s brow, and he felt as if he should faint.“You see, sir, he is really dead,” said the doctor; “thisburn in the heel is decisive. The poor fool is cured of his folly, anddelivered from his captivity.”“Wasn’t his name Faria?” inquired one of the officers whoaccompanied the governor.“Yes, sir; and, as he said, it was an ancient name. He was, too, verylearned, and rational enough on all points which did not relate to histreasure; but on that, indeed, he was intractable.”“It is the sort of malady which we call monomania,” said thedoctor.“You had never anything to complain of?” said the governor to thejailer who had charge of the abbé.“Never, sir,” replied the jailer, “never; on the contrary, hesometimes amused me very much by telling me stories. One day, too, when my wifewas ill, he gave me a prescription which cured her.”“Ah, ah!” said the doctor, “I did not know that I had arival; but I hope, governor, that you will show him all proper respect inconsequence.”“Yes, yes, make your mind easy, he shall be decently interred in thenewest sack we can find. Will that satisfy you?”“Must this last formality take place in your presence, sir?”inquired a turnkey.“Certainly. But make haste—I cannot stay here all day.” Otherfootsteps, going and coming, were now heard, and a moment afterwards the noiseof rustling canvas reached Dantès’ ears, the bed creaked, and the heavyfootfall of a man who lifts a weight sounded on the floor; then the bed againcreaked under the weight deposited upon it.“This evening,” said the governor.“Will there be any mass?” asked one of the attendants.“That is impossible,” replied the governor. “The chaplain ofthe château came to me yesterday to beg for leave of absence, in order to takea trip to Hyères for a week. I told him I would attend to the prisoners in hisabsence. If the poor abbé had not been in such a hurry, he might have had hisrequiem.”“Pooh, pooh;” said the doctor, with the impiety usual in persons ofhis profession; “he is a churchman. God will respect his profession, andnot give the devil the wicked delight of sending him a priest.” A shoutof laughter followed this brutal jest. Meanwhile the operation of putting thebody in the sack was going on.“This evening,” said the governor, when the task was ended.“At what hour?” inquired a turnkey.“Why, about ten or eleven o’clock.”“Shall we watch by the corpse?”“Of what use would it be? Shut the dungeon as if he were alive—thatis all.”Then the steps retreated, and the voices died away in the distance; the noiseof the door, with its creaking hinges and bolts ceased, and a silence moresombre than that of solitude ensued,—the silence of death, which wasall-pervasive, and struck its icy chill to the very soul of Dantès.Then he raised the flag-stone cautiously with his head, and looked carefullyaround the chamber. It was empty, and Dantès emerged from the tunnel. Chapter 20. The Cemetery ofthe Château d’IfOn the bed, at fulllength, and faintly illuminated by the pale light that came from the window,lay a sack of canvas, and under its rude folds was stretched a long andstiffened form; it was Faria’s last winding-sheet,—a winding-sheetwhich, as the turnkey said, cost so little. Everything was in readiness. Abarrier had been placed between Dantès and his old friend. No longer couldEdmond look into those wide-open eyes which had seemed to be penetrating themysteries of death; no longer could he clasp the hand which had done so much tomake his existence blessed. Faria, the beneficent and cheerful companion, withwhom he was accustomed to live so intimately, no longer breathed. He seatedhimself on the edge of that terrible bed, and fell into melancholy and gloomyreverie.Alone! he was alone again! again condemned to silence—again face to facewith nothingness! Alone!—never again to see the face, never again to hearthe voice of the only human being who united him to earth! Was notFaria’s fate the better, after all—to solve the problem of life atits source, even at the risk of horrible suffering?The idea of suicide, which his friend had driven away and kept away by hischeerful presence, now hovered like a phantom over the abbé’s dead body.“If I could die,” he said, “I should go where he goes, andshould assuredly find him again. But how to die? It is very easy,” hewent on with a smile; “I will remain here, rush on the first person thatopens the door, strangle him, and then they will guillotine me.”But excessive grief is like a storm at sea, where the frail bark is tossed fromthe depths to the top of the wave. Dantès recoiled from the idea of so infamousa death, and passed suddenly from despair to an ardent desire for life andliberty.“Die? oh, no,” he exclaimed—“not die now, after havinglived and suffered so long and so much! Die? yes, had I died years ago; but nowto die would be, indeed, to give way to the sarcasm of destiny. No, I want tolive; I shall struggle to the very last; I will yet win back the happiness ofwhich I have been deprived. Before I die I must not forget that I have myexecutioners to punish, and perhaps, too, who knows, some friends to reward.Yet they will forget me here, and I shall die in my dungeon like Faria.”As he said this, he became silent and gazed straight before him like oneoverwhelmed with a strange and amazing thought. Suddenly he arose, lifted hishand to his brow as if his brain were giddy, paced twice or thrice round thedungeon, and then paused abruptly by the bed.“Just God!” he muttered, “whence comes this thought? Is itfrom thee? Since none but the dead pass freely from this dungeon, let me takethe place of the dead!”Without giving himself time to reconsider his decision, and, indeed, that hemight not allow his thoughts to be distracted from his desperate resolution, hebent over the appalling shroud, opened it with the knife which Faria had made,drew the corpse from the sack, and bore it along the tunnel to his own chamber,laid it on his couch, tied around its head the rag he wore at night around hisown, covered it with his counterpane, once again kissed the ice-cold brow, andtried vainly to close the resisting eyes, which glared horribly, turned thehead towards the wall, so that the jailer might, when he brought the eveningmeal, believe that he was asleep, as was his frequent custom; entered thetunnel again, drew the bed against the wall, returned to the other cell, tookfrom the hiding-place the needle and thread, flung off his rags, that theymight feel only naked flesh beneath the coarse canvas, and getting inside thesack, placed himself in the posture in which the dead body had been laid, andsewed up the mouth of the sack from the inside.He would have been discovered by the beating of his heart, if by any mischancethe jailers had entered at that moment. Dantès might have waited until theevening visit was over, but he was afraid that the governor would change hismind, and order the dead body to be removed earlier. In that case his last hopewould have been destroyed.Now his plans were fully made, and this is what he intended to do. If while hewas being carried out the grave-diggers should discover that they were bearinga live instead of a dead body, Dantès did not intend to give them time torecognize him, but with a sudden cut of the knife, he meant to open the sackfrom top to bottom, and, profiting by their alarm, escape; if they tried tocatch him, he would use his knife to better purpose.If they took him to the cemetery and laid him in a grave, he would allowhimself to be covered with earth, and then, as it was night, the grave-diggerscould scarcely have turned their backs before he would have worked his waythrough the yielding soil and escaped. He hoped that the weight of earth wouldnot be so great that he could not overcome it. If he was detected in this andthe earth proved too heavy, he would be stifled, and then—so much thebetter, all would be over.Dantès had not eaten since the preceding evening, but he had not thought ofhunger, nor did he think of it now. His situation was too precarious to allowhim even time to reflect on any thought but one.The first risk that Dantès ran was, that the jailer, when he brought him hissupper at seven o’clock, might perceive the change that had been made;fortunately, twenty times at least, from misanthropy or fatigue, Dantès hadreceived his jailer in bed, and then the man placed his bread and soup on thetable, and went away without saying a word. This time the jailer might not beas silent as usual, but speak to Dantès, and seeing that he received no reply,go to the bed, and thus discover all.When seven o’clock came, Dantès’ agony really began. His handplaced upon his heart was unable to redress its throbbings, while, with theother he wiped the perspiration from his temples. From time to time chills ranthrough his whole body, and clutched his heart in a grasp of ice. Then hethought he was going to die. Yet the hours passed on without any unusualdisturbance, and Dantès knew that he had escaped the first peril. It was a goodaugury.At length, about the hour the governor had appointed, footsteps were heard onthe stairs. Edmond felt that the moment had arrived, summoned up all hiscourage, held his breath, and would have been happy if at the same time hecould have repressed the throbbing of his veins. The footsteps—they weredouble—paused at the door—and Dantès guessed that the twograve-diggers had come to seek him—this idea was soon converted intocertainty, when he heard the noise they made in putting down the hand-bier.The door opened, and a dim light reached Dantès’ eyes through the coarsesack that covered him; he saw two shadows approach his bed, a third remainingat the door with a torch in its hand. The two men, approaching the ends of thebed, took the sack by its extremities.“He’s heavy, though, for an old and thin man,” said one, ashe raised the head.“They say every year adds half a pound to the weight of the bones,”said another, lifting the feet.“Have you tied the knot?” inquired the first speaker.“What would be the use of carrying so much more weight?” was thereply, “I can do that when we get there.”“Yes, you’re right,” replied the companion.“What’s the knot for?” thought Dantès.They deposited the supposed corpse on the bier. Edmond stiffened himself inorder to play the part of a dead man, and then the party, lighted by the manwith the torch, who went first, ascended the stairs. Suddenly he felt the freshand sharp night air, and Dantès knew that the mistral was blowing. It was asensation in which pleasure and pain were strangely mingled.The bearers went on for twenty paces, then stopped, putting the bier down onthe ground. One of them went away, and Dantès heard his shoes striking on thepavement.“Where am I?” he asked himself.“Really, he is by no means a light load!” said the other bearer,sitting on the edge of the hand-barrow.Dantès’ first impulse was to escape, but fortunately he did not attemptit.“Give us a light,” said the other bearer, “or I shall neverfind what I am looking for.”The man with the torch complied, although not asked in the most polite terms.“What can he be looking for?” thought Edmond. “The spade,perhaps.”An exclamation of satisfaction indicated that the grave-digger had found theobject of his search. “Here it is at last,” he said, “notwithout some trouble, though.”“Yes,” was the answer, “but it has lost nothing bywaiting.”As he said this, the man came towards Edmond, who heard a heavy metallicsubstance laid down beside him, and at the same moment a cord was fastenedround his feet with sudden and painful violence.“Well, have you tied the knot?” inquired the grave-digger, who waslooking on.“Yes, and pretty tight too, I can tell you,” was the answer.“Move on, then.” And the bier was lifted once more, and theyproceeded.They advanced fifty paces farther, and then stopped to open a door, then wentforward again. The noise of the waves dashing against the rocks on which thechâteau is built, reached Dantès’ ear distinctly as they went forward.“Bad weather!” observed one of the bearers; “not a pleasantnight for a dip in the sea.”“Why, yes, the abbé runs a chance of being wet,” said the other;and then there was a burst of brutal laughter.Dantès did not comprehend the jest, but his hair stood erect on his head.“Well, here we are at last,” said one of them.“A little farther—a little farther,” said the other.“You know very well that the last was stopped on his way, dashed on therocks, and the governor told us next day that we were careless fellows.”They ascended five or six more steps, and then Dantès felt that they took him,one by the head and the other by the heels, and swung him to and fro.“One!” said the grave-diggers, “two! three!”And at the same instant Dantès felt himself flung into the air like a woundedbird, falling, falling, with a rapidity that made his blood curdle. Althoughdrawn downwards by the heavy weight which hastened his rapid descent, it seemedto him as if the fall lasted for a century. At last, with a horrible splash, hedarted like an arrow into the ice-cold water, and as he did so he uttered ashrill cry, stifled in a moment by his immersion beneath the waves.Dantès had been flung into the sea, and was dragged into its depths by athirty-six-pound shot tied to his feet.The sea is the cemetery of the Château d’If. Chapter 21. The Island ofTiboulenDantès, although stunnedand almost suffocated, had sufficient presence of mind to hold his breath, andas his right hand (prepared as he was for every chance) held his knife open, herapidly ripped up the sack, extricated his arm, and then his body; but in spiteof all his efforts to free himself from the shot, he felt it dragging him downstill lower. He then bent his body, and by a desperate effort severed the cordthat bound his legs, at the moment when it seemed as if he were actuallystrangled. With a mighty leap he rose to the surface of the sea, while the shotdragged down to the depths the sack that had so nearly become his shroud.Dantès waited only to get breath, and then dived, in order to avoid being seen.When he arose a second time, he was fifty paces from where he had first sunk.He saw overhead a black and tempestuous sky, across which the wind was drivingclouds that occasionally suffered a twinkling star to appear; before him wasthe vast expanse of waters, sombre and terrible, whose waves foamed and roaredas if before the approach of a storm. Behind him, blacker than the sea, blackerthan the sky, rose phantom-like the vast stone structure, whose projectingcrags seemed like arms extended to seize their prey, and on the highest rockwas a torch lighting two figures.He fancied that these two forms were looking at the sea; doubtless thesestrange grave-diggers had heard his cry. Dantès dived again, and remained along time beneath the water. This was an easy feat to him, for he usuallyattracted a crowd of spectators in the bay before the lighthouse at Marseilleswhen he swam there, and was unanimously declared to be the best swimmer in theport. When he came up again the light had disappeared.He must now get his bearings. Ratonneau and Pomègue are the nearest islands ofall those that surround the Château d’If, but Ratonneau and Pomègue areinhabited, as is also the islet of Daume. Tiboulen and Lemaire were thereforethe safest for Dantès’ venture. The islands of Tiboulen and Lemaire are aleague from the Château d’If; Dantès, nevertheless, determined to makefor them. But how could he find his way in the darkness of the night?At this moment he saw the light of Planier, gleaming in front of him like astar. By leaving this light on the right, he kept the Island of Tiboulen alittle on the left; by turning to the left, therefore, he would find it. But,as we have said, it was at least a league from the Château d’If to thisisland. Often in prison Faria had said to him, when he saw him idle andinactive:“Dantès, you must not give way to this listlessness; you will be drownedif you seek to escape, and your strength has not been properly exercised andprepared for exertion.”These words rang in Dantès’ ears, even beneath the waves; he hastened tocleave his way through them to see if he had not lost his strength. He foundwith pleasure that his captivity had taken away nothing of his power, and thathe was still master of that element on whose bosom he had so often sported as aboy.Fear, that relentless pursuer, clogged Dantès’ efforts. He listened forany sound that might be audible, and every time that he rose to the top of awave he scanned the horizon, and strove to penetrate the darkness. He fanciedthat every wave behind him was a pursuing boat, and he redoubled his exertions,increasing rapidly his distance from the château, but exhausting his strength.He swam on still, and already the terrible château had disappeared in thedarkness. He could not see it, but he felt its presence.An hour passed, during which Dantès, excited by the feeling of freedom,continued to cleave the waves.“Let us see,” said he, “I have swum above an hour, but as thewind is against me, that has retarded my speed; however, if I am not mistaken,I must be close to Tiboulen. But what if I were mistaken?”A shudder passed over him. He sought to tread water, in order to rest himself;but the sea was too violent, and he felt that he could not make use of thismeans of recuperation.“Well,” said he, “I will swim on until I am worn out, or thecramp seizes me, and then I shall sink;” and he struck out with theenergy of despair.Suddenly the sky seemed to him to become still darker and more dense, and heavyclouds seemed to sweep down towards him; at the same time he felt a sharp painin his knee. He fancied for a moment that he had been shot, and listened forthe report; but he heard nothing. Then he put out his hand, and encountered anobstacle and with another stroke knew that he had gained the shore.Before him rose a grotesque mass of rocks, that resembled nothing so much as avast fire petrified at the moment of its most fervent combustion. It was theIsland of Tiboulen. Dantès rose, advanced a few steps, and, with a ferventprayer of gratitude, stretched himself on the granite, which seemed to himsofter than down. Then, in spite of the wind and rain, he fell into the deep,sweet sleep of utter exhaustion. At the expiration of an hour Edmond wasawakened by the roar of thunder. The tempest was let loose and beating theatmosphere with its mighty wings; from time to time a flash of lightningstretched across the heavens like a fiery serpent, lighting up the clouds thatrolled on in vast chaotic waves.Dantès had not been deceived—he had reached the first of the two islands,which was, in fact, Tiboulen. He knew that it was barren and without shelter;but when the sea became more calm, he resolved to plunge into its waves again,and swim to Lemaire, equally arid, but larger, and consequently better adaptedfor concealment.An overhanging rock offered him a temporary shelter, and scarcely had heavailed himself of it when the tempest burst forth in all its fury. Edmond feltthe trembling of the rock beneath which he lay; the waves, dashing themselvesagainst it, wetted him with their spray. He was safely sheltered, and yet hefelt dizzy in the midst of the warring of the elements and the dazzlingbrightness of the lightning. It seemed to him that the island trembled to itsbase, and that it would, like a vessel at anchor, break moorings, and bear himoff into the centre of the storm.He then recollected that he had not eaten or drunk for four-and-twenty hours.He extended his hands, and drank greedily of the rainwater that had lodged in ahollow of the rock.As he rose, a flash of lightning, that seemed to rive the remotest heights ofheaven, illumined the darkness. By its light, between the Island of Lemaire andCape Croiselle, a quarter of a league distant, Dantès saw a fishing-boat drivenrapidly like a spectre before the power of winds and waves. A second after, hesaw it again, approaching with frightful rapidity. Dantès cried at the top ofhis voice to warn them of their danger, but they saw it themselves. Anotherflash showed him four men clinging to the shattered mast and the rigging, whilea fifth clung to the broken rudder. The men he beheld saw him undoubtedly, fortheir cries were carried to his ears by the wind. Above the splintered mast asail rent to tatters was waving; suddenly the ropes that still held it gaveway, and it disappeared in the darkness of the night like a vast sea-bird.At the same moment a violent crash was heard, and cries of distress. Dantèsfrom his rocky perch saw the shattered vessel, and among the fragments thefloating forms of the hapless sailors. Then all was dark again.Dantès ran down the rocks at the risk of being himself dashed to pieces; helistened, he groped about, but he heard and saw nothing—the cries hadceased, and the tempest continued to rage. By degrees the wind abated, vastgray clouds rolled towards the west, and the blue firmament appeared studdedwith bright stars. Soon a red streak became visible in the horizon, the waveswhitened, a light played over them, and gilded their foaming crests with gold.It was day.Dantès stood mute and motionless before this majestic spectacle, as if he nowbeheld it for the first time; and indeed since his captivity in the Châteaud’If he had forgotten that such scenes were ever to be witnessed. Heturned towards the fortress, and looked at both sea and land. The gloomybuilding rose from the bosom of the ocean with imposing majesty and seemed todominate the scene. It was about five o’clock. The sea continued to getcalmer.“In two or three hours,” thought Dantès, “the turnkey willenter my chamber, find the body of my poor friend, recognize it, seek for me invain, and give the alarm. Then the tunnel will be discovered; the men who castme into the sea and who must have heard the cry I uttered, will be questioned.Then boats filled with armed soldiers will pursue the wretched fugitive. Thecannon will warn everyone to refuse shelter to a man wandering about naked andfamished. The police of Marseilles will be on the alert by land, whilst thegovernor pursues me by sea. I am cold, I am hungry. I have lost even the knifethat saved me. Oh, my God, I have suffered enough surely! Have pity on me, anddo for me what I am unable to do for myself.”As Dantès (his eyes turned in the direction of the Château d’If) utteredthis prayer, he saw off the farther point of the Island of Pomègue a smallvessel with lateen sail skimming the sea like a gull in search of prey; andwith his sailor’s eye he knew it to be a Genoese tartan. She was comingout of Marseilles harbor, and was standing out to sea rapidly, her sharp prowcleaving through the waves.“Oh,” cried Edmond, “to think that in half an hour I couldjoin her, did I not fear being questioned, detected, and conveyed back toMarseilles! What can I do? What story can I invent? under pretext of tradingalong the coast, these men, who are in reality smugglers, will prefer sellingme to doing a good action. I must wait. But I cannot—I am starving. In afew hours my strength will be utterly exhausted; besides, perhaps I have notbeen missed at the fortress. I can pass as one of the sailors wrecked lastnight. My story will be accepted, for there is no one left to contradictme.”As he spoke, Dantès looked toward the spot where the fishing-vessel had beenwrecked, and started. The red cap of one of the sailors hung to a point of therock and some timbers that had formed part of the vessel’s keel, floatedat the foot of the crag. In an instant Dantès’ plan was formed. He swamto the cap, placed it on his head, seized one of the timbers, and struck out soas to cut across the course the vessel was taking.“I am saved!” murmured he. And this conviction restored hisstrength.He soon saw that the vessel, with the wind dead ahead, was tacking between theChâteau d’If and the tower of Planier. For an instant he feared lest,instead of keeping in shore, she should stand out to sea; but he soon saw thatshe would pass, like most vessels bound for Italy, between the islands of Jarosand Calaseraigne.However, the vessel and the swimmer insensibly neared one another, and in oneof its tacks the tartan bore down within a quarter of a mile of him. He rose onthe waves, making signs of distress; but no one on board saw him, and thevessel stood on another tack. Dantès would have shouted, but he knew that thewind would drown his voice.It was then he rejoiced at his precaution in taking the timber, for without ithe would have been unable, perhaps, to reach the vessel—certainly toreturn to shore, should he be unsuccessful in attracting attention.Dantès, though almost sure as to what course the vessel would take, had yetwatched it anxiously until it tacked and stood towards him. Then he advanced;but before they could meet, the vessel again changed her course. By a violenteffort he rose half out of the water, waving his cap, and uttering a loud shoutpeculiar to sailors. This time he was both seen and heard, and the tartaninstantly steered towards him. At the same time, he saw they were about tolower the boat.An instant after, the boat, rowed by two men, advanced rapidly towards him.Dantès let go of the timber, which he now thought to be useless, and swamvigorously to meet them. But he had reckoned too much upon his strength, andthen he realized how serviceable the timber had been to him. His arms becamestiff, his legs lost their flexibility, and he was almost breathless.He shouted again. The two sailors redoubled their efforts, and one of themcried in Italian, “Courage!”The word reached his ear as a wave which he no longer had the strength tosurmount passed over his head. He rose again to the surface, struggled with thelast desperate effort of a drowning man, uttered a third cry, and felt himselfsinking, as if the fatal cannon shot were again tied to his feet. The waterpassed over his head, and the sky turned gray. A convulsive movement againbrought him to the surface. He felt himself seized by the hair, then he saw andheard nothing. He had fainted.When he opened his eyes Dantès found himself on the deck of the tartan. Hisfirst care was to see what course they were taking. They were rapidly leavingthe Château d’If behind. Dantès was so exhausted that the exclamation ofjoy he uttered was mistaken for a sigh.As we have said, he was lying on the deck. A sailor was rubbing his limbs witha woollen cloth; another, whom he recognized as the one who had cried out“Courage!” held a gourd full of rum to his mouth; while the third,an old sailor, at once the pilot and captain, looked on with that egotisticalpity men feel for a misfortune that they have escaped yesterday, and which mayovertake them tomorrow.A few drops of the rum restored suspended animation, while the friction of hislimbs restored their elasticity.“Who are you?” said the pilot in bad French.“I am,” replied Dantès, in bad Italian, “a Maltese sailor. Wewere coming from Syracuse laden with grain. The storm of last night overtook usat Cape Morgiou, and we were wrecked on these rocks.”“Where do you come from?”“From these rocks that I had the good luck to cling to while our captainand the rest of the crew were all lost. I saw your vessel, and fearful of beingleft to perish on the desolate island, I swam off on a piece of wreckage to tryand intercept your course. You have saved my life, and I thank you,”continued Dantès. “I was lost when one of your sailors caught hold of myhair.”“It was I,” said a sailor of a frank and manly appearance;“and it was time, for you were sinking.”“Yes,” returned Dantès, holding out his hand, “I thank youagain.”“I almost hesitated, though,” replied the sailor; “you lookedmore like a brigand than an honest man, with your beard six inches, and yourhair a foot long.”Dantès recollected that his hair and beard had not been cut all the time he wasat the Château d’If.“Yes,” said he, “I made a vow, to our Lady of the Grotto notto cut my hair or beard for ten years if I were saved in a moment of danger;but today the vow expires.”“Now what are we to do with you?” said the captain.“Alas, anything you please. My captain is dead; I have barely escaped;but I am a good sailor. Leave me at the first port you make; I shall be sure tofind employment.”“Do you know the Mediterranean?”“I have sailed over it since my childhood.”“You know the best harbors?”“There are few ports that I could not enter or leave with a bandage overmy eyes.”“I say, captain,” said the sailor who had cried“Courage!” to Dantès, “if what he says is true, what hindershis staying with us?”“If he says true,” said the captain doubtingly. “But in hispresent condition he will promise anything, and take his chance of keeping itafterwards.”“I will do more than I promise,” said Dantès.“We shall see,” returned the other, smiling.“Where are you going?” asked Dantès.“To Leghorn.”“Then why, instead of tacking so frequently, do you not sail nearer thewind?”“Because we should run straight on to the Island of Rion.”“You shall pass it by twenty fathoms.”“Take the helm, and let us see what you know.”The young man took the helm, felt to see if the vessel answered the rudderpromptly and seeing that, without being a first-rate sailor, she yet wastolerably obedient.“To the sheets,” said he. The four seamen, who composed the crew,obeyed, while the pilot looked on. “Haul taut.”They obeyed.“Belay.” This order was also executed; and the vessel passed, asDantès had predicted, twenty fathoms to windward.“Bravo!” said the captain.“Bravo!” repeated the sailors. And they all looked withastonishment at this man whose eye now disclosed an intelligence and his body avigor they had not thought him capable of showing.“You see,” said Dantès, quitting the helm, “I shall be ofsome use to you, at least during the voyage. If you do not want me at Leghorn,you can leave me there, and I will pay you out of the first wages I get, for myfood and the clothes you lend me.”“Ah,” said the captain, “we can agree very well, if you arereasonable.”“Give me what you give the others, and it will be all right,”returned Dantès.“That’s not fair,” said the seaman who had saved Dantès;“for you know more than we do.”“What is that to you, Jacopo?” returned the Captain.“Everyone is free to ask what he pleases.”“That’s true,” replied Jacopo; “I only make aremark.”“Well, you would do much better to find him a jacket and a pair oftrousers, if you have them.”“No,” said Jacopo; “but I have a shirt and a pair oftrousers.”“That is all I want,” interrupted Dantès. Jacopo dived into thehold and soon returned with what Edmond wanted.“Now, then, do you wish for anything else?” said the patron.“A piece of bread and another glass of the capital rum I tasted, for Ihave not eaten or drunk for a long time.” He had not tasted food forforty hours. A piece of bread was brought, and Jacopo offered him the gourd.“Larboard your helm,” cried the captain to the steersman. Dantèsglanced that way as he lifted the gourd to his mouth; then paused with hand inmid-air.“Hollo! what’s the matter at the Château d’If?” saidthe captain.A small white cloud, which had attracted Dantès’ attention, crowned thesummit of the bastion of the Château d’If. At the same moment the faintreport of a gun was heard. The sailors looked at one another.“What is this?” asked the captain.“A prisoner has escaped from the Château d’If, and they are firingthe alarm gun,” replied Dantès. The captain glanced at him, but he hadlifted the rum to his lips and was drinking it with so much composure, thatsuspicions, if the captain had any, died away.“Pretty strong rum! “ said Dantès, wiping his brow with his sleeve.“At any rate,” murmured he, “if it be, so much the better,for I have made a rare acquisition.”Under pretence of being fatigued, Dantès asked to take the helm; the steersman,glad to be relieved, looked at the captain, and the latter by a sign indicatedthat he might abandon it to his new comrade. Dantès could thus keep his eyes onMarseilles.“What is the day of the month?” asked he of Jacopo, who sat downbeside him.“The 28th of February.”“In what year?”“In what year—you ask me in what year?”“Yes,” replied the young man, “I ask you in what year!”“You have forgotten then?”“I got such a fright last night,” replied Dantès, smiling,“that I have almost lost my memory. I ask you what year is it?”“The year 1829,” returned Jacopo.It was fourteen years, day for day, since Dantès’ arrest. He was nineteenwhen he entered the Château d’If; he was thirty-three when he escaped. Asorrowful smile passed over his face; he asked himself what had become ofMercédès, who must believe him dead. Then his eyes lighted up with hatred as hethought of the three men who had caused him so long and wretched a captivity.He renewed against Danglars, Fernand, and Villefort the oath of implacablevengeance he had made in his dungeon.This oath was no longer a vain menace; for the fastest sailor in theMediterranean would have been unable to overtake the little tartan, that withevery stitch of canvas set was flying before the wind to Leghorn. Chapter 22. TheSmugglersDantès had not been aday on board before he had a very clear idea of the men with whom his lot hadbeen cast. Without having been in the school of the Abbé Faria, the worthymaster of La Jeune Amélie (the name of the Genoese tartan) knew asmattering of all the tongues spoken on the shores of that large lake calledthe Mediterranean, from the Arabic to the Provençal, and this, while it sparedhim interpreters, persons always troublesome and frequently indiscreet, gavehim great facilities of communication, either with the vessels he met at sea,with the small boats sailing along the coast, or with the people without name,country, or occupation, who are always seen on the quays of seaports, and wholive by hidden and mysterious means which we must suppose to be a direct giftof Providence, as they have no visible means of support. It is fair to assumethat Dantès was on board a smuggler.At first the captain had received Dantès on board with a certain degree ofdistrust. He was very well known to the customs officers of the coast; and asthere was between these worthies and himself a perpetual battle of wits, he hadat first thought that Dantès might be an emissary of these industriousguardians of rights and duties, who perhaps employed this ingenious means oflearning some of the secrets of his trade. But the skilful manner in whichDantès had handled the lugger had entirely reassured him; and then, when he sawthe light plume of smoke floating above the bastion of the Château d’If,and heard the distant report, he was instantly struck with the idea that he hadon board his vessel one whose coming and going, like that of kings, wasaccompanied with salutes of artillery. This made him less uneasy, it must beowned, than if the new-comer had proved to be a customs officer; but thissupposition also disappeared like the first, when he beheld the perfecttranquillity of his recruit.Edmond thus had the advantage of knowing what the owner was, without the ownerknowing who he was; and however the old sailor and his crew tried to“pump” him, they extracted nothing more from him; he gave accuratedescriptions of Naples and Malta, which he knew as well as Marseilles, and heldstoutly to his first story. Thus the Genoese, subtle as he was, was duped byEdmond, in whose favor his mild demeanor, his nautical skill, and his admirabledissimulation, pleaded. Moreover, it is possible that the Genoese was one ofthose shrewd persons who know nothing but what they should know, and believenothing but what they should believe.In this state of mutual understanding, they reached Leghorn. Here Edmond was toundergo another trial; he was to find out whether he could recognize himself,as he had not seen his own face for fourteen years. He had preserved atolerably good remembrance of what the youth had been, and was now to find outwhat the man had become. His comrades believed that his vow was fulfilled. Ashe had twenty times touched at Leghorn, he remembered a barber in St. FerdinandStreet; he went there to have his beard and hair cut. The barber gazed inamazement at this man with the long, thick and black hair and beard, which gavehis head the appearance of one of Titian’s portraits. At this period itwas not the fashion to wear so large a beard and hair so long; now a barberwould only be surprised if a man gifted with such advantages should consentvoluntarily to deprive himself of them. The Leghorn barber said nothing andwent to work.When the operation was concluded, and Edmond felt that his chin was completelysmooth, and his hair reduced to its usual length, he asked for a looking-glass.He was now, as we have said, three-and-thirty years of age, and his fourteenyears’ imprisonment had produced a great transformation in hisappearance.Dantès had entered the Château d’If with the round, open, smiling face ofa young and happy man, with whom the early paths of life have been smooth, andwho anticipates a future corresponding with his past. This was now all changed.The oval face was lengthened, his smiling mouth had assumed the firm and markedlines which betoken resolution; his eyebrows were arched beneath a browfurrowed with thought; his eyes were full of melancholy, and from their depthsoccasionally sparkled gloomy fires of misanthropy and hatred; his complexion,so long kept from the sun, had now that pale color which produces, when thefeatures are encircled with black hair, the aristocratic beauty of the man ofthe north; the profound learning he had acquired had besides diffused over hisfeatures a refined intellectual expression; and he had also acquired, beingnaturally of a goodly stature, that vigor which a frame possesses which has solong concentrated all its force within itself.To the elegance of a nervous and slight form had succeeded the solidity of arounded and muscular figure. As to his voice, prayers, sobs, and imprecationshad changed it so that at times it was of a singularly penetrating sweetness,and at others rough and almost hoarse.Moreover, from being so long in twilight or darkness, his eyes had acquired thefaculty of distinguishing objects in the night, common to the hyena and thewolf. Edmond smiled when he beheld himself; it was impossible that his bestfriend—if, indeed, he had any friend left—could recognize him; hecould not recognize himself.The master of La Jeune Amélie, who was very desirous of retainingamongst his crew a man of Edmond’s value, had offered to advance himfunds out of his future profits, which Edmond had accepted. His next care onleaving the barber’s who had achieved his first metamorphosis was toenter a shop and buy a complete sailor’s suit—a garb, as we allknow, very simple, and consisting of white trousers, a striped shirt, and acap.It was in this costume, and bringing back to Jacopo the shirt and trousers hehad lent him, that Edmond reappeared before the captain of the lugger, who hadmade him tell his story over and over again before he could believe him, orrecognize in the neat and trim sailor the man with thick and matted beard, hairtangled with seaweed, and body soaking in seabrine, whom he had picked up nakedand nearly drowned. Attracted by his prepossessing appearance, he renewed hisoffers of an engagement to Dantès; but Dantès, who had his own projects, wouldnot agree for a longer time than three months.La Jeune Amélie had a very active crew, very obedient to their captain,who lost as little time as possible. He had scarcely been a week at Leghornbefore the hold of his vessel was filled with printed muslins, contrabandcottons, English powder, and tobacco on which the excise had forgotten to putits mark. The master was to get all this out of Leghorn free of duties, andland it on the shores of Corsica, where certain speculators undertook toforward the cargo to France.They sailed; Edmond was again cleaving the azure sea which had been the firsthorizon of his youth, and which he had so often dreamed of in prison. He leftGorgone on his right and La Pianosa on his left, and went towards the countryof Paoli and Napoleon.The next morning going on deck, as he always did at an early hour, the patronfound Dantès leaning against the bulwarks gazing with intense earnestness at apile of granite rocks, which the rising sun tinged with rosy light. It was theIsland of Monte Cristo.La Jeune Amélie left it three-quarters of a league to the larboard andkept on for Corsica. Dantès thought, as they passed so closely to the islandwhose name was so interesting to him, that he had only to leap into the sea andin half an hour be at the promised land. But then what could he do withoutinstruments to discover his treasure, without arms to defend himself? Besides,what would the sailors say? What would the patron think? He must wait.Fortunately, Dantès had learned how to wait; he had waited fourteen years forhis liberty, and now he was free he could wait at least six months or a yearfor wealth. Would he not have accepted liberty without riches if it had beenoffered to him? Besides, were not those riches chimerical?—offspring ofthe brain of the poor Abbé Faria, had they not died with him? It is true, theletter of the Cardinal Spada was singularly circumstantial, and Dantès repeatedit to himself, from one end to the other, for he had not forgotten a word.Evening came, and Edmond saw the island tinged with the shades of twilight, andthen disappear in the darkness from all eyes but his own, for he, with visionaccustomed to the gloom of a prison, continued to behold it last of all, for heremained alone upon deck. The next morn broke off the coast of Aleria; all daythey coasted, and in the evening saw fires lighted on land; the position ofthese was no doubt a signal for landing, for a ship’s lantern was hung upat the mast-head instead of the streamer, and they came to within a gunshot ofthe shore. Dantès noticed that the captain of La Jeune Amélie had, as heneared the land, mounted two small culverins, which, without making much noise,can throw a four ounce ball a thousand paces or so.But on this occasion the precaution was superfluous, and everything proceededwith the utmost smoothness and politeness. Four shallops came off with verylittle noise alongside the lugger, which, no doubt, in acknowledgement of thecompliment, lowered her own shallop into the sea, and the five boats worked sowell that by two o’clock in the morning all the cargo was out of LaJeune Amélie and on terra firma. The same night, such a man ofregularity was the patron of La Jeune Amélie, the profits were divided,and each man had a hundred Tuscan livres, or about eighty francs.But the voyage was not ended. They turned the bowsprit towards Sardinia, wherethey intended to take in a cargo, which was to replace what had beendischarged. The second operation was as successful as the first, La JeuneAmélie was in luck. This new cargo was destined for the coast of the Duchyof Lucca, and consisted almost entirely of Havana cigars, sherry, and Malagawines.There they had a bit of a skirmish in getting rid of the duties; the excisewas, in truth, the everlasting enemy of the patron of La Jeune Amélie. Acustoms officer was laid low, and two sailors wounded; Dantès was one of thelatter, a ball having touched him in the left shoulder. Dantès was almost gladof this affray, and almost pleased at being wounded, for they were rude lessonswhich taught him with what eye he could view danger, and with what endurance hecould bear suffering. He had contemplated danger with a smile, and when woundedhad exclaimed with the great philosopher, “Pain, thou art not anevil.”He had, moreover, looked upon the customs officer wounded to death, and,whether from heat of blood produced by the encounter, or the chill of humansentiment, this sight had made but slight impression upon him. Dantès was onthe way he desired to follow, and was moving towards the end he wished toachieve; his heart was in a fair way of petrifying in his bosom. Jacopo, seeinghim fall, had believed him killed, and rushing towards him raised him up, andthen attended to him with all the kindness of a devoted comrade.This world was not then so good as Doctor Pangloss believed it, neither was itso wicked as Dantès thought it, since this man, who had nothing to expect fromhis comrade but the inheritance of his share of the prize-money, manifested somuch sorrow when he saw him fall. Fortunately, as we have said, Edmond was onlywounded, and with certain herbs gathered at certain seasons, and sold to thesmugglers by the old Sardinian women, the wound soon closed. Edmond thenresolved to try Jacopo, and offered him in return for his attention a share ofhis prize-money, but Jacopo refused it indignantly.As a result of the sympathetic devotion which Jacopo had from the firstbestowed on Edmond, the latter was moved to a certain degree of affection. Butthis sufficed for Jacopo, who instinctively felt that Edmond had a right tosuperiority of position—a superiority which Edmond had concealed from allothers. And from this time the kindness which Edmond showed him was enough forthe brave seaman.Then in the long days on board ship, when the vessel, gliding on with securityover the azure sea, required no care but the hand of the helmsman, thanks tothe favorable winds that swelled her sails, Edmond, with a chart in his hand,became the instructor of Jacopo, as the poor Abbé Faria had been his tutor. Hepointed out to him the bearings of the coast, explained to him the variationsof the compass, and taught him to read in that vast book opened over our headswhich they call heaven, and where God writes in azure with letters of diamonds.And when Jacopo inquired of him, “What is the use of teaching all thesethings to a poor sailor like me?” Edmond replied, “Who knows? Youmay one day be the captain of a vessel. Your fellow-countryman, Bonaparte,became emperor.” We had forgotten to say that Jacopo was a Corsican.Two months and a half elapsed in these trips, and Edmond had become as skilfula coaster as he had been a hardy seaman; he had formed an acquaintance with allthe smugglers on the coast, and learned all the Masonic signs by which thesehalf pirates recognize each other. He had passed and re-passed his Island ofMonte Cristo twenty times, but not once had he found an opportunity of landingthere.He then formed a resolution. As soon as his engagement with the patron of LaJeune Amélie ended, he would hire a small vessel on his ownaccount—for in his several voyages he had amassed a hundredpiastres—and under some pretext land at the Island of Monte Cristo. Thenhe would be free to make his researches, not perhaps entirely at liberty, forhe would be doubtless watched by those who accompanied him. But in this worldwe must risk something. Prison had made Edmond prudent, and he was desirous ofrunning no risk whatever. But in vain did he rack his imagination; fertile asit was, he could not devise any plan for reaching the island withoutcompanionship.Dantès was tossed about on these doubts and wishes, when the patron, who hadgreat confidence in him, and was very desirous of retaining him in his service,took him by the arm one evening and led him to a tavern on the Via del’Oglio, where the leading smugglers of Leghorn used to congregate and discussaffairs connected with their trade. Already Dantès had visited this maritimeBourse two or three times, and seeing all these hardy free-traders, whosupplied the whole coast for nearly two hundred leagues in extent, he had askedhimself what power might not that man attain who should give the impulse of hiswill to all these contrary and diverging minds. This time it was a great matterthat was under discussion, connected with a vessel laden with Turkey carpets,stuffs of the Levant, and cashmeres. It was necessary to find some neutralground on which an exchange could be made, and then to try and land these goodson the coast of France. If the venture was successful the profit would beenormous, there would be a gain of fifty or sixty piastres each for the crew.The patron of La Jeune Amélie proposed as a place of landing the Islandof Monte Cristo, which being completely deserted, and having neither soldiersnor revenue officers, seemed to have been placed in the midst of the oceansince the time of the heathen Olympus by Mercury, the god of merchants androbbers, classes of mankind which we in modern times have separated if not madedistinct, but which antiquity appears to have included in the same category.At the mention of Monte Cristo Dantès started with joy; he rose to conceal hisemotion, and took a turn around the smoky tavern, where all the languages ofthe known world were jumbled in a lingua franca.When he again joined the two persons who had been discussing the matter, it hadbeen decided that they should touch at Monte Cristo and set out on thefollowing night. Edmond, being consulted, was of opinion that the islandafforded every possible security, and that great enterprises to be well doneshould be done quickly.Nothing then was altered in the plan, and orders were given to get under weighnext night, and, wind and weather permitting, to make the neutral island by thefollowing day. Chapter 23. The Island ofMonte CristoThus, at length, by oneof the unexpected strokes of fortune which sometimes befall those who have fora long time been the victims of an evil destiny, Dantès was about to secure theopportunity he wished for, by simple and natural means, and land on the islandwithout incurring any suspicion. One night more and he would be on his way.The night was one of feverish distraction, and in its progress visions, goodand evil, passed through Dantès’ mind. If he closed his eyes, he sawCardinal Spada’s letter written on the wall in characters offlame—if he slept for a moment the wildest dreams haunted his brain. Heascended into grottos paved with emeralds, with panels of rubies, and the roofglowing with diamond stalactites. Pearls fell drop by drop, as subterraneanwaters filter in their caves. Edmond, amazed, wonderstruck, filled his pocketswith the radiant gems and then returned to daylight, when he discovered thathis prizes had all changed into common pebbles. He then endeavored to re-enterthe marvellous grottos, but they had suddenly receded, and now the path becamea labyrinth, and then the entrance vanished, and in vain did he tax his memoryfor the magic and mysterious word which opened the splendid caverns of Ali Babato the Arabian fisherman. All was useless, the treasure disappeared, and hadagain reverted to the genii from whom for a moment he had hoped to carry itoff.The day came at length, and was almost as feverish as the night had been, butit brought reason to the aid of imagination, and Dantès was then enabled toarrange a plan which had hitherto been vague and unsettled in his brain. Nightcame, and with it the preparation for departure, and these preparations servedto conceal Dantès’ agitation. He had by degrees assumed such authorityover his companions that he was almost like a commander on board; and as hisorders were always clear, distinct, and easy of execution, his comrades obeyedhim with celerity and pleasure.The old patron did not interfere, for he too had recognized the superiority ofDantès over the crew and himself. He saw in the young man his naturalsuccessor, and regretted that he had not a daughter, that he might have boundEdmond to him by a more secure alliance. At seven o’clock in the eveningall was ready, and at ten minutes past seven they doubled the lighthouse justas the beacon was kindled. The sea was calm, and, with a fresh breeze from thesouth-east, they sailed beneath a bright blue sky, in which God also lighted upin turn his beacon lights, each of which is a world. Dantès told them that allhands might turn in, and he would take the helm. When the Maltese (for so theycalled Dantès) had said this, it was sufficient, and all went to their bunkscontentedly.This frequently happened. Dantès, cast from solitude into the world, frequentlyexperienced an imperious desire for solitude; and what solitude is morecomplete, or more poetical, than that of a ship floating in isolation on thesea during the obscurity of the night, in the silence of immensity, and underthe eye of Heaven?Now this solitude was peopled with his thoughts, the night lighted up by hisillusions, and the silence animated by his anticipations. When the patronawoke, the vessel was hurrying on with every sail set, and every sail full withthe breeze. They were making nearly ten knots an hour. The Island of MonteCristo loomed large in the horizon. Edmond resigned the lugger to themaster’s care, and went and lay down in his hammock; but, in spite of asleepless night, he could not close his eyes for a moment.Two hours afterwards he came on deck, as the boat was about to double theIsland of Elba. They were just abreast of Mareciana, and beyond the flat butverdant Island of La Pianosa. The peak of Monte Cristo reddened by the burningsun, was seen against the azure sky. Dantès ordered the helmsman to put downhis helm, in order to leave La Pianosa to starboard, as he knew that he shouldshorten his course by two or three knots. About five o’clock in theevening the island was distinct, and everything on it was plainly perceptible,owing to that clearness of the atmosphere peculiar to the light which the raysof the sun cast at its setting.Edmond gazed very earnestly at the mass of rocks which gave out all the varietyof twilight colors, from the brightest pink to the deepest blue; and from timeto time his cheeks flushed, his brow darkened, and a mist passed over his eyes.Never did a gamester, whose whole fortune is staked on one cast of the die,experience the anguish which Edmond felt in his paroxysms of hope.Night came, and at ten o’clock they anchored. La Jeune Amélie wasfirst at the rendezvous. In spite of his usual command over himself, Dantèscould not restrain his impetuosity. He was the first to jump on shore; and hadhe dared, he would, like Lucius Brutus, have “kissed his motherearth.” It was dark, but at eleven o’clock the moon rose in themidst of the ocean, whose every wave she silvered, and then, “ascendinghigh,” played in floods of pale light on the rocky hills of this secondPelion.The island was familiar to the crew of La Jeune Amélie,—it was oneof her regular haunts. As to Dantès, he had passed it on his voyage to and fromthe Levant, but never touched at it. He questioned Jacopo.“Where shall we pass the night?” he inquired.“Why, on board the tartan,” replied the sailor.“Should we not do better in the grottos?”“What grottos?”“Why, the grottos—caves of the island.”“I do not know of any grottos,” replied Jacopo.The cold sweat sprang forth on Dantès’ brow.“What, are there no grottos at Monte Cristo?” he asked.“None.”For a moment Dantès was speechless; then he remembered that these caves mighthave been filled up by some accident, or even stopped up, for the sake ofgreater security, by Cardinal Spada. The point was, then, to discover thehidden entrance. It was useless to search at night, and Dantès thereforedelayed all investigation until the morning. Besides, a signal made half aleague out at sea, and to which La Jeune Amélie replied by a similarsignal, indicated that the moment for business had come.The boat that now arrived, assured by the answering signal that all was well,soon came in sight, white and silent as a phantom, and cast anchor within acable’s length of shore.Then the landing began. Dantès reflected, as he worked, on the shout of joywhich, with a single word, he could evoke from all these men, if he gaveutterance to the one unchanging thought that pervaded his heart; but, far fromdisclosing this precious secret, he almost feared that he had already said toomuch, and by his restlessness and continual questions, his minute observationsand evident preoccupation, aroused suspicions. Fortunately, as regarded thiscircumstance at least, his painful past gave to his countenance an indeliblesadness, and the glimmerings of gayety seen beneath this cloud were indeed buttransitory.No one had the slightest suspicion; and when next day, taking a fowling-piece,powder, and shot, Dantès declared his intention to go and kill some of the wildgoats that were seen springing from rock to rock, his wish was construed into alove of sport, or a desire for solitude. However, Jacopo insisted on followinghim, and Dantès did not oppose this, fearing if he did so that he might incurdistrust. Scarcely, however, had they gone a quarter of a league when, havingkilled a kid, he begged Jacopo to take it to his comrades, and request them tocook it, and when ready to let him know by firing a gun. This and some driedfruits and a flask of Monte Pulciano, was the bill of fare.Dantès went on, looking from time to time behind and around about him. Havingreached the summit of a rock, he saw, a thousand feet beneath him, hiscompanions, whom Jacopo had rejoined, and who were all busy preparing therepast which Edmond’s skill as a marksman had augmented with a capitaldish.Edmond looked at them for a moment with the sad and gentle smile of a mansuperior to his fellows.“In two hours’ time,” said he, “these persons willdepart richer by fifty piastres each, to go and risk their lives again byendeavoring to gain fifty more; then they will return with a fortune of sixhundred francs, and waste this treasure in some city with the pride of sultansand the insolence of nabobs. At this moment hope makes me despise their riches,which seem to me contemptible. Yet perchance tomorrow deception will so act onme, that I shall, on compulsion, consider such a contemptible possession as theutmost happiness. Oh, no!” exclaimed Edmond, “that will not be. Thewise, unerring Faria could not be mistaken in this one thing. Besides, it werebetter to die than to continue to lead this low and wretched life.”Thus Dantès, who but three months before had no desire but liberty had now notliberty enough, and panted for wealth. The cause was not in Dantès, but inProvidence, who, while limiting the power of man, has filled him with boundlessdesires.Meanwhile, by a cleft between two walls of rock, following a path worn by atorrent, and which, in all human probability, human foot had never before trod,Dantès approached the spot where he supposed the grottos must have existed.Keeping along the shore, and examining the smallest object with seriousattention, he thought he could trace, on certain rocks, marks made by the handof man.Time, which encrusts all physical substances with its mossy mantle, as itinvests all things of the mind with forgetfulness, seemed to have respectedthese signs, which apparently had been made with some degree of regularity, andprobably with a definite purpose. Occasionally the marks were hidden undertufts of myrtle, which spread into large bushes laden with blossoms, or beneathparasitical lichen. So Edmond had to separate the branches or brush away themoss to know where the guide-marks were. The sight of marks renewed Edmondfondest hopes. Might it not have been the cardinal himself who had first tracedthem, in order that they might serve as a guide for his nephew in the event ofa catastrophe, which he could not foresee would have been so complete. Thissolitary place was precisely suited to the requirements of a man desirous ofburying treasure. Only, might not these betraying marks have attracted othereyes than those for whom they were made? and had the dark and wondrous islandindeed faithfully guarded its precious secret?It seemed, however, to Edmond, who was hidden from his comrades by theinequalities of the ground, that at sixty paces from the harbor the marksceased; nor did they terminate at any grotto. A large round rock, placedsolidly on its base, was the only spot to which they seemed to lead. Edmondconcluded that perhaps instead of having reached the end of the route he hadonly explored its beginning, and he therefore turned round and retraced hissteps.Meanwhile his comrades had prepared the repast, had got some water from aspring, spread out the fruit and bread, and cooked the kid. Just at the momentwhen they were taking the dainty animal from the spit, they saw Edmondspringing with the boldness of a chamois from rock to rock, and they fired thesignal agreed upon. The sportsman instantly changed his direction, and ranquickly towards them. But even while they watched his daring progress,Edmond’s foot slipped, and they saw him stagger on the edge of a rock anddisappear. They all rushed towards him, for all loved Edmond in spite of hissuperiority; yet Jacopo reached him first.He found Edmond lying prone, bleeding, and almost senseless. He had rolled downa declivity of twelve or fifteen feet. They poured a little rum down histhroat, and this remedy which had before been so beneficial to him, producedthe same effect as formerly. Edmond opened his eyes, complained of great painin his knee, a feeling of heaviness in his head, and severe pains in his loins.They wished to carry him to the shore; but when they touched him, althoughunder Jacopo’s directions, he declared, with heavy groans, that he couldnot bear to be moved.It may be supposed that Dantès did not now think of his dinner, but he insistedthat his comrades, who had not his reasons for fasting, should have their meal.As for himself, he declared that he had only need of a little rest, and thatwhen they returned he should be easier. The sailors did not require muchurging. They were hungry, and the smell of the roasted kid was very savory, andyour tars are not very ceremonious. An hour afterwards they returned. All thatEdmond had been able to do was to drag himself about a dozen paces forward tolean against a moss-grown rock.But, instead of growing easier, Dantès’ pains appeared to increase inviolence. The old patron, who was obliged to sail in the morning in order toland his cargo on the frontiers of Piedmont and France, between Nice andFréjus, urged Dantès to try and rise. Edmond made great exertions in order tocomply; but at each effort he fell back, moaning and turning pale.“He has broken his ribs,” said the commander, in a low voice.“No matter; he is an excellent fellow, and we must not leave him. We willtry and carry him on board the tartan.”Dantès declared, however, that he would rather die where he was than undergothe agony which the slightest movement cost him.“Well,” said the patron, “let what may happen, it shall neverbe said that we deserted a good comrade like you. We will not go tillevening.”This very much astonished the sailors, although, not one opposed it. The patronwas so strict that this was the first time they had ever seen him give up anenterprise, or even delay in its execution. Dantès would not allow that anysuch infraction of regular and proper rules should be made in his favor.“No, no,” he said to the patron, “I was awkward, and it isjust that I pay the penalty of my clumsiness. Leave me a small supply ofbiscuit, a gun, powder, and balls, to kill the kids or defend myself at need,and a pickaxe, that I may build a shelter if you delay in coming back forme.”“But you’ll die of hunger,” said the patron.“I would rather do so,” was Edmond’s reply, “thansuffer the inexpressible agonies which the slightest movement causes me.”The patron turned towards his vessel, which was rolling on the swell in thelittle harbor, and, with sails partly set, would be ready for sea when hertoilet should be completed.“What are we to do, Maltese?” asked the captain. “We cannotleave you here so, and yet we cannot stay.”“Go, go!” exclaimed Dantès.“We shall be absent at least a week,” said the patron, “andthen we must run out of our course to come here and take you up again.”“Why,” said Dantès, “if in two or three days you hail anyfishing-boat, desire them to come here to me. I will pay twenty-five piastresfor my passage back to Leghorn. If you do not come across one, return forme.” The patron shook his head.“Listen, Captain Baldi; there’s one way of settling this,”said Jacopo. “Do you go, and I will stay and take care of the woundedman.”“And give up your share of the venture,” said Edmond, “toremain with me?”“Yes,” said Jacopo, “and without any hesitation.”“You are a good fellow and a kind-hearted messmate,” repliedEdmond, “and heaven will recompense you for your generous intentions; butI do not wish anyone to stay with me. A day or two of rest will set me up, andI hope I shall find among the rocks certain herbs most excellent forbruises.”A peculiar smile passed over Dantès’ lips; he squeezed Jacopo’shand warmly, but nothing could shake his determination to remain—andremain alone.The smugglers left with Edmond what he had requested and set sail, but notwithout turning about several times, and each time making signs of a cordialfarewell, to which Edmond replied with his hand only, as if he could not movethe rest of his body.Then, when they had disappeared, he said with a smile,—“’Tisstrange that it should be among such men that we find proofs of friendship anddevotion.” Then he dragged himself cautiously to the top of a rock, fromwhich he had a full view of the sea, and thence he saw the tartan complete herpreparations for sailing, weigh anchor, and, balancing herself as gracefully asa water-fowl ere it takes to the wing, set sail.At the end of an hour she was completely out of sight; at least, it wasimpossible for the wounded man to see her any longer from the spot where hewas. Then Dantès rose more agile and light than the kid among the myrtles andshrubs of these wild rocks, took his gun in one hand, his pickaxe in the other,and hastened towards the rock on which the marks he had noted terminated.“And now,” he exclaimed, remembering the tale of the Arabianfisherman, which Faria had related to him, “now, Open Sesame!” Chapter 24. The SecretCaveThe sun had nearlyreached the meridian, and his scorching rays fell full on the rocks, whichseemed themselves sensible of the heat. Thousands of grasshoppers, hidden inthe bushes, chirped with a monotonous and dull note; the leaves of the myrtleand olive trees waved and rustled in the wind. At every step that Edmond tookhe disturbed the lizards glittering with the hues of the emerald; afar off hesaw the wild goats bounding from crag to crag. In a word, the island wasinhabited, yet Edmond felt himself alone, guided by the hand of God.He felt an indescribable sensation somewhat akin to dread—that dread ofthe daylight which even in the desert makes us fear we are watched andobserved. This feeling was so strong that at the moment when Edmond was aboutto begin his labor, he stopped, laid down his pickaxe, seized his gun, mountedto the summit of the highest rock, and from thence gazed round in everydirection.But it was not upon Corsica, the very houses of which he could distinguish; oron Sardinia; or on the Island of Elba, with its historical associations; orupon the almost imperceptible line that to the experienced eye of a sailoralone revealed the coast of Genoa the proud, and Leghorn the commercial, thathe gazed. It was at the brigantine that had left in the morning, and the tartanthat had just set sail, that Edmond fixed his eyes.The first was just disappearing in the straits of Bonifacio; the other,following an opposite direction, was about to round the Island of Corsica.This sight reassured him. He then looked at the objects near him. He saw thathe was on the highest point of the island,—a statue on this vast pedestalof granite, nothing human appearing in sight, while the blue ocean beat againstthe base of the island, and covered it with a fringe of foam. Then he descendedwith cautious and slow step, for he dreaded lest an accident similar to that hehad so adroitly feigned should happen in reality.Dantès, as we have said, had traced the marks along the rocks, and he hadnoticed that they led to a small creek, which was hidden like the bath of someancient nymph. This creek was sufficiently wide at its mouth, and deep in thecentre, to admit of the entrance of a small vessel of the lugger class, whichwould be perfectly concealed from observation.Then following the clew that, in the hands of the Abbé Faria, had been soskilfully used to guide him through the Dædalian labyrinth of probabilities, hethought that the Cardinal Spada, anxious not to be watched, had entered thecreek, concealed his little barque, followed the line marked by the notches inthe rock, and at the end of it had buried his treasure. It was this idea thathad brought Dantès back to the circular rock. One thing only perplexed Edmond,and destroyed his theory. How could this rock, which weighed several tons, havebeen lifted to this spot, without the aid of many men?Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind. Instead of raising it, thought he,they have lowered it. And he sprang from the rock in order to inspect the baseon which it had formerly stood.He soon perceived that a slope had been formed, and the rock had slid alongthis until it stopped at the spot it now occupied. A large stone had served asa wedge; flints and pebbles had been inserted around it, so as to conceal theorifice; this species of masonry had been covered with earth, and grass andweeds had grown there, moss had clung to the stones, myrtle-bushes had takenroot, and the old rock seemed fixed to the earth.Dantès dug away the earth carefully, and detected, or fancied he detected, theingenious artifice. He attacked this wall, cemented by the hand of time, withhis pickaxe. After ten minutes’ labor the wall gave way, and a hole largeenough to insert the arm was opened.Dantès went and cut the strongest olive-tree he could find, stripped off itsbranches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as a lever. But the rock was tooheavy, and too firmly wedged, to be moved by anyone man, were he Herculeshimself. Dantès saw that he must attack the wedge. But how?He cast his eyes around, and saw the horn full of powder which his friendJacopo had left him. He smiled; the infernal invention would serve him for thispurpose.With the aid of his pickaxe, Dantès, after the manner of a labor-savingpioneer, dug a mine between the upper rock and the one that supported it,filled it with powder, then made a match by rolling his handkerchief insaltpetre. He lighted it and retired.The explosion soon followed; the upper rock was lifted from its base by theterrific force of the powder; the lower one flew into pieces; thousands ofinsects escaped from the aperture Dantès had previously formed, and a hugesnake, like the guardian demon of the treasure, rolled himself along indarkening coils, and disappeared.Dantès approached the upper rock, which now, without any support, leanedtowards the sea. The intrepid treasure-seeker walked round it, and, selectingthe spot from whence it appeared most susceptible to attack, placed his leverin one of the crevices, and strained every nerve to move the mass.The rock, already shaken by the explosion, tottered on its base. Dantèsredoubled his efforts; he seemed like one of the ancient Titans, who uprootedthe mountains to hurl against the father of the gods. The rock yielded, rolledover, bounded from point to point, and finally disappeared in the ocean.On the spot it had occupied was a circular space, exposing an iron ring letinto a square flag-stone.Dantès uttered a cry of joy and surprise; never had a first attempt beencrowned with more perfect success. He would fain have continued, but his kneestrembled, and his heart beat so violently, and his sight became so dim, that hewas forced to pause.This feeling lasted but for a moment. Edmond inserted his lever in the ring andexerted all his strength; the flag-stone yielded, and disclosed steps thatdescended until they were lost in the obscurity of a subterraneous grotto.Anyone else would have rushed on with a cry of joy. Dantès turned pale,hesitated, and reflected.“Come,” said he to himself, “be a man. I am accustomed toadversity. I must not be cast down by the discovery that I have been deceived.What, then, would be the use of all I have suffered? The heart breaks when,after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all its illusionsdestroyed. Faria has dreamed this; the Cardinal Spada buried no treasure here;perhaps he never came here, or if he did, Cæsar Borgia, the intrepidadventurer, the stealthy and indefatigable plunderer, has followed him,discovered his traces, pursued them as I have done, raised the stone, anddescending before me, has left me nothing.”He remained motionless and pensive, his eyes fixed on the gloomy aperture thatwas open at his feet.“Now that I expect nothing, now that I no longer entertain the slightesthopes, the end of this adventure becomes simply a matter of curiosity.”And he remained again motionless and thoughtful.“Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy a place in the varied career ofthat royal bandit. This fabulous event formed but a link in a long chain ofmarvels. Yes, Borgia has been here, a torch in one hand, a sword in the other,and within twenty paces, at the foot of this rock, perhaps two guards keptwatch on land and sea, while their master descended, as I am about to descend,dispelling the darkness before his awe-inspiring progress.”“But what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed hissecret?” asked Dantès of himself.“The fate,” replied he, smiling, “of those who buried Alaric,and were interred with the corpse.”“Yet, had he come,” thought Dantès, “he would have found thetreasure, and Borgia, he who compared Italy to an artichoke, which he coulddevour leaf by leaf, knew too well the value of time to waste it in replacingthis rock. I will go down.”Then he descended, a smile on his lips, and murmuring that last word of humanphilosophy, “Perhaps!”But instead of the darkness, and the thick and mephitic atmosphere he hadexpected to find, Dantès saw a dim and bluish light, which, as well as the air,entered, not merely by the aperture he had just formed, but by the intersticesand crevices of the rock which were visible from without, and through which hecould distinguish the blue sky and the waving branches of the evergreen oaks,and the tendrils of the creepers that grew from the rocks.After having stood a few minutes in the cavern, the atmosphere of which wasrather warm than damp, Dantès’ eye, habituated as it was to darkness,could pierce even to the remotest angles of the cavern, which was of granitethat sparkled like diamonds.“Alas,” said Edmond, smiling, “these are the treasures thecardinal has left; and the good abbé, seeing in a dream these glittering walls,has indulged in fallacious hopes.”But he called to mind the words of the will, which he knew by heart. “Inthe farthest angle of the second opening,” said the cardinal’swill. He had only found the first grotto; he had now to seek the second. Dantèscontinued his search. He reflected that this second grotto must penetratedeeper into the island; he examined the stones, and sounded one part of thewall where he fancied the opening existed, masked for precaution’s sake.The pickaxe struck for a moment with a dull sound that drew out ofDantès’ forehead large drops of perspiration. At last it seemed to himthat one part of the wall gave forth a more hollow and deeper echo; he eagerlyadvanced, and with the quickness of perception that no one but a prisonerpossesses, saw that there, in all probability, the opening must be.However, he, like Cæsar Borgia, knew the value of time; and, in order to avoidfruitless toil, he sounded all the other walls with his pickaxe, struck theearth with the butt of his gun, and finding nothing that appeared suspicious,returned to that part of the wall whence issued the consoling sound he hadbefore heard.He again struck it, and with greater force. Then a singular thing occurred. Ashe struck the wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used in the ground work ofarabesques broke off, and fell to the ground in flakes, exposing a large whitestone. The aperture of the rock had been closed with stones, then this stuccohad been applied, and painted to imitate granite. Dantès struck with the sharpend of his pickaxe, which entered someway between the interstices.It was there he must dig.But by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that Faria,had not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give way, and a feelingof discouragement stole over him. This last proof, instead of giving him freshstrength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe descended, or rather fell; he placedit on the ground, passed his hand over his brow, and remounted the stairs,alleging to himself, as an excuse, a desire to be assured that no one waswatching him, but in reality because he felt that he was about to faint.The island was deserted, and the sun seemed to cover it with its fiery glance;afar off, a few small fishing boats studded the bosom of the blue ocean.Dantès had tasted nothing, but he thought not of hunger at such a moment; hehastily swallowed a few drops of rum, and again entered the cavern.The pickaxe that had seemed so heavy, was now like a feather in his grasp; heseized it, and attacked the wall. After several blows he perceived that thestones were not cemented, but had been merely placed one upon the other, andcovered with stucco; he inserted the point of his pickaxe, and using the handleas a lever, with joy soon saw the stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at hisfeet.He had nothing more to do now, but with the iron tooth of the pickaxe to drawthe stones towards him one by one. The aperture was already sufficiently largefor him to enter, but by waiting, he could still cling to hope, and retard thecertainty of deception. At last, after renewed hesitation, Dantès entered thesecond grotto.The second grotto was lower and more gloomy than the first; the air that couldonly enter by the newly formed opening had the mephitic smell Dantès wassurprised not to find in the outer cavern. He waited in order to allow pure airto displace the foul atmosphere, and then went on.At the left of the opening was a dark and deep angle. But to Dantès’ eyethere was no darkness. He glanced around this second grotto; it was, like thefirst, empty.The treasure, if it existed, was buried in this corner. The time had at lengtharrived; two feet of earth removed, and Dantès’ fate would be decided.He advanced towards the angle, and summoning all his resolution, attacked theground with the pickaxe. At the fifth or sixth blow the pickaxe struck againstan iron substance. Never did funeral knell, never did alarm-bell, produce agreater effect on the hearer. Had Dantès found nothing he could not have becomemore ghastly pale.He again struck his pickaxe into the earth, and encountered the sameresistance, but not the same sound.“It is a casket of wood bound with iron,” thought he.At this moment a shadow passed rapidly before the opening; Dantès seized hisgun, sprang through the opening, and mounted the stair. A wild goat had passedbefore the mouth of the cave, and was feeding at a little distance. This wouldhave been a favorable occasion to secure his dinner; but Dantès feared lest thereport of his gun should attract attention.He thought a moment, cut a branch of a resinous tree, lighted it at the fire atwhich the smugglers had prepared their breakfast, and descended with thistorch.He wished to see everything. He approached the hole he had dug, and now, withthe aid of the torch, saw that his pickaxe had in reality struck against ironand wood. He planted his torch in the ground and resumed his labor.In an instant a space three feet long by two feet broad was cleared, and Dantèscould see an oaken coffer, bound with cut steel; in the middle of the lid hesaw engraved on a silver plate, which was still untarnished, the arms of theSpada family—viz., a sword, en pale, on an oval shield, like allthe Italian armorial bearings, and surmounted by a cardinal’s hat.Dantès easily recognized them, Faria had so often drawn them for him. There wasno longer any doubt: the treasure was there—no one would have been atsuch pains to conceal an empty casket. In an instant he had cleared everyobstacle away, and he saw successively the lock, placed between two padlocks,and the two handles at each end, all carved as things were carved at thatepoch, when art rendered the commonest metals precious.Dantès seized the handles, and strove to lift the coffer; it was impossible. Hesought to open it; lock and padlock were fastened; these faithful guardiansseemed unwilling to surrender their trust. Dantès inserted the sharp end of thepickaxe between the coffer and the lid, and pressing with all his force on thehandle, burst open the fastenings. The hinges yielded in their turn and fell,still holding in their grasp fragments of the wood, and the chest was open.Edmond was seized with vertigo; he cocked his gun and laid it beside him. Hethen closed his eyes as children do in order that they may see in theresplendent night of their own imagination more stars than are visible in thefirmament; then he re-opened them, and stood motionless with amazement.Three compartments divided the coffer. In the first, blazed piles of goldencoin; in the second, were ranged bars of unpolished gold, which possessednothing attractive save their value; in the third, Edmond grasped handfuls ofdiamonds, pearls, and rubies, which, as they fell on one another, sounded likehail against glass.After having touched, felt, examined these treasures, Edmond rushed through thecaverns like a man seized with frenzy; he leaped on a rock, from whence hecould behold the sea. He was alone—alone with these countless, theseunheard-of treasures! Was he awake, or was it but a dream? Was it a transientvision, or was he face to face with reality?He would fain have gazed upon his gold, and yet he had not strength enough; foran instant he leaned his head in his hands as if to prevent his senses fromleaving him, and then rushed madly about the rocks of Monte Cristo, terrifyingthe wild goats and scaring the sea-fowls with his wild cries and gestures; thenhe returned, and, still unable to believe the evidence of his senses, rushedinto the grotto, and found himself before this mine of gold and jewels.This time he fell on his knees, and, clasping his hands convulsively, uttered aprayer intelligible to God alone. He soon became calmer and more happy, foronly now did he begin to realize his felicity.He then set himself to work to count his fortune. There were a thousand ingotsof gold, each weighing from two to three pounds; then he piled up twenty-fivethousand crowns, each worth about eighty francs of our money, and bearing theeffigies of Alexander VI. and his predecessors; and he saw that the complementwas not half empty. And he measured ten double handfuls of pearls, diamonds,and other gems, many of which, mounted by the most famous workmen, werevaluable beyond their intrinsic worth.Dantès saw the light gradually disappear, and fearing to be surprised in thecavern, left it, his gun in his hand. A piece of biscuit and a small quantityof rum formed his supper, and he snatched a few hours’ sleep, lying overthe mouth of the cave.It was a night of joy and terror, such as this man of stupendous emotions hadalready experienced twice or thrice in his lifetime. Chapter 25. TheUnknownDay, for which Dantèshad so eagerly and impatiently waited with open eyes, again dawned. With thefirst light Dantès resumed his search. Again he climbed the rocky height he hadascended the previous evening, and strained his view to catch every peculiarityof the landscape; but it wore the same wild, barren aspect when seen by therays of the morning sun which it had done when surveyed by the fading glimmerof eve.Descending into the grotto, he lifted the stone, filled his pockets with gems,put the box together as well and securely as he could, sprinkled fresh sandover the spot from which it had been taken, and then carefully trod down theearth to give it everywhere a uniform appearance; then, quitting the grotto, hereplaced the stone, heaping on it broken masses of rocks and rough fragments ofcrumbling granite, filling the interstices with earth, into which he deftlyinserted rapidly growing plants, such as the wild myrtle and flowering thorn,then carefully watering these new plantations, he scrupulously effaced everytrace of footsteps, leaving the approach to the cavern as savage-looking anduntrodden as he had found it. This done, he impatiently awaited the return ofhis companions. To wait at Monte Cristo for the purpose of watching like adragon over the almost incalculable riches that had thus fallen into hispossession satisfied not the cravings of his heart, which yearned to return todwell among mankind, and to assume the rank, power, and influence which arealways accorded to wealth—that first and greatest of all the forceswithin the grasp of man.On the sixth day, the smugglers returned. From a distance Dantès recognized therig and handling of La Jeune Amélie, and dragging himself with affecteddifficulty towards the landing-place, he met his companions with an assurancethat, although considerably better than when they quitted him, he stillsuffered acutely from his late accident. He then inquired how they had fared intheir trip. To this question the smugglers replied that, although successful inlanding their cargo in safety, they had scarcely done so when they receivedintelligence that a guard-ship had just quitted the port of Toulon and wascrowding all sail towards them. This obliged them to make all the speed theycould to evade the enemy, when they could but lament the absence of Dantès,whose superior skill in the management of a vessel would have availed them somaterially. In fact, the pursuing vessel had almost overtaken them when,fortunately, night came on, and enabled them to double the Cape of Corsica, andso elude all further pursuit. Upon the whole, however, the trip had beensufficiently successful to satisfy all concerned; while the crew, andparticularly Jacopo, expressed great regrets that Dantès had not been an equalsharer with themselves in the profits, which amounted to no less a sum thanfifty piastres each.Edmond preserved the most admirable self-command, not suffering the faintestindication of a smile to escape him at the enumeration of all the benefits hewould have reaped had he been able to quit the island; but as La JeuneAmélie had merely come to Monte Cristo to fetch him away, he embarked thatsame evening, and proceeded with the captain to Leghorn.Arrived at Leghorn, he repaired to the house of a Jew, a dealer in preciousstones, to whom he disposed of four of his smallest diamonds for five thousandfrancs each. Dantès half feared that such valuable jewels in the hands of apoor sailor like himself might excite suspicion; but the cunning purchaserasked no troublesome questions concerning a bargain by which he gained a roundprofit of at least eighty per cent.The following day Dantès presented Jacopo with an entirely new vessel,accompanying the gift by a donation of one hundred piastres, that he mightprovide himself with a suitable crew and other requisites for his outfit, uponcondition that he would go at once to Marseilles for the purpose of inquiringafter an old man named Louis Dantès, residing in the Allées de Meilhan, andalso a young woman called Mercédès, an inhabitant of the Catalan village.Jacopo could scarcely believe his senses at receiving this magnificent present,which Dantès hastened to account for by saying that he had merely been a sailorfrom whim and a desire to spite his family, who did not allow him as much moneyas he liked to spend; but that on his arrival at Leghorn he had come intopossession of a large fortune, left him by an uncle, whose sole heir he was.The superior education of Dantès gave an air of such extreme probability tothis statement that it never once occurred to Jacopo to doubt its accuracy.The term for which Edmond had engaged to serve on board La Jeune Améliehaving expired, Dantès took leave of the captain, who at first tried all hispowers of persuasion to induce him to remain as one of the crew, but havingbeen told the history of the legacy, he ceased to importune him further.The following morning Jacopo set sail for Marseilles, with directions fromDantès to join him at the Island of Monte Cristo.Having seen Jacopo fairly out of the harbor, Dantès proceeded to make his finaladieus on board La Jeune Amélie, distributing so liberal a gratuityamong her crew as to secure for him the good wishes of all, and expressions ofcordial interest in all that concerned him. To the captain he promised to writewhen he had made up his mind as to his future plans. Then Dantès departed forGenoa.At the moment of his arrival a small yacht was under trial in the bay; thisyacht had been built by order of an Englishman, who, having heard that theGenoese excelled all other builders along the shores of the Mediterranean inthe construction of fast-sailing vessels, was desirous of possessing a specimenof their skill; the price agreed upon between the Englishman and the Genoesebuilder was forty thousand francs. Dantès, struck with the beauty andcapability of the little vessel, applied to its owner to transfer it to him,offering sixty thousand francs, upon condition that he should be allowed totake immediate possession. The proposal was too advantageous to be refused, themore so as the person for whom the yacht was intended had gone upon a tourthrough Switzerland, and was not expected back in less than three weeks or amonth, by which time the builder reckoned upon being able to complete another.A bargain was therefore struck. Dantès led the owner of the yacht to thedwelling of a Jew; retired with the latter for a few minutes to a small backparlor, and upon their return the Jew counted out to the shipbuilder the sum ofsixty thousand francs in bright gold pieces.The delighted builder then offered his services in providing a suitable crewfor the little vessel, but this Dantès declined with many thanks, saying he wasaccustomed to cruise about quite alone, and his principal pleasure consisted inmanaging his yacht himself; the only thing the builder could oblige him inwould be to contrive a sort of secret closet in the cabin at his bed’shead, the closet to contain three divisions, so constructed as to be concealedfrom all but himself. The builder cheerfully undertook the commission, andpromised to have these secret places completed by the next day, Dantèsfurnishing the dimensions and plan in accordance with which they were to beconstructed.Two hours afterward Dantès sailed from the port of Genoa, under the inspectionof an immense crowd drawn together by curiosity to see the rich Spanishnobleman who preferred managing his own yacht. But their wonder was soonchanged to admiration at seeing the perfect skill with which Dantès handled thehelm. The boat, indeed, seemed to be animated with almost human intelligence,so promptly did it obey the slightest touch; and Dantès required but a shorttrial of his beautiful craft to acknowledge that the Genoese had not withoutreason attained their high reputation in the art of shipbuilding.The spectators followed the little vessel with their eyes as long as itremained visible; they then turned their conjectures upon her probabledestination. Some insisted she was making for Corsica, others the Island ofElba; bets were offered to any amount that she was bound for Spain; whileAfrica was positively reported by many persons as her intended course; but noone thought of Monte Cristo.Yet thither it was that Dantès guided his vessel, and at Monte Cristo hearrived at the close of the second day; his boat had proved herself afirst-class sailor, and had come the distance from Genoa in thirty-five hours.Dantès had carefully noted the general appearance of the shore, and, instead oflanding at the usual place, he dropped anchor in the little creek. The islandwas utterly deserted, and bore no evidence of having been visited since he wentaway; his treasure was just as he had left it.Early on the following morning he commenced the removal of his riches, and erenightfall the whole of his immense wealth was safely deposited in thecompartments of the secret locker.A week passed by. Dantès employed it in manœuvring his yacht round the island,studying it as a skilful horseman would the animal he destined for someimportant service, till at the end of that time he was perfectly conversantwith its good and bad qualities. The former Dantès proposed to augment, thelatter to remedy.Upon the eighth day he discerned a small vessel under full sail approachingMonte Cristo. As it drew near, he recognized it as the boat he had given toJacopo. He immediately signalled it. His signal was returned, and in two hoursafterwards the new-comer lay at anchor beside the yacht.A mournful answer awaited each of Edmond’s eager inquiries as to theinformation Jacopo had obtained. Old Dantès was dead, and Mercédès haddisappeared.Dantès listened to these melancholy tidings with outward calmness; but, leapinglightly ashore, he signified his desire to be quite alone. In a couple of hourshe returned. Two of the men from Jacopo’s boat came on board the yacht toassist in navigating it, and he gave orders that she should be steered directto Marseilles. For his father’s death he was in some manner prepared; buthe knew not how to account for the mysterious disappearance of Mercédès.Without divulging his secret, Dantès could not give sufficiently clearinstructions to an agent. There were, besides, other particulars he wasdesirous of ascertaining, and those were of a nature he alone could investigatein a manner satisfactory to himself. His looking-glass had assured him, duringhis stay at Leghorn, that he ran no risk of recognition; moreover, he had nowthe means of adopting any disguise he thought proper. One fine morning, then,his yacht, followed by the little fishing-boat, boldly entered the port ofMarseilles, and anchored exactly opposite the spot from whence, on thenever-to-be-forgotten night of his departure for the Château d’If, he hadbeen put on board the boat destined to convey him thither.Still Dantès could not view without a shudder the approach of a gendarme whoaccompanied the officers deputed to demand his bill of health ere the yacht waspermitted to hold communication with the shore; but with that perfectself-possession he had acquired during his acquaintance with Faria, Dantèscoolly presented an English passport he had obtained from Leghorn, and as thisgave him a standing which a French passport would not have afforded, he wasinformed that there existed no obstacle to his immediate debarkation.The first person to attract the attention of Dantès, as he landed on theCanebière, was one of the crew belonging to the Pharaon. Edmond welcomedthe meeting with this fellow—who had been one of his own sailors—asa sure means of testing the extent of the change which time had worked in hisown appearance. Going straight towards him, he propounded a variety ofquestions on different subjects, carefully watching the man’s countenanceas he did so; but not a word or look implied that he had the slightest idea ofever having seen before the person with whom he was then conversing.Giving the sailor a piece of money in return for his civility, Dantès proceededonwards; but ere he had gone many steps he heard the man loudly calling him tostop.Dantès instantly turned to meet him.“I beg your pardon, sir,” said the honest fellow, in almostbreathless haste, “but I believe you made a mistake; you intended to giveme a two-franc piece, and see, you gave me a double Napoleon.”“Thank you, my good friend. I see that I have made a trifling mistake, asyou say; but by way of rewarding your honesty I give you another doubleNapoleon, that you may drink to my health, and be able to ask your messmates tojoin you.”So extreme was the surprise of the sailor, that he was unable even to thankEdmond, whose receding figure he continued to gaze after in speechlessastonishment. “Some nabob from India,” was his comment.Dantès, meanwhile, went on his way. Each step he trod oppressed his heart withfresh emotion; his first and most indelible recollections were there; not atree, not a street, that he passed but seemed filled with dear and cherishedmemories. And thus he proceeded onwards till he arrived at the end of the Ruede Noailles, from whence a full view of the Allées de Meilhan was obtained. Atthis spot, so pregnant with fond and filial remembrances, his heart beat almostto bursting, his knees tottered under him, a mist floated over his sight, andhad he not clung for support to one of the trees, he would inevitably havefallen to the ground and been crushed beneath the many vehicles continuallypassing there. Recovering himself, however, he wiped the perspiration from hisbrows, and stopped not again till he found himself at the door of the house inwhich his father had lived.The nasturtiums and other plants, which his father had delighted to trainbefore his window, had all disappeared from the upper part of the house.Leaning against the tree, he gazed thoughtfully for a time at the upper storiesof the shabby little house. Then he advanced to the door, and asked whetherthere were any rooms to be let. Though answered in the negative, he begged soearnestly to be permitted to visit those on the fifth floor, that, in despiteof the oft-repeated assurance of the concierge that they were occupied,Dantès succeeded in inducing the man to go up to the tenants, and askpermission for a gentleman to be allowed to look at them.The tenants of the humble lodging were a young couple who had been scarcelymarried a week; and seeing them, Dantès sighed heavily. Nothing in the twosmall chambers forming the apartments remained as it had been in the time ofthe elder Dantès; the very paper was different, while the articles ofantiquated furniture with which the rooms had been filled in Edmond’stime had all disappeared; the four walls alone remained as he had left them.The bed belonging to the present occupants was placed as the former owner ofthe chamber had been accustomed to have his; and, in spite of his efforts toprevent it, the eyes of Edmond were suffused in tears as he reflected that onthat spot the old man had breathed his last, vainly calling for his son.The young couple gazed with astonishment at the sight of their visitor’semotion, and wondered to see the large tears silently chasing each other downhis otherwise stern and immovable features; but they felt the sacredness of hisgrief, and kindly refrained from questioning him as to its cause, while, withinstinctive delicacy, they left him to indulge his sorrow alone.When he withdrew from the scene of his painful recollections, they bothaccompanied him downstairs, reiterating their hope that he would come againwhenever he pleased, and assuring him that their poor dwelling would ever beopen to him.As Edmond passed the door on the fourth floor, he paused to inquire whetherCaderousse the tailor still dwelt there; but he received for reply, that theperson in question had got into difficulties, and at the present time kept asmall inn on the route from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.Having obtained the address of the person to whom the house in the Allées deMeilhan belonged, Dantès next proceeded thither, and, under the name of LordWilmore (the name and title inscribed on his passport), purchased the smalldwelling for the sum of twenty-five thousand francs, at least ten thousand morethan it was worth; but had its owner asked half a million, it wouldunhesitatingly have been given.The very same day the occupants of the apartments on the fifth floor of thehouse, now become the property of Dantès, were duly informed by the notary whohad arranged the necessary transfer of deeds, etc., that the new landlord gavethem their choice of any of the rooms in the house, without the leastaugmentation of rent, upon condition of their giving instant possession of thetwo small chambers they at present inhabited.This strange event aroused great wonder and curiosity in the neighborhood ofthe Allées de Meilhan, and a multitude of theories were afloat, none of whichwas anywhere near the truth. But what raised public astonishment to a climax,and set all conjecture at defiance, was the knowledge that the same strangerwho had in the morning visited the Allées de Meilhan had been seen in theevening walking in the little village of the Catalans, and afterwards observedto enter a poor fisherman’s hut, and to pass more than an hour ininquiring after persons who had either been dead or gone away for more thanfifteen or sixteen years.But on the following day the family from whom all these particulars had beenasked received a handsome present, consisting of an entirely new fishing-boat,with two seines and a tender.The delighted recipients of these munificent gifts would gladly have poured outtheir thanks to their generous benefactor, but they had seen him, upon quittingthe hut, merely give some orders to a sailor, and then springing lightly onhorseback, leave Marseilles by the Porte d’Aix. Chapter 26. The Pont duGard InnSuch of my readers ashave made a pedestrian excursion to the south of France may perchance havenoticed, about midway between the town of Beaucaire and the village ofBellegarde,—a little nearer to the former than to the latter,—asmall roadside inn, from the front of which hung, creaking and flapping in thewind, a sheet of tin covered with a grotesque representation of the Pont duGard. This modern place of entertainment stood on the left-hand side of thepost road, and backed upon the Rhône. It also boasted of what in Languedoc isstyled a garden, consisting of a small plot of ground, on the side opposite tothe main entrance reserved for the reception of guests. A few dingy olives andstunted fig-trees struggled hard for existence, but their withered dustyfoliage abundantly proved how unequal was the conflict. Between these sicklyshrubs grew a scanty supply of garlic, tomatoes, and eschalots; while, lone andsolitary, like a forgotten sentinel, a tall pine raised its melancholy head inone of the corners of this unattractive spot, and displayed its flexible stemand fan-shaped summit dried and cracked by the fierce heat of the sub-tropicalsun.All these trees, great or small, were turned in the direction to which theMistral blows, one of the three curses of Provence, the others being theDurance and the Parliament.In the surrounding plain, which more resembled a dusty lake than solid ground,were scattered a few miserable stalks of wheat, the effect, no doubt, of acurious desire on the part of the agriculturists of the country to see whethersuch a thing as the raising of grain in those parched regions was practicable.Each stalk served as a perch for a grasshopper, which regaled the passers-bythrough this Egyptian scene with its strident, monotonous note.For about seven or eight years the little tavern had been kept by a man and hiswife, with two servants,—a chambermaid named Trinette, and a hostlercalled Pecaud. This small staff was quite equal to all the requirements, for acanal between Beaucaire and Aiguemortes had revolutionized transportation bysubstituting boats for the cart and the stagecoach. And, as though to add tothe daily misery which this prosperous canal inflicted on the unfortunateinnkeeper, whose utter ruin it was fast accomplishing, it was situated betweenthe Rhône from which it had its source and the post-road it had depleted, not ahundred steps from the inn, of which we have given a brief but faithfuldescription.The innkeeper himself was a man of from forty to fifty-five years of age, tall,strong, and bony, a perfect specimen of the natives of those southernlatitudes; he had dark, sparkling, and deep-set eyes, hooked nose, and teethwhite as those of a carnivorous animal; his hair, like his beard, which he woreunder his chin, was thick and curly, and in spite of his age but slightlyinterspersed with a few silvery threads. His naturally dark complexion hadassumed a still further shade of brown from the habit the unfortunate man hadacquired of stationing himself from morning till eve at the threshold of hisdoor, on the lookout for guests who seldom came, yet there he stood, day afterday, exposed to the meridional rays of a burning sun, with no other protectionfor his head than a red handkerchief twisted around it, after the manner of theSpanish muleteers. This man was our old acquaintance, Gaspard Caderousse.His wife, on the contrary, whose maiden name had been Madeleine Radelle, waspale, meagre, and sickly-looking. Born in the neighborhood of Arles, she hadshared in the beauty for which its women are proverbial; but that beauty hadgradually withered beneath the devastating influence of the slow fever soprevalent among dwellers by the ponds of Aiguemortes and the marshes ofCamargue. She remained nearly always in her second-floor chamber, shivering inher chair, or stretched languid and feeble on her bed, while her husband kepthis daily watch at the door—a duty he performed with so much the greaterwillingness, as it saved him the necessity of listening to the endless plaintsand murmurs of his helpmate, who never saw him without breaking out into bitterinvectives against fate; to all of which her husband would calmly return anunvarying reply, in these philosophic words:“Hush, La Carconte. It is God’s pleasure that things should beso.”The sobriquet of La Carconte had been bestowed on Madeleine Radelle from thefact that she had been born in a village, so called, situated between Salon andLambesc; and as a custom existed among the inhabitants of that part of Francewhere Caderousse lived of styling every person by some particular anddistinctive appellation, her husband had bestowed on her the name of LaCarconte in place of her sweet and euphonious name of Madeleine, which, in allprobability, his rude gutteral language would not have enabled him topronounce.Still, let it not be supposed that amid this affected resignation to the willof Providence, the unfortunate innkeeper did not writhe under the double miseryof seeing the hateful canal carry off his customers and his profits, and thedaily infliction of his peevish partner’s murmurs and lamentations.Like other dwellers in the south, he was a man of sober habits and moderatedesires, but fond of external show, vain, and addicted to display. During thedays of his prosperity, not a festivity took place without himself and wifebeing among the spectators. He dressed in the picturesque costume worn upongrand occasions by the inhabitants of the south of France, bearing equalresemblance to the style adopted both by the Catalans and Andalusians; while LaCarconte displayed the charming fashion prevalent among the women of Arles, amode of attire borrowed equally from Greece and Arabia. But, by degrees,watch-chains, necklaces, parti-colored scarves, embroidered bodices, velvetvests, elegantly worked stockings, striped gaiters, and silver buckles for theshoes, all disappeared; and Gaspard Caderousse, unable to appear abroad in hispristine splendor, had given up any further participation in the pomps andvanities, both for himself and wife, although a bitter feeling of enviousdiscontent filled his mind as the sound of mirth and merry music from thejoyous revellers reached even the miserable hostelry to which he still clung,more for the shelter than the profit it afforded.Caderousse, then, was, as usual, at his place of observation before the door,his eyes glancing listlessly from a piece of closely shaven grass—onwhich some fowls were industriously, though fruitlessly, endeavoring to turn upsome grain or insect suited to their palate—to the deserted road, whichled away to the north and south, when he was aroused by the shrill voice of hiswife, and grumbling to himself as he went, he mounted to her chamber, firsttaking care, however, to set the entrance door wide open, as an invitation toany chance traveller who might be passing.At the moment Caderousse quitted his sentry-like watch before the door, theroad on which he so eagerly strained his sight was void and lonely as a desertat midday. There it lay stretching out into one interminable line of dust andsand, with its sides bordered by tall, meagre trees, altogether presenting souninviting an appearance, that no one in his senses could have imagined thatany traveller, at liberty to regulate his hours for journeying, would choose toexpose himself in such a formidable Sahara.Nevertheless, had Caderousse but retained his post a few minutes longer, hemight have caught a dim outline of something approaching from the direction ofBellegarde; as the moving object drew nearer, he would easily have perceivedthat it consisted of a man and horse, between whom the kindest and most amiableunderstanding appeared to exist. The horse was of Hungarian breed, and ambledalong at an easy pace. His rider was a priest, dressed in black, and wearing athree-cornered hat; and, spite of the ardent rays of a noonday sun, the paircame on with a fair degree of rapidity.Having arrived before the Pont du Gard, the horse stopped, but whether for hisown pleasure or that of his rider would have been difficult to say. Howeverthat might have been, the priest, dismounting, led his steed by the bridle insearch of some place to which he could secure him. Availing himself of a handlethat projected from a half-fallen door, he tied the animal safely and havingdrawn a red cotton handkerchief, from his pocket, wiped away the perspirationthat streamed from his brow, then, advancing to the door, struck thrice withthe end of his iron-shod stick.At this unusual sound, a huge black dog came rushing to meet the daringassailant of his ordinarily tranquil abode, snarling and displaying his sharpwhite teeth with a determined hostility that abundantly proved how little hewas accustomed to society. At that moment a heavy footstep was heard descendingthe wooden staircase that led from the upper floor, and, with many bows andcourteous smiles, the host of the Pont du Gard besought his guest to enter.“You are welcome, sir, most welcome!” repeated the astonishedCaderousse. “Now, then, Margotin,” cried he, speaking to the dog,“will you be quiet? Pray don’t heed him, sir!—he only barks,he never bites. I make no doubt a glass of good wine would be acceptable thisdreadfully hot day.” Then perceiving for the first time the garb of thetraveller he had to entertain, Caderousse hastily exclaimed: “A thousandpardons! I really did not observe whom I had the honor to receive under my poorroof. What would the abbé please to have? What refreshment can I offer? All Ihave is at his service.”The priest gazed on the person addressing him with a long and searchinggaze—there even seemed a disposition on his part to court a similarscrutiny on the part of the innkeeper; then, observing in the countenance ofthe latter no other expression than extreme surprise at his own want ofattention to an inquiry so courteously worded, he deemed it as well toterminate this dumb show, and therefore said, speaking with a strong Italianaccent, “You are, I presume, M. Caderousse?”“Yes, sir,” answered the host, even more surprised at the questionthan he had been by the silence which had preceded it; “I am GaspardCaderousse, at your service.”“Gaspard Caderousse,” rejoined the priest.“Yes,—Christian and surname are the same. You formerly lived, Ibelieve in the Allées de Meilhan, on the fourth floor?”“I did.”“And you followed the business of a tailor?”“True, I was a tailor, till the trade fell off. It is so hot atMarseilles, that really I believe that the respectable inhabitants will in timego without any clothing whatever. But talking of heat, is there nothing I canoffer you by way of refreshment?”“Yes; let me have a bottle of your best wine, and then, with yourpermission, we will resume our conversation from where we left off.”“As you please, sir,” said Caderousse, who, anxious not to lose thepresent opportunity of finding a customer for one of the few bottles of Cahorsstill remaining in his possession, hastily raised a trap-door in the floor ofthe apartment they were in, which served both as parlor and kitchen.Upon issuing forth from his subterranean retreat at the expiration of fiveminutes, he found the abbé seated upon a wooden stool, leaning his elbow on atable, while Margotin, whose animosity seemed appeased by the unusual commandof the traveller for refreshments, had crept up to him, and had establishedhimself very comfortably between his knees, his long, skinny neck resting onhis lap, while his dim eye was fixed earnestly on the traveller’s face.“Are you quite alone?” inquired the guest, as Caderousse placedbefore him the bottle of wine and a glass.“Quite, quite alone,” replied the man—“or, at least,practically so, for my poor wife, who is the only person in the house besidesmyself, is laid up with illness, and unable to render me the least assistance,poor thing!”“You are married, then?” said the priest, with a show of interest,glancing round as he spoke at the scanty furnishings of the apartment.“Ah, sir,” said Caderousse with a sigh, “it is easy toperceive I am not a rich man; but in this world a man does not thrive thebetter for being honest.” The abbé fixed on him a searching, penetratingglance.“Yes, honest—I can certainly say that much for myself,”continued the innkeeper, fairly sustaining the scrutiny of the abbé’sgaze; “I can boast with truth of being an honest man; and,”continued he significantly, with a hand on his breast and shaking his head,“that is more than everyone can say nowadays.”“So much the better for you, if what you assert be true,” said theabbé; “for I am firmly persuaded that, sooner or later, the good will berewarded, and the wicked punished.”“Such words as those belong to your profession,” answeredCaderousse, “and you do well to repeat them; but,” added he, with abitter expression of countenance, “one is free to believe them or not, asone pleases.”“You are wrong to speak thus,” said the abbé; “and perhaps Imay, in my own person, be able to prove to you how completely you are inerror.”“What mean you?” inquired Caderousse with a look of surprise.“In the first place, I must be satisfied that you are the person I am insearch of.”“What proofs do you require?”“Did you, in the year 1814 or 1815, know anything of a young sailor namedDantès?”“Dantès? Did I know poor dear Edmond? Why, Edmond Dantès and myself wereintimate friends!” exclaimed Caderousse, whose countenance flushed darklyas he caught the penetrating gaze of the abbé fixed on him, while the clear,calm eye of the questioner seemed to dilate with feverish scrutiny.“You remind me,” said the priest, “that the young manconcerning whom I asked you was said to bear the name of Edmond.”“Said to bear the name!” repeated Caderousse, becoming excited andeager. “Why, he was so called as truly as I myself bore the appellationof Gaspard Caderousse; but tell me, I pray, what has become of poor Edmond? Didyou know him? Is he alive and at liberty? Is he prosperous and happy?”“He died a more wretched, hopeless, heart-broken prisoner than the felonswho pay the penalty of their crimes at the galleys of Toulon.”A deadly pallor followed the flush on the countenance of Caderousse, who turnedaway, and the priest saw him wiping the tears from his eyes with the corner ofthe red handkerchief twisted round his head.“Poor fellow, poor fellow!” murmured Caderousse. “Well,there, sir, is another proof that good people are never rewarded on this earth,and that none but the wicked prosper. Ah,” continued Caderousse, speakingin the highly colored language of the South, “the world grows worse andworse. Why does not God, if he really hates the wicked, as he is said to do,send down brimstone and fire, and consume them altogether?”“You speak as though you had loved this young Dantès,” observed theabbé, without taking any notice of his companion’s vehemence.“And so I did,” replied Caderousse; “though once, I confess,I envied him his good fortune. But I swear to you, sir, I swear to you, byeverything a man holds dear, I have, since then, deeply and sincerely lamentedhis unhappy fate.”There was a brief silence, during which the fixed, searching eye of the abbéwas employed in scrutinizing the agitated features of the innkeeper.“You knew the poor lad, then?” continued Caderousse.“I was called to see him on his dying bed, that I might administer to himthe consolations of religion.”“And of what did he die?” asked Caderousse in a choking voice.“Of what, think you, do young and strong men die in prison, when theyhave scarcely numbered their thirtieth year, unless it be ofimprisonment?” Caderousse wiped away the large beads of perspiration thatgathered on his brow.“But the strangest part of the story is,” resumed the abbé,“that Dantès, even in his dying moments, swore by his crucified Redeemer,that he was utterly ignorant of the cause of his detention.”“And so he was,” murmured Caderousse. “How should he havebeen otherwise? Ah, sir, the poor fellow told you the truth.”“And for that reason, he besought me to try and clear up a mystery he hadnever been able to penetrate, and to clear his memory should any foul spot orstain have fallen on it.”And here the look of the abbé, becoming more and more fixed, seemed to restwith ill-concealed satisfaction on the gloomy depression which was rapidlyspreading over the countenance of Caderousse.“A rich Englishman,” continued the abbé, “who had been hiscompanion in misfortune, but had been released from prison during the secondrestoration, was possessed of a diamond of immense value; this jewel hebestowed on Dantès upon himself quitting the prison, as a mark of his gratitudefor the kindness and brotherly care with which Dantès had nursed him in asevere illness he underwent during his confinement. Instead of employing thisdiamond in attempting to bribe his jailers, who might only have taken it andthen betrayed him to the governor, Dantès carefully preserved it, that in theevent of his getting out of prison he might have wherewithal to live, for thesale of such a diamond would have quite sufficed to make his fortune.”“Then, I suppose,” asked Caderousse, with eager, glowing looks,“that it was a stone of immense value?”“Why, everything is relative,” answered the abbé. “To one inEdmond’s position the diamond certainly was of great value. It wasestimated at fifty thousand francs.”“Bless me!” exclaimed Caderousse, “fifty thousand francs!Surely the diamond was as large as a nut to be worth all that.”“No,” replied the abbé, “it was not of such a size as that;but you shall judge for yourself. I have it with me.”The sharp gaze of Caderousse was instantly directed towards the priest’sgarments, as though hoping to discover the location of the treasure. Calmlydrawing forth from his pocket a small box covered with black shagreen, the abbéopened it, and displayed to the dazzled eyes of Caderousse the sparkling jewelit contained, set in a ring of admirable workmanship.“And that diamond,” cried Caderousse, almost breathless with eageradmiration, “you say, is worth fifty thousand francs?”“It is, without the setting, which is also valuable,” replied theabbé, as he closed the box, and returned it to his pocket, while its brillianthues seemed still to dance before the eyes of the fascinated innkeeper.“But how comes the diamond in your possession, sir? Did Edmond make youhis heir?”“No, merely his testamentary executor. ‘I once possessed four dearand faithful friends, besides the maiden to whom I was betrothed’ hesaid; ‘and I feel convinced they have all unfeignedly grieved over myloss. The name of one of the four friends is Caderousse.’” Theinnkeeper shivered.“‘Another of the number,’” continued the abbé, withoutseeming to notice the emotion of Caderousse, “‘is called Danglars;and the third, in spite of being my rival, entertained a very sincere affectionfor me.’”A fiendish smile played over the features of Caderousse, who was about to breakin upon the abbé’s speech, when the latter, waving his hand, said,“Allow me to finish first, and then if you have any observations to make,you can do so afterwards. ‘The third of my friends, although my rival,was much attached to me,—his name was Fernand; that of my betrothedwas’—Stay, stay,” continued the abbé, “I have forgottenwhat he called her.”“Mercédès,” said Caderousse eagerly.“True,” said the abbé, with a stifled sigh, “Mercédès itwas.”“Go on,” urged Caderousse.“Bring me a carafe of water,” said the abbé.Caderousse quickly performed the stranger’s bidding; and after pouringsome into a glass, and slowly swallowing its contents, the abbé, resuming hisusual placidity of manner, said, as he placed his empty glass on the table:“Where did we leave off?”“The name of Edmond’s betrothed was Mercédès.”“To be sure. ‘You will go to Marseilles,’ saidDantès,—for you understand, I repeat his words just as he uttered them.Do you understand?”“Perfectly.”“‘You will sell this diamond; you will divide the money into fiveequal parts, and give an equal portion to these good friends, the only personswho have loved me upon earth.’”“But why into five parts?” asked Caderousse; “you onlymentioned four persons.”“Because the fifth is dead, as I hear. The fifth sharer in Edmond’sbequest, was his own father.”“Too true, too true!” ejaculated Caderousse, almost suffocated bythe contending passions which assailed him, “the poor old man diddie.”“I learned so much at Marseilles,” replied the abbé, making astrong effort to appear indifferent; “but from the length of time thathas elapsed since the death of the elder Dantès, I was unable to obtain anyparticulars of his end. Can you enlighten me on that point?”“I do not know who could if I could not,” said Caderousse.“Why, I lived almost on the same floor with the poor old man. Ah, yes,about a year after the disappearance of his son the poor old man died.”“Of what did he die?”“Why, the doctors called his complaint gastro-enteritis, I believe; hisacquaintances say he died of grief; but I, who saw him in his dying moments, Isay he died of——”Caderousse paused.“Of what?” asked the priest, anxiously and eagerly.“Why, of downright starvation.”“Starvation!” exclaimed the abbé, springing from his seat.“Why, the vilest animals are not suffered to die by such a death as that.The very dogs that wander houseless and homeless in the streets find somepitying hand to cast them a mouthful of bread; and that a man, a Christian,should be allowed to perish of hunger in the midst of other men who callthemselves Christians, is too horrible for belief. Oh, it isimpossible!—utterly impossible!”“What I have said, I have said,” answered Caderousse.“And you are a fool for having said anything about it,” said avoice from the top of the stairs. “Why should you meddle with what doesnot concern you?”The two men turned quickly, and saw the sickly countenance of La Carcontepeering between the baluster rails; attracted by the sound of voices, she hadfeebly dragged herself down the stairs, and, seated on the lower step, head onknees, she had listened to the foregoing conversation.“Mind your own business, wife,” replied Caderousse sharply.“This gentleman asks me for information, which common politeness will notpermit me to refuse.”“Politeness, you simpleton!” retorted La Carconte. “What haveyou to do with politeness, I should like to know? Better study a little commonprudence. How do you know the motives that person may have for trying toextract all he can from you?”“I pledge you my word, madam,” said the abbé, “that myintentions are good; and that your husband can incur no risk, provided heanswers me candidly.”“Ah, that’s all very fine,” retorted the woman.“Nothing is easier than to begin with fair promises and assurances ofnothing to fear; but when poor, silly folks, like my husband there, have beenpersuaded to tell all they know, the promises and assurances of safety arequickly forgotten; and at some moment when nobody is expecting it, beholdtrouble and misery, and all sorts of persecutions, are heaped on theunfortunate wretches, who cannot even see whence all their afflictionscome.”“Nay, nay, my good woman, make yourself perfectly easy, I beg of you.Whatever evils may befall you, they will not be occasioned by myinstrumentality, that I solemnly promise you.”La Carconte muttered a few inarticulate words, then let her head again dropupon her knees, and went into a fit of ague, leaving the two speakers to resumethe conversation, but remaining so as to be able to hear every word theyuttered. Again the abbé had been obliged to swallow a draught of water to calmthe emotions that threatened to overpower him.When he had sufficiently recovered himself, he said, “It appears, then,that the miserable old man you were telling me of was forsaken by everyone.Surely, had not such been the case, he would not have perished by so dreadful adeath.”“Why, he was not altogether forsaken,” continued Caderousse,“for Mercédès the Catalan and Monsieur Morrel were very kind to him; butsomehow the poor old man had contracted a profound hatred for Fernand—thevery person,” added Caderousse with a bitter smile, “that you namedjust now as being one of Dantès’ faithful and attached friends.”“And was he not so?” asked the abbé.“Gaspard, Gaspard!” murmured the woman, from her seat on thestairs, “mind what you are saying!”Caderousse made no reply to these words, though evidently irritated and annoyedby the interruption, but, addressing the abbé, said, “Can a man befaithful to another whose wife he covets and desires for himself? But Dantèswas so honorable and true in his own nature, that he believed everybody’sprofessions of friendship. Poor Edmond, he was cruelly deceived; but it wasfortunate that he never knew, or he might have found it more difficult, when onhis deathbed, to pardon his enemies. And, whatever people may say,”continued Caderousse, in his native language, which was not altogether devoidof rude poetry, “I cannot help being more frightened at the idea of themalediction of the dead than the hatred of the living.”“Imbecile!” exclaimed La Carconte.“Do you, then, know in what manner Fernand injured Dantès?”inquired the abbé of Caderousse.“Do I? No one better.”“Speak out then, say what it was!”“Gaspard!” cried La Carconte, “do as you will; you aremaster—but if you take my advice you’ll hold your tongue.”“Well, wife,” replied Caderousse, “I don’t know butwhat you’re right!”“So you will say nothing?” asked the abbé.“Why, what good would it do?” asked Caderousse. “If the poorlad were living, and came to me and begged that I would candidly tell whichwere his true and which his false friends, why, perhaps, I should not hesitate.But you tell me he is no more, and therefore can have nothing to do with hatredor revenge, so let all such feeling be buried with him.”“You prefer, then,” said the abbé, “that I should bestow onmen you say are false and treacherous, the reward intended for faithfulfriendship?”“That is true enough,” returned Caderousse. “You say truly,the gift of poor Edmond was not meant for such traitors as Fernand andDanglars; besides, what would it be to them? no more than a drop of water inthe ocean.”“Remember,” chimed in La Carconte, “those two could crush youat a single blow!”“How so?” inquired the abbé. “Are these persons, then, sorich and powerful?”“Do you not know their history?”“I do not. Pray relate it to me!”Caderousse seemed to reflect for a few moments, then said, “No, truly, itwould take up too much time.”“Well, my good friend,” returned the abbé, in a tone that indicatedutter indifference on his part, “you are at liberty, either to speak orbe silent, just as you please; for my own part, I respect your scruples andadmire your sentiments; so let the matter end. I shall do my duty asconscientiously as I can, and fulfil my promise to the dying man. My firstbusiness will be to dispose of this diamond.”So saying, the abbé again drew the small box from his pocket, opened it, andcontrived to hold it in such a light, that a bright flash of brilliant huespassed before the dazzled gaze of Caderousse.“Wife, wife!” cried he in a hoarse voice, “come here!”“Diamond!” exclaimed La Carconte, rising and descending to thechamber with a tolerably firm step; “what diamond are you talkingabout?”“Why, did you not hear all we said?” inquired Caderousse. “Itis a beautiful diamond left by poor Edmond Dantès, to be sold, and the moneydivided between his father, Mercédès, his betrothed bride, Fernand, Danglars,and myself. The jewel is worth at least fifty thousand francs.”“Oh, what a magnificent jewel!” cried the astonished woman.“The fifth part of the profits from this stone belongs to us then, doesit not?” asked Caderousse.“It does,” replied the abbé; “with the addition of an equaldivision of that part intended for the elder Dantès, which I believe myself atliberty to divide equally with the four survivors.”“And why among us four?” inquired Caderousse.“As being the friends Edmond esteemed most faithful and devoted tohim.”“I don’t call those friends who betray and ruin you,”murmured the wife in her turn, in a low, muttering voice.“Of course not!” rejoined Caderousse quickly; “no more do I,and that was what I was observing to this gentleman just now. I said I lookedupon it as a sacrilegious profanation to reward treachery, perhapscrime.”“Remember,” answered the abbé calmly, as he replaced the jewel andits case in the pocket of his cassock, “it is your fault, not mine, thatI do so. You will have the goodness to furnish me with the address of bothFernand and Danglars, in order that I may execute Edmond’s lastwishes.”The agitation of Caderousse became extreme, and large drops of perspirationrolled from his heated brow. As he saw the abbé rise from his seat and gotowards the door, as though to ascertain if his horse were sufficientlyrefreshed to continue his journey, Caderousse and his wife exchanged looks ofdeep meaning.“There, you see, wife,” said the former, “this splendiddiamond might all be ours, if we chose!”“Do you believe it?”“Why, surely a man of his holy profession would not deceive us!”“Well,” replied La Carconte, “do as you like. For my part, Iwash my hands of the affair.”So saying, she once more climbed the staircase leading to her chamber, her bodyconvulsed with chills, and her teeth rattling in her head, in spite of theintense heat of the weather. Arrived at the top stair, she turned round, andcalled out, in a warning tone, to her husband, “Gaspard, consider wellwhat you are about to do!”“I have both reflected and decided,” answered he.La Carconte then entered her chamber, the flooring of which creaked beneath herheavy, uncertain tread, as she proceeded towards her armchair, into which shefell as though exhausted.“Well,” asked the abbé, as he returned to the apartment below,“what have you made up your mind to do?”“To tell you all I know,” was the reply.“I certainly think you act wisely in so doing,” said the priest.“Not because I have the least desire to learn anything you may please toconceal from me, but simply that if, through your assistance, I coulddistribute the legacy according to the wishes of the testator, why, so much thebetter, that is all.”“I hope it may be so,” replied Caderousse, his face flushed withcupidity.“I am all attention,” said the abbé.“Stop a minute,” answered Caderousse; “we might beinterrupted in the most interesting part of my story, which would be a pity;and it is as well that your visit hither should be made known only toourselves.”With these words he went stealthily to the door, which he closed, and, by wayof still greater precaution, bolted and barred it, as he was accustomed to doat night.During this time the abbé had chosen his place for listening at his ease. Heremoved his seat into a corner of the room, where he himself would be in deepshadow, while the light would be fully thrown on the narrator; then, with headbent down and hands clasped, or rather clenched together, he prepared to givehis whole attention to Caderousse, who seated himself on the little stool,exactly opposite to him.“Remember, this is no affair of mine,” said the trembling voice ofLa Carconte, as though through the flooring of her chamber she viewed the scenethat was enacting below.“Enough, enough!” replied Caderousse; “say no more about it;I will take all the consequences upon myself.”And he began his story. Chapter 27. The StoryFirst, sir,” saidCaderousse, “you must make me a promise.”“What is that?” inquired the abbé.“Why, if you ever make use of the details I am about to give you, thatyou will never let anyone know that it was I who supplied them; for the personsof whom I am about to talk are rich and powerful, and if they only laid thetips of their fingers on me, I should break to pieces like glass.”“Make yourself easy, my friend,” replied the abbé. “I am apriest, and confessions die in my breast. Recollect, our only desire is tocarry out, in a fitting manner, the last wishes of our friend. Speak, then,without reserve, as without hatred; tell the truth, the whole truth; I do notknow, never may know, the persons of whom you are about to speak; besides, I aman Italian, and not a Frenchman, and belong to God, and not to man, and I shallshortly retire to my convent, which I have only quitted to fulfil the lastwishes of a dying man.”This positive assurance seemed to give Caderousse a little courage.“Well, then, under these circumstances,” said Caderousse, “Iwill, I even believe I ought to undeceive you as to the friendship which poorEdmond thought so sincere and unquestionable.”“Begin with his father, if you please.” said the abbé;“Edmond talked to me a great deal about the old man for whom he had thedeepest love.”“The history is a sad one, sir,” said Caderousse, shaking his head;“perhaps you know all the earlier part of it?”“Yes.” answered the abbé; “Edmond related to me everythinguntil the moment when he was arrested in a small cabaret close toMarseilles.”“At La Réserve! Oh, yes; I can see it all before me this moment.”“Was it not his betrothal feast?”“It was and the feast that began so gayly had a very sorrowful ending; apolice commissary, followed by four soldiers, entered, and Dantès wasarrested.”“Yes, and up to this point I know all,” said the priest.“Dantès himself only knew that which personally concerned him, for henever beheld again the five persons I have named to you, or heard mention ofanyone of them.”“Well, when Dantès was arrested, Monsieur Morrel hastened to obtain theparticulars, and they were very sad. The old man returned alone to his home,folded up his wedding suit with tears in his eyes, and paced up and down hischamber the whole day, and would not go to bed at all, for I was underneath himand heard him walking the whole night; and for myself, I assure you I could notsleep either, for the grief of the poor father gave me great uneasiness, andevery step he took went to my heart as really as if his foot had pressedagainst my breast.“The next day Mercédès came to implore the protection of M. de Villefort;she did not obtain it, however, and went to visit the old man; when she saw himso miserable and heart-broken, having passed a sleepless night, and not touchedfood since the previous day, she wished him to go with her that she might takecare of him; but the old man would not consent. ‘No,’ was the oldman’s reply, ‘I will not leave this house, for my poor dear boyloves me better than anything in the world; and if he gets out of prison hewill come and see me the first thing, and what would he think if I did not waithere for him?’ I heard all this from the window, for I was anxious thatMercédès should persuade the old man to accompany her, for his footsteps overmy head night and day did not leave me a moment’s repose.”“But did you not go upstairs and try to console the poor old man?”asked the abbé.“Ah, sir,” replied Caderousse, “we cannot console those whowill not be consoled, and he was one of these; besides, I know not why, but heseemed to dislike seeing me. One night, however, I heard his sobs, and I couldnot resist my desire to go up to him, but when I reached his door he was nolonger weeping but praying. I cannot now repeat to you, sir, all the eloquentwords and imploring language he made use of; it was more than piety, it wasmore than grief, and I, who am no canter, and hate the Jesuits, said then tomyself, ‘It is really well, and I am very glad that I have not anychildren; for if I were a father and felt such excessive grief as the old mandoes, and did not find in my memory or heart all he is now saying, I shouldthrow myself into the sea at once, for I could not bear it.’”“Poor father!” murmured the priest.“From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary. M. Morreland Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and, although I wascertain he was at home, he would not make any answer. One day, when, contraryto his custom, he had admitted Mercédès, and the poor girl, in spite of her owngrief and despair, endeavored to console him, he said to her,—‘Beassured, my dear daughter, he is dead; and instead of expecting him, it is hewho is awaiting us; I am quite happy, for I am the oldest, and of course shallsee him first.’“However well disposed a person may be, why, you see we leave off after atime seeing persons who are in sorrow, they make one melancholy; and so at lastold Dantès was left all to himself, and I only saw from time to time strangersgo up to him and come down again with some bundle they tried to hide; but Iguessed what these bundles were, and that he sold by degrees what he had to payfor his subsistence. At length the poor old fellow reached the end of all hehad; he owed three quarters’ rent, and they threatened to turn him out;he begged for another week, which was granted to him. I know this, because thelandlord came into my apartment when he left his.“For the first three days I heard him walking about as usual, but, on thefourth I heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at all risks. The doorwas closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw him so pale and haggard,that believing him very ill, I went and told M. Morrel and then ran on toMercédès. They both came immediately, M. Morrel bringing a doctor, and thedoctor said it was inflammation of the bowels, and ordered him a limited diet.I was there, too, and I never shall forget the old man’s smile at thisprescription.“From that time he received all who came; he had an excuse for not eatingany more; the doctor had put him on a diet.”The abbé uttered a kind of groan.“The story interests you, does it not, sir?” inquired Caderousse.“Yes,” replied the abbé, “it is very affecting.”“Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even moreanxious than before to have him taken to her own home. This was M.Morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against hisconsent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were actuallyfrightened. Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and M. Morrel wentaway, making a sign to the Catalan that he had left his purse on thechimney-piece; but, availing himself of the doctor’s order, the old manwould not take any sustenance; at length (after nine days of despair andfasting), the old man died, cursing those who had caused his misery, and sayingto Mercédès, ‘If you ever see my Edmond again, tell him I die blessinghim.’”The abbé rose from his chair, made two turns round the chamber, and pressed histrembling hand against his parched throat.“And you believe he died——”“Of hunger, sir, of hunger,” said Caderousse. “I am ascertain of it as that we two are Christians.”The abbé, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water that was standing by himhalf-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and then resumed his seat, with red eyesand pale cheeks.“This was, indeed, a horrid event,” said he in a hoarse voice.“The more so, sir, as it was men’s and not God’sdoing.”“Tell me of those men,” said the abbé, “and remembertoo,” he added in an almost menacing tone, “you have promised totell me everything. Tell me, therefore, who are these men who killed the sonwith despair, and the father with famine?”“Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other fromambition,—Fernand and Danglars.”“How was this jealousy manifested? Speak on.”“They denounced Edmond as a Bonapartist agent.”“Which of the two denounced him? Which was the real delinquent?”“Both, sir; one with a letter, and the other put it in the post.”“And where was this letter written?”“At La Réserve, the day before the betrothal feast.”“’Twas so, then—’twas so, then,” murmured theabbé. “Oh, Faria, Faria, how well did you judge men and things!”“What did you please to say, sir?” asked Caderousse.“Nothing, nothing,” replied the priest; “go on.”“It was Danglars who wrote the denunciation with his left hand, that hiswriting might not be recognized, and Fernand who put it in the post.”“But,” exclaimed the abbé suddenly, “you were thereyourself.”“I!” said Caderousse, astonished; “who told you I wasthere?”The abbé saw he had overshot the mark, and he added quickly,—“Noone; but in order to have known everything so well, you must have been aneye-witness.”“True, true!” said Caderousse in a choking voice, “I wasthere.”“And did you not remonstrate against such infamy?” asked the abbé;“if not, you were an accomplice.”“Sir,” replied Caderousse, “they had made me drink to such anexcess that I nearly lost all perception. I had only an indistinctunderstanding of what was passing around me. I said all that a man in such astate could say; but they both assured me that it was a jest they were carryingon, and perfectly harmless.”“Next day—next day, sir, you must have seen plain enough what theyhad been doing, yet you said nothing, though you were present when Dantès wasarrested.”“Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; but Danglarsrestrained me. ‘If he should really be guilty,’ said he, ‘anddid really put in to the Island of Elba; if he is really charged with a letterfor the Bonapartist committee at Paris, and if they find this letter upon him,those who have supported him will pass for his accomplices.’ I confess Ihad my fears, in the state in which politics then were, and I held my tongue.It was cowardly, I confess, but it was not criminal.”“I understand—you allowed matters to take their course, that wasall.”“Yes, sir,” answered Caderousse; “and remorse preys on menight and day. I often ask pardon of God, I swear to you, because this action,the only one with which I have seriously to reproach myself in all my life, isno doubt the cause of my abject condition. I am expiating a moment ofselfishness, and so I always say to La Carconte, when she complains,‘Hold your tongue, woman; it is the will of God.’” AndCaderousse bowed his head with every sign of real repentance.“Well, sir,” said the abbé, “you have spoken unreservedly;and thus to accuse yourself is to deserve pardon.”“Unfortunately, Edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me.”“He did not know,” said the abbé.“But he knows it all now,” interrupted Caderousse; “they saythe dead know everything.”There was a brief silence; the abbé rose and paced up and down pensively, andthen resumed his seat.“You have two or three times mentioned a M. Morrel,” he said;“who was he?”“The owner of the Pharaon and patron of Dantès.”“And what part did he play in this sad drama?” inquired the abbé.“The part of an honest man, full of courage and real regard. Twenty timeshe interceded for Edmond. When the emperor returned, he wrote, implored,threatened, and so energetically, that on the second restoration he waspersecuted as a Bonapartist. Ten times, as I told you, he came to seeDantès’ father, and offered to receive him in his own house; and thenight or two before his death, as I have already said, he left his purse on themantelpiece, with which they paid the old man’s debts, and buried himdecently; and so Edmond’s father died, as he had lived, without doingharm to anyone. I have the purse still by me—a large one, made of redsilk.”“And,” asked the abbé, “is M. Morrel still alive?”“Yes,” replied Caderousse.“In that case,” replied the abbé, “he should be a man blessedof God, rich, happy.”Caderousse smiled bitterly. “Yes, happy as myself,” said he.“What! M. Morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.“He is reduced almost to the last extremity—nay, he is almost atthe point of dishonor.”“How?”“Yes,” continued Caderousse, “so it is; after five-and-twentyyears of labor, after having acquired a most honorable name in the trade ofMarseilles, M. Morrel is utterly ruined; he has lost five ships in two years,has suffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and his only hope now isin that very Pharaon which poor Dantès commanded, and which is expectedfrom the Indies with a cargo of cochineal and indigo. If this ship founders,like the others, he is a ruined man.”“And has the unfortunate man wife or children?” inquired the abbé.“Yes, he has a wife, who through everything has behaved like an angel; hehas a daughter, who was about to marry the man she loved, but whose family nowwill not allow him to wed the daughter of a ruined man; he has, besides, a son,a lieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose, all this, instead oflessening, only augments his sorrows. If he were alone in the world he wouldblow out his brains, and there would be an end.”“Horrible!” ejaculated the priest.“And it is thus heaven recompenses virtue, sir,” added Caderousse.“You see, I, who never did a bad action but that I have told youof—am in destitution, with my poor wife dying of fever before my veryeyes, and I unable to do anything in the world for her; I shall die of hunger,as old Dantès did, while Fernand and Danglars are rolling in wealth.”“How is that?”“Because their deeds have brought them good fortune, while honest menhave been reduced to misery.”“What has become of Danglars, the instigator, and therefore the mostguilty?”“What has become of him? Why, he left Marseilles, and was taken, on therecommendation of M. Morrel, who did not know his crime, as cashier into aSpanish bank. During the war with Spain he was employed in the commissariat ofthe French army, and made a fortune; then with that money he speculated in thefunds, and trebled or quadrupled his capital; and, having first married hisbanker’s daughter, who left him a widower, he has married a second time,a widow, a Madame de Nargonne, daughter of M. de Servieux, the king’schamberlain, who is in high favor at court. He is a millionaire, and they havemade him a baron, and now he is the Baron Danglars, with a fine residence inthe Rue du Mont-Blanc, with ten horses in his stables, six footmen in hisantechamber, and I know not how many millions in his strongbox.”“Ah!” said the abbé, in a peculiar tone, “he is happy.”“Happy? Who can answer for that? Happiness or unhappiness is the secretknown but to one’s self and the walls—walls have ears but notongue; but if a large fortune produces happiness, Danglars is happy.”“And Fernand?”“Fernand? Why, much the same story.”“But how could a poor Catalan fisher-boy, without education or resources,make a fortune? I confess this staggers me.”“And it has staggered everybody. There must have been in his life somestrange secret that no one knows.”“But, then, by what visible steps has he attained this high fortune orhigh position?”“Both, sir—he has both fortune and position—both.”“This must be impossible!”“It would seem so; but listen, and you will understand. Some days beforethe return of the emperor, Fernand was drafted. The Bourbons left him quietlyenough at the Catalans, but Napoleon returned, a special levy was made, andFernand was compelled to join. I went too; but as I was older than Fernand, andhad just married my poor wife, I was only sent to the coast. Fernand wasenrolled in the active army, went to the frontier with his regiment, and was atthe battle of Ligny. The night after that battle he was sentry at the door of ageneral who carried on a secret correspondence with the enemy. That same nightthe general was to go over to the English. He proposed to Fernand to accompanyhim; Fernand agreed to do so, deserted his post, and followed the general.“Fernand would have been court-martialed if Napoleon had remained on thethrone, but his action was rewarded by the Bourbons. He returned to France withthe epaulet of sub-lieutenant, and as the protection of the general, who is inthe highest favor, was accorded to him, he was a captain in 1823, during theSpanish war—that is to say, at the time when Danglars made his earlyspeculations. Fernand was a Spaniard, and being sent to Spain to ascertain thefeeling of his fellow-countrymen, found Danglars there, got on very intimateterms with him, won over the support of the royalists at the capital and in theprovinces, received promises and made pledges on his own part, guided hisregiment by paths known to himself alone through the mountain gorges which wereheld by the royalists, and, in fact, rendered such services in this briefcampaign that, after the taking of Trocadero, he was made colonel, and receivedthe title of count and the cross of an officer of the Legion of Honor.”“Destiny! destiny!” murmured the abbé.“Yes, but listen: this was not all. The war with Spain being ended,Fernand’s career was checked by the long peace which seemed likely toendure throughout Europe. Greece only had risen against Turkey, and had begunher war of independence; all eyes were turned towards Athens—it was thefashion to pity and support the Greeks. The French government, withoutprotecting them openly, as you know, gave countenance to volunteer assistance.Fernand sought and obtained leave to go and serve in Greece, still having hisname kept on the army roll.Some time after, it was stated that the Comte de Morcerf (this was the name hebore) had entered the service of Ali Pasha with the rank of instructor-general.Ali Pasha was killed, as you know, but before he died he recompensed theservices of Fernand by leaving him a considerable sum, with which he returnedto France, when he was gazetted lieutenant-general.”“So that now——?” inquired the abbé.“So that now,” continued Caderousse, “he owns a magnificenthouse—No. 27, Rue du Helder, Paris.”The abbé opened his mouth, hesitated for a moment, then, making an effort atself-control, he said, “And Mercédès—they tell me that she hasdisappeared?”“Disappeared,” said Caderousse, “yes, as the sun disappears,to rise the next day with still more splendor.”“Has she made a fortune also?” inquired the abbé, with an ironicalsmile.“Mercédès is at this moment one of the greatest ladies in Paris,”replied Caderousse.“Go on,” said the abbé; “it seems as if I were listening tothe story of a dream. But I have seen things so extraordinary, that what youtell me seems less astonishing than it otherwise might.”“Mercédès was at first in the deepest despair at the blow which deprivedher of Edmond. I have told you of her attempts to propitiate M. de Villefort,her devotion to the elder Dantès. In the midst of her despair, a new afflictionovertook her. This was the departure of Fernand—of Fernand, whose crimeshe did not know, and whom she regarded as her brother. Fernand went, andMercédès remained alone.“Three months passed and still she wept—no news of Edmond, no newsof Fernand, no companionship save that of an old man who was dying withdespair. One evening, after a day of accustomed vigil at the angle of two roadsleading to Marseilles from the Catalans, she returned to her home moredepressed than ever. Suddenly she heard a step she knew, turned anxiouslyaround, the door opened, and Fernand, dressed in the uniform of asub-lieutenant, stood before her.“It was not the one she wished for most, but it seemed as if a part ofher past life had returned to her.“Mercédès seized Fernand’s hands with a transport which he took forlove, but which was only joy at being no longer alone in the world, and seeingat last a friend, after long hours of solitary sorrow. And then, it must beconfessed, Fernand had never been hated—he was only not precisely loved.Another possessed all Mercédès’ heart; that other was absent, haddisappeared, perhaps was dead. At this last thought Mercédès burst into a floodof tears, and wrung her hands in agony; but the thought, which she had alwaysrepelled before when it was suggested to her by another, came now in full forceupon her mind; and then, too, old Dantès incessantly said to her, ‘OurEdmond is dead; if he were not, he would return to us.’“The old man died, as I have told you; had he lived, Mercédès, perchance,had not become the wife of another, for he would have been there to reproachher infidelity. Fernand saw this, and when he learned of the old man’sdeath he returned. He was now a lieutenant. At his first coming he had not saida word of love to Mercédès; at the second he reminded her that he loved her.“Mercédès begged for six months more in which to await and mourn forEdmond.”“So that,” said the abbé, with a bitter smile, “that makeseighteen months in all. What more could the most devoted lover desire?”Then he murmured the words of the English poet, “‘Frailty, thy nameis woman.’”“Six months afterwards,” continued Caderousse, “the marriagetook place in the church of Accoules.”“The very church in which she was to have married Edmond,” murmuredthe priest; “there was only a change of bridegrooms.”“Well, Mercédès was married,” proceeded Caderousse; “butalthough in the eyes of the world she appeared calm, she nearly fainted as shepassed La Réserve, where, eighteen months before, the betrothal had beencelebrated with him whom she might have known she still loved, had she lookedto the bottom of her heart. Fernand, more happy, but not more at hisease—for I saw at this time he was in constant dread of Edmond’sreturn—Fernand was very anxious to get his wife away, and to departhimself. There were too many unpleasant possibilities associated with theCatalans, and eight days after the wedding they left Marseilles.”“Did you ever see Mercédès again?” inquired the priest.“Yes, during the Spanish war, at Perpignan, where Fernand had left her;she was attending to the education of her son.”The abbé started. “Her son?” said he.“Yes,” replied Caderousse, “little Albert.”“But, then, to be able to instruct her child,” continued the abbé,“she must have received an education herself. I understood from Edmondthat she was the daughter of a simple fisherman, beautiful butuneducated.”“Oh,” replied Caderousse, “did he know so little of hislovely betrothed? Mercédès might have been a queen, sir, if the crown were tobe placed on the heads of the loveliest and most intelligent. Fernand’sfortune was already waxing great, and she developed with his growing fortune.She learned drawing, music—everything. Besides, I believe, betweenourselves, she did this in order to distract her mind, that she might forget;and she only filled her head in order to alleviate the weight on her heart. Butnow her position in life is assured,” continued Caderousse; “nodoubt fortune and honors have comforted her; she is rich, a countess, andyet——”Caderousse paused.“And yet what?” asked the abbé.“Yet, I am sure, she is not happy,” said Caderousse.“What makes you believe this?”“Why, when I found myself utterly destitute, I thought my old friendswould, perhaps, assist me. So I went to Danglars, who would not even receiveme. I called on Fernand, who sent me a hundred francs by hisvalet-de-chambre.”“Then you did not see either of them?”“No, but Madame de Morcerf saw me.”“How was that?”“As I went away a purse fell at my feet—it containedfive-and-twenty louis; I raised my head quickly, and saw Mercédès, who at onceshut the blind.”“And M. de Villefort?” asked the abbé.“Oh, he never was a friend of mine, I did not know him, and I had nothingto ask of him.”“Do you not know what became of him, and the share he had inEdmond’s misfortunes?”“No; I only know that some time after Edmond’s arrest, he marriedMademoiselle de Saint-Méran, and soon after left Marseilles; no doubt he hasbeen as lucky as the rest; no doubt he is as rich as Danglars, as high instation as Fernand. I only, as you see, have remained poor, wretched, andforgotten.”“You are mistaken, my friend,” replied the abbé; “God mayseem sometimes to forget for a time, while his justice reposes, but therealways comes a moment when he remembers—and behold—a proof!”As he spoke, the abbé took the diamond from his pocket, and giving it toCaderousse, said, “Here, my friend, take this diamond, it isyours.”“What, for me only?” cried Caderousse, “ah, sir, do not jestwith me!”“This diamond was to have been shared among his friends. Edmond had onefriend only, and thus it cannot be divided. Take the diamond, then, and sellit; it is worth fifty thousand francs, and I repeat my wish that this sum maysuffice to release you from your wretchedness.”“Oh, sir,” said Caderousse, putting out one hand timidly, and withthe other wiping away the perspiration which bedewed his brow,—“Oh,sir, do not make a jest of the happiness or despair of a man.”“I know what happiness and what despair are, and I never make a jest ofsuch feelings. Take it, then, but in exchange——”Caderousse, who touched the diamond, withdrew his hand.The abbé smiled.“In exchange,” he continued, “give me the red silk purse thatM. Morrel left on old Dantès’ chimney-piece, and which you tell me isstill in your hands.”Caderousse, more and more astonished, went toward a large oaken cupboard,opened it, and gave the abbé a long purse of faded red silk, round which weretwo copper runners that had once been gilt. The abbé took it, and in returngave Caderousse the diamond.“Oh, you are a man of God, sir,” cried Caderousse; “for noone knew that Edmond had given you this diamond, and you might have keptit.”“Which,” said the abbé to himself, “you would havedone.” The abbé rose, took his hat and gloves. “Well,” hesaid, “all you have told me is perfectly true, then, and I may believe itin every particular.”“See, sir,” replied Caderousse, “in this corner is a crucifixin holy wood—here on this shelf is my wife’s testament; open thisbook, and I will swear upon it with my hand on the crucifix. I will swear toyou by my soul’s salvation, my faith as a Christian, I have toldeverything to you as it occurred, and as the recording angel will tell it tothe ear of God at the day of the last judgment!”“’Tis well,” said the abbé, convinced by his manner and tonethat Caderousse spoke the truth. “’Tis well, and may this moneyprofit you! Adieu; I go far from men who thus so bitterly injure eachother.”The abbé with difficulty got away from the enthusiastic thanks of Caderousse,opened the door himself, got out and mounted his horse, once more saluted theinnkeeper, who kept uttering his loud farewells, and then returned by the roadhe had travelled in coming.When Caderousse turned around, he saw behind him La Carconte, paler andtrembling more than ever.“Is, then, all that I have heard really true?” she inquired.“What? That he has given the diamond to us only?” inquiredCaderousse, half bewildered with joy; “yes, nothing more true! See, hereit is.”The woman gazed at it a moment, and then said, in a gloomy voice,“Suppose it’s false?”Caderousse started and turned pale.“False!” he muttered. “False! Why should that man give me afalse diamond?”“To get your secret without paying for it, you blockhead!”Caderousse remained for a moment aghast under the weight of such an idea.“Oh!” he said, taking up his hat, which he placed on the redhandkerchief tied round his head, “we will soon find out.”“In what way?”“Why, the fair is on at Beaucaire, there are always jewellers from Paristhere, and I will show it to them. Look after the house, wife, and I shall beback in two hours,” and Caderousse left the house in haste, and ranrapidly in the direction opposite to that which the priest had taken.“Fifty thousand francs!” muttered La Carconte when left alone;“it is a large sum of money, but it is not a fortune.” VOLUME TWO Chapter 28. The PrisonRegisterThe day after that inwhich the scene we have just described had taken place on the road betweenBellegarde and Beaucaire, a man of about thirty or two-and-thirty, dressed in abright blue frock coat, nankeen trousers, and a white waistcoat, having theappearance and accent of an Englishman, presented himself before the mayor ofMarseilles.“Sir,” said he, “I am chief clerk of the house of Thomson& French, of Rome. We are, and have been these ten years, connected withthe house of Morrel & Son, of Marseilles. We have a hundred thousand francsor thereabouts loaned on their securities, and we are a little uneasy atreports that have reached us that the firm is on the brink of ruin. I havecome, therefore, express from Rome, to ask you for information.”“Sir,” replied the mayor. “I know very well that during thelast four or five years misfortune has seemed to pursue M. Morrel. He has lostfour or five vessels, and suffered by three or four bankruptcies; but it is notfor me, although I am a creditor myself to the amount of ten thousand francs,to give any information as to the state of his finances. Ask of me, as mayor,what is my opinion of M. Morrel, and I shall say that he is a man honorable tothe last degree, and who has up to this time fulfilled every engagement withscrupulous punctuality. This is all I can say, sir; if you wish to learn more,address yourself to M. de Boville, the inspector of prisons, No. 15, Rue deNouailles; he has, I believe, two hundred thousand francs in Morrel’shands, and if there be any grounds for apprehension, as this is a greateramount than mine, you will most probably find him better informed thanmyself.”The Englishman seemed to appreciate this extreme delicacy, made his bow andwent away, proceeding with a characteristic British stride towards the streetmentioned.M. de Boville was in his private room, and the Englishman, on perceiving him,made a gesture of surprise, which seemed to indicate that it was not the firsttime he had been in his presence. As to M. de Boville, he was in such a stateof despair, that it was evident all the faculties of his mind, absorbed in thethought which occupied him at the moment, did not allow either his memory orhis imagination to stray to the past.The Englishman, with the coolness of his nation, addressed him in terms nearlysimilar to those with which he had accosted the mayor of Marseilles.“Oh, sir,” exclaimed M. de Boville, “your fears areunfortunately but too well founded, and you see before you a man in despair. Ihad two hundred thousand francs placed in the hands of Morrel & Son; thesetwo hundred thousand francs were the dowry of my daughter, who was to bemarried in a fortnight, and these two hundred thousand francs were payable,half on the 15th of this month, and the other half on the 15th of next month. Ihad informed M. Morrel of my desire to have these payments punctually, and hehas been here within the last half-hour to tell me that if his ship, thePharaon, did not come into port on the 15th, he would be wholly unableto make this payment.”“But,” said the Englishman, “this looks very much like asuspension of payment.”“It looks more like bankruptcy!” exclaimed M. de Bovilledespairingly.The Englishman appeared to reflect a moment, and then said, “From whichit would appear, sir, that this credit inspires you with considerableapprehension?”“To tell you the truth, I consider it lost.”“Well, then, I will buy it of you!”“You?”“Yes, I!”“But at a tremendous discount, of course?”“No, for two hundred thousand francs. Our house,” added theEnglishman with a laugh, “does not do things in that way.”“And you will pay——”“Ready money.”And the Englishman drew from his pocket a bundle of bank-notes, which mighthave been twice the sum M. de Boville feared to lose. A ray of joy passedacross M. de Boville’s countenance, yet he made an effort atself-control, and said:“Sir, I ought to tell you that, in all probability, you will not realizesix per cent of this sum.”“That’s no affair of mine,” replied the Englishman,“that is the affair of the house of Thomson & French, in whose name Iact. They have, perhaps, some motive to serve in hastening the ruin of a rivalfirm. But all I know, sir, is, that I am ready to hand you over this sum inexchange for your assignment of the debt. I only ask a brokerage.”“Of course, that is perfectly just,” cried M. de Boville.“The commission is usually one and a half; will you havetwo—three—five per cent, or even more? Whatever you say.”“Sir,” replied the Englishman, laughing, “I am like my house,and do not do such things—no, the commission I ask is quitedifferent.”“Name it, sir, I beg.”“You are the inspector of prisons?”“I have been so these fourteen years.”“You keep the registers of entries and departures?”“I do.”“To these registers there are added notes relative to theprisoners?”“There are special reports on every prisoner.”“Well, sir, I was educated at Rome by a poor devil of an abbé, whodisappeared suddenly. I have since learned that he was confined in the Châteaud’If, and I should like to learn some particulars of his death.”“What was his name?”“The Abbé Faria.”“Oh, I recollect him perfectly,” cried M. de Boville; “he wascrazy.”“So they said.”“Oh, he was, decidedly.”“Very possibly; but what sort of madness was it?”“He pretended to know of an immense treasure, and offered vast sums tothe government if they would liberate him.”“Poor devil!—and he is dead?”“Yes, sir, five or six months ago, last February.”“You have a good memory, sir, to recollect dates so well.”“I recollect this, because the poor devil’s death was accompaniedby a singular incident.”“May I ask what that was?” said the Englishman with an expressionof curiosity, which a close observer would have been astonished at discoveringin his phlegmatic countenance.“Oh dear, yes, sir; the abbé’s dungeon was forty or fifty feetdistant from that of one of Bonaparte’s emissaries,—one of thosewho had contributed the most to the return of the usurper in 1815, a veryresolute and very dangerous man.”“Indeed!” said the Englishman.“Yes,” replied M. de Boville; “I myself had occasion to seethis man in 1816 or 1817, and we could only go into his dungeon with a file ofsoldiers. That man made a deep impression on me; I shall never forget hiscountenance!”The Englishman smiled imperceptibly.“And you say, sir,” he interposed, “that the twodungeons——”“Were separated by a distance of fifty feet; but it appears that thisEdmond Dantès——”“This dangerous man’s name was——”“Edmond Dantès. It appears, sir, that this Edmond Dantès had procuredtools, or made them, for they found a tunnel through which the prisoners heldcommunication with one another.”“This tunnel was dug, no doubt, with an intention of escape?”“No doubt; but unfortunately for the prisoners, the Abbé Faria had anattack of catalepsy, and died.”“That must have cut short the projects of escape.”“For the dead man, yes,” replied M. de Boville, “but not forthe survivor; on the contrary, this Dantès saw a means of accelerating hisescape. He, no doubt, thought that prisoners who died in the Château d’Ifwere interred in an ordinary burial-ground, and he conveyed the dead man intohis own cell, took his place in the sack in which they had sewed up the corpse,and awaited the moment of interment.”“It was a bold step, and one that showed some courage,” remarkedthe Englishman.“As I have already told you, sir, he was a very dangerous man; and,fortunately, by his own act disembarrassed the government of the fears it hadon his account.”“How was that?”“How? Do you not comprehend?”“No.”“The Château d’If has no cemetery, and they simply throw the deadinto the sea, after fastening a thirty-six-pound cannon-ball to theirfeet.”“Well?” observed the Englishman as if he were slow ofcomprehension.“Well, they fastened a thirty-six-pound ball to his feet, and threw himinto the sea.”“Really!” exclaimed the Englishman.“Yes, sir,” continued the inspector of prisons. “You mayimagine the amazement of the fugitive when he found himself flung headlong overthe rocks! I should like to have seen his face at that moment.”“That would have been difficult.”“No matter,” replied De Boville, in supreme good-humor at thecertainty of recovering his two hundred thousand francs,—“nomatter, I can fancy it.” And he shouted with laughter.“So can I,” said the Englishman, and he laughed too; but he laughedas the English do, “at the end of his teeth.”“And so,” continued the Englishman who first gained his composure,“he was drowned?”“Unquestionably.”“So that the governor got rid of the dangerous and the crazy prisoner atthe same time?”“Precisely.”“But some official document was drawn up as to this affair, Isuppose?” inquired the Englishman.“Yes, yes, the mortuary deposition. You understand, Dantès’relations, if he had any, might have some interest in knowing if he were deador alive.”“So that now, if there were anything to inherit from him, they may do sowith easy conscience. He is dead, and no mistake about it.”“Oh, yes; and they may have the fact attested whenever theyplease.”“So be it,” said the Englishman. “But to return to theseregisters.”“True, this story has diverted our attention from them. Excuse me.”“Excuse you for what? For the story? By no means; it really seems to mevery curious.”“Yes, indeed. So, sir, you wish to see all relating to the poor abbé, whoreally was gentleness itself.”“Yes, you will much oblige me.”“Go into my study here, and I will show it to you.”And they both entered M. de Boville’s study. Everything was here arrangedin perfect order; each register had its number, each file of papers its place.The inspector begged the Englishman to seat himself in an armchair, and placedbefore him the register and documents relative to the Château d’If,giving him all the time he desired for the examination, while De Boville seatedhimself in a corner, and began to read his newspaper. The Englishman easilyfound the entries relative to the Abbé Faria; but it seemed that the historywhich the inspector had related interested him greatly, for after havingperused the first documents he turned over the leaves until he reached thedeposition respecting Edmond Dantès. There he found everything arranged in dueorder,—the accusation, examination, Morrel’s petition, M. deVillefort’s marginal notes. He folded up the accusation quietly, and putit as quietly in his pocket; read the examination, and saw that the name ofNoirtier was not mentioned in it; perused, too, the application dated 10thApril, 1815, in which Morrel, by the deputy procureur’s advice,exaggerated with the best intentions (for Napoleon was then on the throne) theservices Dantès had rendered to the imperial cause—services whichVillefort’s certificates rendered indisputable. Then he saw through thewhole thing. This petition to Napoleon, kept back by Villefort, had become,under the second restoration, a terrible weapon against him in the hands of theking’s attorney. He was no longer astonished when he searched on to findin the register this note, placed in a bracket against his name:Edmond Dantès.An inveterate Bonapartist; took an active part in the return from the Island ofElba.To be kept in strict solitary confinement, and to be closely watched andguarded.Beneath these lines was written in another hand: “See noteabove—nothing can be done.”He compared the writing in the bracket with the writing of the certificateplaced beneath Morrel’s petition, and discovered that the note in thebracket was the same writing as the certificate—that is to say, was inVillefort’s handwriting.As to the note which accompanied this, the Englishman understood that it mighthave been added by some inspector who had taken a momentary interest inDantès’ situation, but who had, from the remarks we have quoted, found itimpossible to give any effect to the interest he had felt.As we have said, the inspector, from discretion, and that he might not disturbthe Abbé Faria’s pupil in his researches, had seated himself in a corner,and was reading Le Drapeau Blanc. He did not see the Englishman fold upand place in his pocket the accusation written by Danglars under the arbor ofLa Réserve, and which had the postmark, “Marseilles, 27th February,delivery 6 o’clock, P.M.”But it must be said that if he had seen it, he attached so little importance tothis scrap of paper, and so much importance to his two hundred thousand francs,that he would not have opposed whatever the Englishman might do, howeverirregular it might be.“Thanks,” said the latter, closing the register with a slam,“I have all I want; now it is for me to perform my promise. Give me asimple assignment of your debt; acknowledge therein the receipt of the cash,and I will hand you over the money.”He rose, gave his seat to M. de Boville, who took it without ceremony, andquickly drew up the required assignment, while the Englishman counted out thebank-notes on the other side of the desk. Chapter 29. The House ofMorrel & SonAnyone who had quittedMarseilles a few years previously, well acquainted with the interior ofMorrel’s warehouse, and had returned at this date, would have found agreat change. Instead of that air of life, of comfort, and of happiness thatpermeates a flourishing and prosperous business establishment—instead ofmerry faces at the windows, busy clerks hurrying to and fro in the longcorridors—instead of the court filled with bales of goods, re-echoingwith the cries and the jokes of porters, one would have immediately perceivedall aspect of sadness and gloom. Out of all the numerous clerks that used tofill the deserted corridor and the empty office, but two remained. One was ayoung man of three or four-and-twenty, who was in love with M. Morrel’sdaughter, and had remained with him in spite of the efforts of his friends toinduce him to withdraw; the other was an old one-eyed cashier, called“Cocles,” or “Cock-eye,” a nickname given him by theyoung men who used to throng this vast now almost deserted bee-hive, and whichhad so completely replaced his real name that he would not, in all probability,have replied to anyone who addressed him by it.Cocles remained in M. Morrel’s service, and a most singular change hadtaken place in his position; he had at the same time risen to the rank ofcashier, and sunk to the rank of a servant. He was, however, the same Cocles,good, patient, devoted, but inflexible on the subject of arithmetic, the onlypoint on which he would have stood firm against the world, even against M.Morrel; and strong in the multiplication-table, which he had at hisfingers’ ends, no matter what scheme or what trap was laid to catch him.In the midst of the disasters that befell the house, Cocles was the only oneunmoved. But this did not arise from a want of affection; on the contrary, froma firm conviction. Like the rats that one by one forsake the doomed ship evenbefore the vessel weighs anchor, so all the numerous clerks had by degreesdeserted the office and the warehouse. Cocles had seen them go without thinkingof inquiring the cause of their departure. Everything was as we have said, aquestion of arithmetic to Cocles, and during twenty years he had always seenall payments made with such exactitude, that it seemed as impossible to himthat the house should stop payment, as it would to a miller that the river thathad so long turned his mill should cease to flow.Nothing had as yet occurred to shake Cocles’ belief; the lastmonth’s payment had been made with the most scrupulous exactitude; Cocleshad detected an overbalance of fourteen sous in his cash, and the same eveninghe had brought them to M. Morrel, who, with a melancholy smile, threw them intoan almost empty drawer, saying:“Thanks, Cocles; you are the pearl of cashiers.”Cocles went away perfectly happy, for this eulogium of M. Morrel, himself thepearl of the honest men of Marseilles, flattered him more than a present offifty crowns. But since the end of the month M. Morrel had passed many ananxious hour.In order to meet the payments then due; he had collected all his resources,and, fearing lest the report of his distress should get bruited abroad atMarseilles when he was known to be reduced to such an extremity, he went to theBeaucaire fair to sell his wife’s and daughter’s jewels and aportion of his plate. By this means the end of the month was passed, but hisresources were now exhausted. Credit, owing to the reports afloat, was nolonger to be had; and to meet the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15thof the present month, and the one hundred thousand francs due on the 15th ofthe next month to M. de Boville, M. Morrel had, in reality, no hope but thereturn of the Pharaon, of whose departure he had learnt from a vesselwhich had weighed anchor at the same time, and which had already arrived inharbor.But this vessel which, like the Pharaon, came from Calcutta, had been infor a fortnight, while no intelligence had been received of the Pharaon.Such was the state of affairs when, the day after his interview with M. deBoville, the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French of Rome,presented himself at M. Morrel’s.Emmanuel received him; this young man was alarmed by the appearance of everynew face, for every new face might be that of a new creditor, come in anxietyto question the head of the house. The young man, wishing to spare his employerthe pain of this interview, questioned the new-comer; but the stranger declaredthat he had nothing to say to M. Emmanuel, and that his business was with M.Morrel in person.Emmanuel sighed, and summoned Cocles. Cocles appeared, and the young man badehim conduct the stranger to M. Morrel’s apartment. Cocles went first, andthe stranger followed him. On the staircase they met a beautiful girl ofsixteen or seventeen, who looked with anxiety at the stranger.“M. Morrel is in his room, is he not, Mademoiselle Julie?” said thecashier.“Yes; I think so, at least,” said the young girl hesitatingly.“Go and see, Cocles, and if my father is there, announce thisgentleman.”“It will be useless to announce me, mademoiselle,” returned theEnglishman. “M. Morrel does not know my name; this worthy gentleman hasonly to announce the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French ofRome, with whom your father does business.”The young girl turned pale and continued to descend, while the stranger andCocles continued to mount the staircase. She entered the office where Emmanuelwas, while Cocles, by the aid of a key he possessed, opened a door in thecorner of a landing-place on the second staircase, conducted the stranger intoan antechamber, opened a second door, which he closed behind him, and afterhaving left the clerk of the house of Thomson & French alone, returned andsigned to him that he could enter.The Englishman entered, and found Morrel seated at a table, turning over theformidable columns of his ledger, which contained the list of his liabilities.At the sight of the stranger, M. Morrel closed the ledger, arose, and offered aseat to the stranger; and when he had seen him seated, resumed his own chair.Fourteen years had changed the worthy merchant, who, in his thirty-sixth yearat the opening of this history, was now in his fiftieth; his hair had turnedwhite, time and sorrow had ploughed deep furrows on his brow, and his look,once so firm and penetrating, was now irresolute and wandering, as if he fearedbeing forced to fix his attention on some particular thought or person.The Englishman looked at him with an air of curiosity, evidently mingled withinterest. “Monsieur,” said Morrel, whose uneasiness was increasedby this examination, “you wish to speak to me?”“Yes, monsieur; you are aware from whom I come?”“The house of Thomson & French; at least, so my cashier tellsme.”“He has told you rightly. The house of Thomson & French had 300,000or 400,000 francs to pay this month in France; and, knowing your strictpunctuality, have collected all the bills bearing your signature, and chargedme as they became due to present them, and to employ the moneyotherwise.”Morrel sighed deeply, and passed his hand over his forehead, which was coveredwith perspiration.“So then, sir,” said Morrel, “you hold bills of mine?”“Yes, and for a considerable sum.”“What is the amount?” asked Morrel with a voice he strove to renderfirm.“Here is,” said the Englishman, taking a quantity of papers fromhis pocket, “an assignment of 200,000 francs to our house by M. deBoville, the inspector of prisons, to whom they are due. You acknowledge, ofcourse, that you owe this sum to him?”“Yes; he placed the money in my hands at four and a half per cent nearlyfive years ago.”“When are you to pay?”“Half the 15th of this month, half the 15th of next.”“Just so; and now here are 32,500 francs payable shortly; they are allsigned by you, and assigned to our house by the holders.”“I recognize them,” said Morrel, whose face was suffused, as hethought that, for the first time in his life, he would be unable to honor hisown signature. “Is this all?”“No, I have for the end of the month these bills which have been assignedto us by the house of Pascal, and the house of Wild & Turner of Marseilles,amounting to nearly 55,000 francs; in all, 287,500 francs.”It is impossible to describe what Morrel suffered during this enumeration.“Two hundred and eighty-seven thousand five hundred francs,”repeated he.“Yes, sir,” replied the Englishman. “I will not,”continued he, after a moment’s silence, “conceal from you, thatwhile your probity and exactitude up to this moment are universallyacknowledged, yet the report is current in Marseilles that you are not able tomeet your liabilities.”At this almost brutal speech Morrel turned deathly pale.“Sir,” said he, “up to this time—and it is now morethan four-and-twenty years since I received the direction of this house from myfather, who had himself conducted it for five-and-thirty years—never hasanything bearing the signature of Morrel & Son been dishonored.”“I know that,” replied the Englishman. “But as a man of honorshould answer another, tell me fairly, shall you pay these with the samepunctuality?”Morrel shuddered, and looked at the man, who spoke with more assurance than hehad hitherto shown.“To questions frankly put,” said he, “a straightforwardanswer should be given. Yes, I shall pay, if, as I hope, my vessel arrivessafely; for its arrival will again procure me the credit which the numerousaccidents, of which I have been the victim, have deprived me; but if thePharaon should be lost, and this last resource begone——”The poor man’s eyes filled with tears.“Well,” said the other, “if this last resource failyou?”“Well,” returned Morrel, “it is a cruel thing to be forced tosay, but, already used to misfortune, I must habituate myself to shame. I fearI shall be forced to suspend payment.”“Have you no friends who could assist you?”Morrel smiled mournfully.“In business, sir,” said he, “one has no friends, onlycorrespondents.”“It is true,” murmured the Englishman; “then you have but onehope.”“But one.”“The last?”“The last.”“So that if this fail——”“I am ruined,—completely ruined!”“As I was on my way here, a vessel was coming into port.”“I know it, sir; a young man, who still adheres to my fallen fortunes,passes a part of his time in a belvedere at the top of the house, in hopes ofbeing the first to announce good news to me; he has informed me of the arrivalof this ship.”“And it is not yours?”“No, she is a Bordeaux vessel, La Gironde; she comes from Indiaalso; but she is not mine.”“Perhaps she has spoken to the Pharaon, and brings you sometidings of her?”“Shall I tell you plainly one thing, sir? I dread almost as much toreceive any tidings of my vessel as to remain in doubt. Uncertainty is stillhope.” Then in a low voice Morrel added,—“This delay is notnatural. The Pharaon left Calcutta the 5th of February; she ought tohave been here a month ago.”“What is that?” said the Englishman. “What is the meaning ofthat noise?”“Oh, my God!” cried Morrel, turning pale, “what is it?”A loud noise was heard on the stairs of people moving hastily, and half-stifledsobs. Morrel rose and advanced to the door; but his strength failed him and hesank into a chair. The two men remained opposite one another, Morrel tremblingin every limb, the stranger gazing at him with an air of profound pity. Thenoise had ceased; but it seemed that Morrel expected something—somethinghad occasioned the noise, and something must follow. The stranger fancied heheard footsteps on the stairs; and that the footsteps, which were those ofseveral persons, stopped at the door. A key was inserted in the lock of thefirst door, and the creaking of hinges was audible.“There are only two persons who have the key to that door,”murmured Morrel, “Cocles and Julie.”At this instant the second door opened, and the young girl, her eyes bathedwith tears, appeared. Morrel rose tremblingly, supporting himself by the arm ofthe chair. He would have spoken, but his voice failed him.“Oh, father!” said she, clasping her hands, “forgive yourchild for being the bearer of evil tidings.”Morrel again changed color. Julie threw herself into his arms.“Oh, father, father!” murmured she, “courage!”“The Pharaon has gone down, then?” said Morrel in a hoarsevoice. The young girl did not speak; but she made an affirmative sign with herhead as she lay on her father’s breast.“And the crew?” asked Morrel.“Saved,” said the girl; “saved by the crew of the vessel thathas just entered the harbor.”Morrel raised his two hands to heaven with an expression of resignation andsublime gratitude.“Thanks, my God,” said he, “at least thou strikest but mealone.”A tear moistened the eye of the phlegmatic Englishman.“Come in, come in,” said Morrel, “for I presume you are allat the door.”Scarcely had he uttered those words when Madame Morrel entered weepingbitterly. Emmanuel followed her, and in the antechamber were visible the roughfaces of seven or eight half-naked sailors. At the sight of these men theEnglishman started and advanced a step; then restrained himself, and retiredinto the farthest and most obscure corner of the apartment. Madame Morrel satdown by her husband and took one of his hands in hers, Julie still lay with herhead on his shoulder, Emmanuel stood in the centre of the chamber and seemed toform the link between Morrel’s family and the sailors at the door.“How did this happen?” said Morrel.“Draw nearer, Penelon,” said the young man, “and tell us allabout it.”An old seaman, bronzed by the tropical sun, advanced, twirling the remains of ahat between his hands.“Good-day, M. Morrel,” said he, as if he had just quittedMarseilles the previous evening, and had just returned from Aix or Toulon.“Good-day, Penelon,” returned Morrel, who could not refrain fromsmiling through his tears, “where is the captain?”“The captain, M. Morrel,—he has stayed behind sick at Palma; butplease God, it won’t be much, and you will see him in a few days allalive and hearty.”“Well, now tell your story, Penelon.”Penelon rolled his quid in his cheek, placed his hand before his mouth, turnedhis head, and sent a long jet of tobacco-juice into the antechamber, advancedhis foot, balanced himself, and began.“You see, M. Morrel,” said he, “we were somewhere betweenCape Blanc and Cape Boyador, sailing with a fair breeze, south-south-west aftera week’s calm, when Captain Gaumard comes up to me—I was at thehelm I should tell you—and says, ‘Penelon, what do you think ofthose clouds coming up over there?’ I was just then looking at themmyself. ‘What do I think, captain? Why I think that they are risingfaster than they have any business to do, and that they would not be so blackif they didn’t mean mischief.’—‘That’s my opiniontoo,’ said the captain, ‘and I’ll take precautionsaccordingly. We are carrying too much canvas. Avast, there, all hands! Take inthe studding-sails and stow the flying jib.’ It was time; the squall wason us, and the vessel began to heel. ‘Ah,’ said the captain,‘we have still too much canvas set; all hands lower the mainsail!’Five minutes after, it was down; and we sailed under mizzen-topsails andtop-gallant sails. ‘Well, Penelon,’ said the captain, ‘whatmakes you shake your head?’ ‘Why,’ I says, ‘I stillthink you’ve got too much on.’ ‘I think you’reright,’ answered he, ‘we shall have a gale.’ ‘A gale?More than that, we shall have a tempest, or I don’t know what’swhat.’ You could see the wind coming like the dust at Montredon; luckilythe captain understood his business. ‘Take in two reefs in thetop-sails,’ cried the captain; ‘let go the bowlin’s, haul thebrace, lower the top-gallant sails, haul out the reef-tackles on theyards.’”“That was not enough for those latitudes,” said the Englishman;“I should have taken four reefs in the topsails and furled thespanker.”His firm, sonorous, and unexpected voice made everyone start. Penelon put hishand over his eyes, and then stared at the man who thus criticized themanœuvres of his captain.“We did better than that, sir,” said the old sailor respectfully;“we put the helm up to run before the tempest; ten minutes after westruck our top-sails and scudded under bare poles.”“The vessel was very old to risk that,” said the Englishman.“Eh, it was that that did the business; after pitching heavily for twelvehours we sprung a leak. ‘Penelon,’ said the captain, ‘I thinkwe are sinking, give me the helm, and go down into the hold.’ I gave himthe helm, and descended; there was already three feet of water. ‘Allhands to the pumps!’ I shouted; but it was too late, and it seemed themore we pumped the more came in. ‘Ah,’ said I, after fourhours’ work, ‘since we are sinking, let us sink; we can die butonce.’ ‘Is that the example you set, Penelon?’ cries thecaptain; ‘very well, wait a minute.’ He went into his cabin andcame back with a brace of pistols. ‘I will blow the brains out of thefirst man who leaves the pump,’ said he.”“Well done!” said the Englishman.“There’s nothing gives you so much courage as good reasons,”continued the sailor; “and during that time the wind had abated, and thesea gone down, but the water kept rising; not much, only two inches an hour,but still it rose. Two inches an hour does not seem much, but in twelve hoursthat makes two feet, and three we had before, that makes five.‘Come,’ said the captain, ‘we have done all in our power, andM. Morrel will have nothing to reproach us with, we have tried to save theship, let us now save ourselves. To the boats, my lads, as quick as youcan.’ Now,” continued Penelon, “you see, M. Morrel, a sailoris attached to his ship, but still more to his life, so we did not wait to betold twice; the more so, that the ship was sinking under us, and seemed to say,‘Get along—save yourselves.’ We soon launched the boat, andall eight of us got into it. The captain descended last, or rather, he did notdescend, he would not quit the vessel; so I took him round the waist, and threwhim into the boat, and then I jumped after him. It was time, for just as Ijumped the deck burst with a noise like the broadside of a man-of-war. Tenminutes after she pitched forward, then the other way, spun round and round,and then good-bye to the Pharaon. As for us, we were three days withoutanything to eat or drink, so that we began to think of drawing lots who shouldfeed the rest, when we saw La Gironde; we made signals of distress, sheperceived us, made for us, and took us all on board. There now, M. Morrel,that’s the whole truth, on the honor of a sailor; is not it true, youfellows there?” A general murmur of approbation showed that the narratorhad faithfully detailed their misfortunes and sufferings.“Well, well,” said M. Morrel, “I know there was no one infault but destiny. It was the will of God that this should happen, blessed behis name. What wages are due to you?”“Oh, don’t let us talk of that, M. Morrel.”“Yes, but we will talk of it.”“Well, then, three months,” said Penelon.“Cocles, pay two hundred francs to each of these good fellows,”said Morrel. “At another time,” added he, “I should havesaid, Give them, besides, two hundred francs over as a present; but times arechanged, and the little money that remains to me is not my own, so do not thinkme mean on this account.”Penelon turned to his companions, and exchanged a few words with them.“As for that, M. Morrel,” said he, again turning his quid,“as for that——”“As for what?”“The money.”“Well——”“Well, we all say that fifty francs will be enough for us at present, andthat we will wait for the rest.”“Thanks, my friends, thanks!” cried Morrel gratefully; “takeit—take it; and if you can find another employer, enter his service; youare free to do so.”These last words produced a prodigious effect on the seaman. Penelon nearlyswallowed his quid; fortunately he recovered.“What, M. Morrel!” said he in a low voice, “you send us away;you are then angry with us!”“No, no,” said M. Morrel, “I am not angry, quite thecontrary, and I do not send you away; but I have no more ships, and therefore Ido not want any sailors.”“No more ships!” returned Penelon; “well, then, you’llbuild some; we’ll wait for you.”“I have no money to build ships with, Penelon,” said the poor ownermournfully, “so I cannot accept your kind offer.”“No more money? Then you must not pay us; we can scud, like thePharaon, under bare poles.”“Enough, enough!” cried Morrel, almost overpowered; “leaveme, I pray you; we shall meet again in a happier time. Emmanuel, go with them,and see that my orders are executed.”“At least, we shall see each other again, M. Morrel?” askedPenelon.“Yes; I hope so, at least. Now go.” He made a sign to Cocles, whowent first; the seamen followed him and Emmanuel brought up the rear.“Now,” said the owner to his wife and daughter, “leave me; Iwish to speak with this gentleman.”And he glanced towards the clerk of Thomson & French, who had remainedmotionless in the corner during this scene, in which he had taken no part,except the few words we have mentioned. The two women looked at this personwhose presence they had entirely forgotten, and retired; but, as she left theapartment, Julie gave the stranger a supplicating glance, to which he repliedby a smile that an indifferent spectator would have been surprised to see onhis stern features. The two men were left alone. “Well, sir,” saidMorrel, sinking into a chair, “you have heard all, and I have nothingfurther to tell you.”“I see,” returned the Englishman, “that a fresh and unmeritedmisfortune has overwhelmed you, and this only increases my desire to serveyou.”“Oh, sir!” cried Morrel.“Let me see,” continued the stranger, “I am one of yourlargest creditors.”“Your bills, at least, are the first that will fall due.”“Do you wish for time to pay?”“A delay would save my honor, and consequently my life.”“How long a delay do you wish for?”Morrel reflected. “Two months,” said he.“I will give you three,” replied the stranger.“But,” asked Morrel, “will the house of Thomson & Frenchconsent?”“Oh, I take everything on myself. Today is the 5th of June.”“Yes.”“Well, renew these bills up to the 5th of September; and on the 5th ofSeptember at eleven o’clock (the hand of the clock pointed to eleven), Ishall come to receive the money.”“I shall expect you,” returned Morrel; “and I will payyou—or I shall be dead.” These last words were uttered in so low atone that the stranger could not hear them. The bills were renewed, the oldones destroyed, and the poor ship-owner found himself with three months beforehim to collect his resources. The Englishman received his thanks with thephlegm peculiar to his nation; and Morrel, overwhelming him with gratefulblessings, conducted him to the staircase. The stranger met Julie on thestairs; she pretended to be descending, but in reality she was waiting for him.“Oh, sir”—said she, clasping her hands.“Mademoiselle,” said the stranger, “one day you will receivea letter signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor.’ Do exactly what the letterbids you, however strange it may appear.”“Yes, sir,” returned Julie.“Do you promise?”“I swear to you I will.”“It is well. Adieu, mademoiselle. Continue to be the good, sweet girl youare at present, and I have great hopes that Heaven will reward you by givingyou Emmanuel for a husband.”Julie uttered a faint cry, blushed like a rose, and leaned against thebaluster. The stranger waved his hand, and continued to descend. In the courthe found Penelon, who, with a rouleau of a hundred francs in either hand,seemed unable to make up his mind to retain them. “Come with me, myfriend,” said the Englishman; “I wish to speak to you.” Chapter 30. The Fifth ofSeptemberThe extension providedfor by the agent of Thomson & French, at the moment when Morrel expected itleast, was to the poor shipowner so decided a stroke of good fortune that healmost dared to believe that fate was at length grown weary of wasting herspite upon him. The same day he told his wife, Emmanuel, and his daughter allthat had occurred; and a ray of hope, if not of tranquillity, returned to thefamily. Unfortunately, however, Morrel had not only engagements with the houseof Thomson & French, who had shown themselves so considerate towards him;and, as he had said, in business he had correspondents, and not friends. Whenhe thought the matter over, he could by no means account for this generousconduct on the part of Thomson & French towards him; and could onlyattribute it to some such selfish argument as this: “We had better help aman who owes us nearly 300,000 francs, and have those 300,000 francs at the endof three months than hasten his ruin, and get only six or eight per cent of ourmoney back again.”Unfortunately, whether through envy or stupidity, all Morrel’scorrespondents did not take this view; and some even came to a contrarydecision. The bills signed by Morrel were presented at his office withscrupulous exactitude, and, thanks to the delay granted by the Englishman, werepaid by Cocles with equal punctuality. Cocles thus remained in his accustomedtranquillity. It was Morrel alone who remembered with alarm, that if he had torepay on the 15th the 50,000 francs of M. de Boville, and on the 30th the32,500 francs of bills, for which, as well as the debt due to the inspector ofprisons, he had time granted, he must be a ruined man.The opinion of all the commercial men was that, under the reverses which hadsuccessively weighed down Morrel, it was impossible for him to remain solvent.Great, therefore, was the astonishment when at the end of the month, hecancelled all his obligations with his usual punctuality. Still confidence wasnot restored to all minds, and the general opinion was that the complete ruinof the unfortunate shipowner had been postponed only until the end of themonth.The month passed, and Morrel made extraordinary efforts to get in all hisresources. Formerly his paper, at any date, was taken with confidence, and waseven in request. Morrel now tried to negotiate bills at ninety days only, andnone of the banks would give him credit. Fortunately, Morrel had some fundscoming in on which he could rely; and, as they reached him, he found himself ina condition to meet his engagements when the end of July came.The agent of Thomson & French had not been again seen at Marseilles; theday after, or two days after his visit to Morrel, he had disappeared; and as inthat city he had had no intercourse but with the mayor, the inspector ofprisons, and M. Morrel, his departure left no trace except in the memories ofthese three persons. As to the sailors of the Pharaon, they must havefound snug berths elsewhere, for they also had disappeared.Captain Gaumard, recovered from his illness, had returned from Palma. Hedelayed presenting himself at Morrel’s, but the owner, hearing of hisarrival, went to see him. The worthy shipowner knew, from Penelon’srecital, of the captain’s brave conduct during the storm, and tried toconsole him. He brought him also the amount of his wages, which Captain Gaumardhad not dared to apply for.As he descended the staircase, Morrel met Penelon, who was going up. Penelonhad, it would seem, made good use of his money, for he was newly clad. When hesaw his employer, the worthy tar seemed much embarrassed, drew on one side intothe corner of the landing-place, passed his quid from one cheek to the other,stared stupidly with his great eyes, and only acknowledged the squeeze of thehand which Morrel as usual gave him by a slight pressure in return. Morrelattributed Penelon’s embarrassment to the elegance of his attire; it wasevident the good fellow had not gone to such an expense on his own account; hewas, no doubt, engaged on board some other vessel, and thus his bashfulnessarose from the fact of his not having, if we may so express ourselves, wornmourning for the Pharaon longer. Perhaps he had come to tell CaptainGaumard of his good luck, and to offer him employment from his new master.“Worthy fellows!” said Morrel,  as he went away, “may yournew master love you as I loved you, and be more fortunate than I havebeen!”August rolled by in unceasing efforts on the part of Morrel to renew his creditor revive the old. On the 20th of August it was known at Marseilles that he hadleft town in the mailcoach, and then it was said that the bills would go toprotest at the end of the month, and that Morrel had gone away and left hischief clerk Emmanuel, and his cashier Cocles, to meet the creditors. But,contrary to all expectation, when the 31st of August came, the house opened asusual, and Cocles appeared behind the grating of the counter, examined allbills presented with the usual scrutiny, and, from first to last, paid all withthe usual precision. There came in, moreover, two drafts which M. Morrel hadfully anticipated, and which Cocles paid as punctually as the bills which theshipowner had accepted. All this was incomprehensible, and then, with thetenacity peculiar to prophets of bad news, the failure was put off until theend of September.On the 1st, Morrel returned; he was awaited by his family with extreme anxiety,for from this journey to Paris they hoped great things. Morrel had thought ofDanglars, who was now immensely rich, and had lain under great obligations toMorrel in former days, since to him it was owing that Danglars entered theservice of the Spanish banker, with whom he had laid the foundations of hisvast wealth. It was said at this moment that Danglars was worth from six toeight millions of francs, and had unlimited credit. Danglars, then, withouttaking a crown from his pocket, could save Morrel; he had but to pass his wordfor a loan, and Morrel was saved. Morrel had long thought of Danglars, but hadkept away from some instinctive motive, and had delayed as long as possibleavailing himself of this last resource. And Morrel was right, for he returnedhome crushed by the humiliation of a refusal.Yet, on his arrival, Morrel did not utter a complaint, or say one harsh word.He embraced his weeping wife and daughter, pressed Emmanuel’s hand withfriendly warmth, and then going to his private room on the second floor hadsent for Cocles.“Then,” said the two women to Emmanuel, “we are indeedruined.”It was agreed in a brief council held among them, that Julie should write toher brother, who was in garrison at Nîmes, to come to them as speedily aspossible. The poor women felt instinctively that they required all theirstrength to support the blow that impended. Besides, Maximilian Morrel, thoughhardly two-and-twenty, had great influence over his father.He was a strong-minded, upright young man. At the time when he decided on hisprofession his father had no desire to choose for him, but had consulted youngMaximilian’s taste. He had at once declared for a military life, and hadin consequence studied hard, passed brilliantly through the Polytechnic School,and left it as sub-lieutenant of the 53rd of the line. For a year he had heldthis rank, and expected promotion on the first vacancy. In his regimentMaximilian Morrel was noted for his rigid observance, not only of theobligations imposed on a soldier, but also of the duties of a man; and he thusgained the name of “the stoic.” We need hardly say that many ofthose who gave him this epithet repeated it because they had heard it, and didnot even know what it meant.This was the young man whom his mother and sister called to their aid tosustain them under the serious trial which they felt they would soon have toendure. They had not mistaken the gravity of this event, for the moment afterMorrel had entered his private office with Cocles, Julie saw the latter leaveit pale, trembling, and his features betraying the utmost consternation. Shewould have questioned him as he passed by her, but the worthy creature hasteneddown the staircase with unusual precipitation, and only raised his hands toheaven and exclaimed:“Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle, what a dreadful misfortune! Who couldever have believed it!”A moment afterwards Julie saw him go upstairs carrying two or three heavyledgers, a portfolio, and a bag of money.Morrel examined the ledgers, opened the portfolio, and counted the money. Allhis funds amounted to 6,000 or 8,000 francs, his bills receivable up to the 5thto 4,000 or 5,000, which, making the best of everything, gave him 14,000 francsto meet debts amounting to 287,500 francs. He had not even the means for makinga possible settlement on account.However, when Morrel went down to his dinner, he appeared very calm. Thiscalmness was more alarming to the two women than the deepest dejection wouldhave been. After dinner Morrel usually went out and used to take his coffee atthe club of the Phocéens, and read the Semaphore; this day he did notleave the house, but returned to his office.As to Cocles, he seemed completely bewildered. For part of the day he went intothe courtyard, seated himself on a stone with his head bare and exposed to theblazing sun. Emmanuel tried to comfort the women, but his eloquence faltered.The young man was too well acquainted with the business of the house, not tofeel that a great catastrophe hung over the Morrel family. Night came, the twowomen had watched, hoping that when he left his room Morrel would come to them,but they heard him pass before their door, and trying to conceal the noise ofhis footsteps. They listened; he went into his sleeping-room, and fastened thedoor inside. Madame Morrel sent her daughter to bed, and half an hour afterJulie had retired, she rose, took off her shoes, and went stealthily along thepassage, to see through the keyhole what her husband was doing.In the passage she saw a retreating shadow; it was Julie, who, uneasy herself,had anticipated her mother. The young lady went towards Madame Morrel.“He is writing,” she said.They had understood each other without speaking. Madame Morrel looked againthrough the keyhole, Morrel was writing; but Madame Morrel remarked, what herdaughter had not observed, that her husband was writing on stamped paper. Theterrible idea that he was writing his will flashed across her; she shuddered,and yet had not strength to utter a word.Next day M. Morrel seemed as calm as ever, went into his office as usual, cameto his breakfast punctually, and then, after dinner, he placed his daughterbeside him, took her head in his arms, and held her for a long time against hisbosom. In the evening, Julie told her mother, that although he was apparentlyso calm, she had noticed that her father’s heart beat violently.The next two days passed in much the same way. On the evening of the 4th ofSeptember, M. Morrel asked his daughter for the key of his study. Julietrembled at this request, which seemed to her of bad omen. Why did her fatherask for this key which she always kept, and which was only taken from her inchildhood as a punishment? The young girl looked at Morrel.“What have I done wrong, father,” she said, “that you shouldtake this key from me?”“Nothing, my dear,” replied the unhappy man, the tears starting tohis eyes at this simple question,—“nothing, only I want it.”Julie made a pretence to feel for the key. “I must have left it in myroom,” she said.And she went out, but instead of going to her apartment she hastened to consultEmmanuel.“Do not give this key to your father,” said he, “and tomorrowmorning, if possible, do not quit him for a moment.”She questioned Emmanuel, but he knew nothing, or would not say what he knew.During the night, between the 4th and 5th of September, Madame Morrel remainedlistening for every sound, and, until three o’clock in the morning, sheheard her husband pacing the room in great agitation. It was threeo’clock when he threw himself on the bed. The mother and daughter passedthe night together. They had expected Maximilian since the previous evening. Ateight o’clock in the morning Morrel entered their chamber. He was calm;but the agitation of the night was legible in his pale and careworn visage.They did not dare to ask him how he had slept. Morrel was kinder to his wife,more affectionate to his daughter, than he had ever been. He could not ceasegazing at and kissing the sweet girl. Julie, mindful of Emmanuel’srequest, was following her father when he quitted the room, but he said to herquickly:“Remain with your mother, dearest.” Julie wished to accompany him.“I wish you to do so,” said he.This was the first time Morrel had ever so spoken, but he said it in a tone ofpaternal kindness, and Julie did not dare to disobey. She remained at the samespot standing mute and motionless. An instant afterwards the door opened, shefelt two arms encircle her, and a mouth pressed her forehead. She looked up anduttered an exclamation of joy.“Maximilian, my dearest brother!” she cried.At these words Madame Morrel rose, and threw herself into her son’s arms.“Mother,” said the young man, looking alternately at Madame Morreland her daughter, “what has occurred—what has happened? Your letterhas frightened me, and I have come hither with all speed.”“Julie,” said Madame Morrel, making a sign to the young man,“go and tell your father that Maximilian has just arrived.”The young lady rushed out of the apartment, but on the first step of thestaircase she found a man holding a letter in his hand.“Are you not Mademoiselle Julie Morrel?” inquired the man, with astrong Italian accent.“Yes, sir,” replied Julie with hesitation; “what is yourpleasure? I do not know you.”“Read this letter,” he said, handing it to her. Julie hesitated.“It concerns the best interests of your father,” said themessenger.The young girl hastily took the letter from him. She opened it quickly andread:“Go this moment to the Allées de Meilhan, enter the house No. 15, ask theporter for the key of the room on the fifth floor, enter the apartment, takefrom the corner of the mantelpiece a purse netted in red silk, and give it toyour father. It is important that he should receive it before eleveno’clock. You promised to obey me implicitly. Remember your oath.“Sinbad the Sailor.”The young girl uttered a joyful cry, raised her eyes, looked round to questionthe messenger, but he had disappeared. She cast her eyes again over the note toperuse it a second time, and saw there was a postscript. She read:“It is important that you should fulfil this mission in person and alone.If you go accompanied by any other person, or should anyone else go in yourplace, the porter will reply that he does not know anything about it.”This postscript decreased greatly the young girl’s happiness. Was therenothing to fear? was there not some snare laid for her? Her innocence had kepther in ignorance of the dangers that might assail a young girl of her age. Butthere is no need to know danger in order to fear it; indeed, it may beobserved, that it is usually unknown perils that inspire the greatest terror.Julie hesitated, and resolved to take counsel. Yet, through a singular impulse,it was neither to her mother nor her brother that she applied, but to Emmanuel.She hastened down and told him what had occurred on the day when the agent ofThomson & French had come to her father’s, related the scene on thestaircase, repeated the promise she had made, and showed him the letter.“You must go, then, mademoiselle,” said Emmanuel.“Go there?” murmured Julie.“Yes; I will accompany you.”“But did you not read that I must be alone?” said Julie.“And you shall be alone,” replied the young man. “I willawait you at the corner of the Rue du Musée, and if you are so long absent asto make me uneasy, I will hasten to rejoin you, and woe to him of whom youshall have cause to complain to me!”“Then, Emmanuel?” said the young girl with hesitation, “it isyour opinion that I should obey this invitation?”“Yes. Did not the messenger say your father’s safety depended uponit?”“But what danger threatens him, then, Emmanuel?” she asked.Emmanuel hesitated a moment, but his desire to make Julie decide immediatelymade him reply.“Listen,” he said; “today is the 5th of September, is itnot?”“Yes.”“Today, then, at eleven o’clock, your father has nearly threehundred thousand francs to pay?”“Yes, we know that.”“Well, then,” continued Emmanuel, “we have not fifteenthousand francs in the house.”“What will happen then?”“Why, if today before eleven o’clock your father has not foundsomeone who will come to his aid, he will be compelled at twelve o’clockto declare himself a bankrupt.”“Oh, come, then, come!” cried she, hastening away with the youngman.During this time, Madame Morrel had told her son everything. The young man knewquite well that, after the succession of misfortunes which had befallen hisfather, great changes had taken place in the style of living and housekeeping;but he did not know that matters had reached such a point. He wasthunderstruck. Then, rushing hastily out of the apartment, he ran upstairs,expecting to find his father in his study, but he rapped there in vain.While he was yet at the door of the study he heard the bedroom door open,turned, and saw his father. Instead of going direct to his study, M. Morrel hadreturned to his bedchamber, which he was only this moment quitting. Morreluttered a cry of surprise at the sight of his son, of whose arrival he wasignorant. He remained motionless on the spot, pressing with his left handsomething he had concealed under his coat. Maximilian sprang down thestaircase, and threw his arms round his father’s neck; but suddenly herecoiled, and placed his right hand on Morrel’s breast.“Father,” he exclaimed, turning pale as death, “what are yougoing to do with that brace of pistols under your coat?”“Oh, this is what I feared!” said Morrel.“Father, father, in Heaven’s name,” exclaimed the young man,“what are these weapons for?”“Maximilian,” replied Morrel, looking fixedly at his son,“you are a man, and a man of honor. Come, and I will explain toyou.”And with a firm step Morrel went up to his study, while Maximilian followedhim, trembling as he went. Morrel opened the door, and closed it behind hisson; then, crossing the anteroom, went to his desk on which he placed thepistols, and pointed with his finger to an open ledger. In this ledger was madeout an exact balance-sheet of his affairs. Morrel had to pay, within half anhour, 287,500 francs. All he possessed was 15,257 francs.“Read!” said Morrel.The young man was overwhelmed as he read. Morrel said not a word. What could hesay? What need he add to such a desperate proof in figures?“And have you done all that is possible, father, to meet this disastrousresult?” asked the young man, after a moment’s pause.“I have,” replied Morrel.“You have no money coming in on which you can rely?”“None.”“You have exhausted every resource?”“All.”“And in half an hour,” said Maximilian in a gloomy voice,“our name is dishonored!”“Blood washes out dishonor,” said Morrel.“You are right, father; I understand you.” Then extending his handtowards one of the pistols, he said, “There is one for you and one forme—thanks!”Morrel caught his hand. “Your mother—your sister! Who will supportthem?”A shudder ran through the young man’s frame. “Father,” hesaid, “do you reflect that you are bidding me to live?”“Yes, I do so bid you,” answered Morrel, “it is your duty.You have a calm, strong mind, Maximilian. Maximilian, you are no ordinary man.I make no requests or commands; I only ask you to examine my position as if itwere your own, and then judge for yourself.”The young man reflected for a moment, then an expression of sublime resignationappeared in his eyes, and with a slow and sad gesture he took off his twoepaulets, the insignia of his rank.“Be it so, then, my father,” he said, extending his hand to Morrel,“die in peace, my father; I will live.”Morrel was about to cast himself on his knees before his son, but Maximiliancaught him in his arms, and those two noble hearts were pressed against eachother for a moment.“You know it is not my fault,” said Morrel.Maximilian smiled. “I know, father, you are the most honorable man I haveever known.”“Good, my son. And now there is no more to be said; go and rejoin yourmother and sister.”“My father,” said the young man, bending his knee, “blessme!” Morrel took the head of his son between his two hands, drew himforward, and kissing his forehead several times said:“Oh, yes, yes, I bless you in my own name, and in the name of threegenerations of irreproachable men, who say through me, ‘The edifice whichmisfortune has destroyed, Providence may build up again.’ On seeing medie such a death, the most inexorable will have pity on you. To you, perhaps,they will accord the time they have refused to me. Then do your best to keepour name free from dishonor. Go to work, labor, young man, struggle ardentlyand courageously; live, yourself, your mother and sister, with the most rigideconomy, so that from day to day the property of those whom I leave in yourhands may augment and fructify. Reflect how glorious a day it will be, howgrand, how solemn, that day of complete restoration, on which you will say inthis very office, ‘My father died because he could not do what I havethis day done; but he died calmly and peaceably, because in dying he knew whatI should do.’”“My father, my father!” cried the young man, “why should younot live?”“If I live, all would be changed; if I live, interest would be convertedinto doubt, pity into hostility; if I live I am only a man who has broken hisword, failed in his engagements—in fact, only a bankrupt. If, on thecontrary, I die, remember, Maximilian, my corpse is that of an honest butunfortunate man. Living, my best friends would avoid my house; dead, allMarseilles will follow me in tears to my last home. Living, you would feelshame at my name; dead, you may raise your head and say, ‘I am the son ofhim you killed, because, for the first time, he has been compelled to break hisword.’”The young man uttered a groan, but appeared resigned.“And now,” said Morrel, “leave me alone, and endeavor to keepyour mother and sister away.”“Will you not see my sister once more?” asked Maximilian. A lastbut final hope was concealed by the young man in the effect of this interview,and therefore he had suggested it. Morrel shook his head. “I saw her thismorning, and bade her adieu.”“Have you no particular commands to leave with me, my father?”inquired Maximilian in a faltering voice.“Yes; my son, and a sacred command.”“Say it, my father.”“The house of Thomson & French is the only one who, from humanity,or, it may be, selfishness—it is not for me to read men’shearts—has had any pity for me. Its agent, who will in ten minutespresent himself to receive the amount of a bill of 287,500 francs, I will notsay granted, but offered me three months. Let this house be the first repaid,my son, and respect this man.”“Father, I will,” said Maximilian.“And now, once more, adieu,” said Morrel. “Go, leave me; Iwould be alone. You will find my will in the secretaire in my bedroom.”The young man remained standing and motionless, having but the force of willand not the power of execution.“Hear me, Maximilian,” said his father. “Suppose I were asoldier like you, and ordered to carry a certain redoubt, and you knew I mustbe killed in the assault, would you not say to me, as you said just now,‘Go, father; for you are dishonored by delay, and death is preferable toshame!’”“Yes, yes,” said the young man, “yes;” and once againembracing his father with convulsive pressure, he said, “Be it so, myfather.”And he rushed out of the study. When his son had left him, Morrel remained aninstant standing with his eyes fixed on the door; then putting forth his arm,he pulled the bell. After a moment’s interval, Cocles appeared.It was no longer the same man—the fearful revelations of the three lastdays had crushed him. This thought—the house of Morrel is about to stoppayment—bent him to the earth more than twenty years would otherwise havedone.“My worthy Cocles,” said Morrel in a tone impossible to describe,“do you remain in the antechamber. When the gentleman who came threemonths ago—the agent of Thomson & French—arrives, announce hisarrival to me.”Cocles made no reply; he made a sign with his head, went into the anteroom, andseated himself. Morrel fell back in his chair, his eyes fixed on the clock;there were seven minutes left, that was all. The hand moved on with incrediblerapidity, he seemed to see its motion.What passed in the mind of this man at the supreme moment of his agony cannotbe told in words. He was still comparatively young, he was surrounded by theloving care of a devoted family, but he had convinced himself by a course ofreasoning, illogical perhaps, yet certainly plausible, that he must separatehimself from all he held dear in the world, even life itself. To form theslightest idea of his feelings, one must have seen his face with its expressionof enforced resignation and its tear-moistened eyes raised to heaven. Theminute hand moved on. The pistols were loaded; he stretched forth his hand,took one up, and murmured his daughter’s name. Then he laid it down,seized his pen, and wrote a few words. It seemed to him as if he had not takena sufficient farewell of his beloved daughter. Then he turned again to theclock, counting time now not by minutes, but by seconds.He took up the deadly weapon again, his lips parted and his eyes fixed on theclock, and then shuddered at the click of the trigger as he cocked the pistol.At this moment of mortal anguish the cold sweat came forth upon his brow, apang stronger than death clutched at his heart-strings. He heard the door ofthe staircase creak on its hinges—the clock gave its warning to strikeeleven—the door of his study opened. Morrel did not turn round—heexpected these words of Cocles, “The agent of Thomson &French.”He placed the muzzle of the pistol between his teeth. Suddenly he heard acry—it was his daughter’s voice. He turned and saw Julie. Thepistol fell from his hands.“My father!” cried the young girl, out of breath, and half deadwith joy—“saved, you are saved!” And she threw herself intohis arms, holding in her extended hand a red, netted silk purse.“Saved, my child!” said Morrel; “what do you mean?”“Yes, saved—saved! See, see!” said the young girl.Morrel took the purse, and started as he did so, for a vague remembrancereminded him that it once belonged to himself. At one end was the receiptedbill for the 287,000 francs, and at the other was a diamond as large as ahazel-nut, with these words on a small slip of parchment: Julie’sDowry.Morrel passed his hand over his brow; it seemed to him a dream. At this momentthe clock struck eleven. He felt as if each stroke of the hammer fell upon hisheart.“Explain, my child,” he said, “Explain, my child,” hesaid, “explain—where did you find this purse?”“In a house in the Allées de Meilhan, No. 15, on the corner of amantelpiece in a small room on the fifth floor.”“But,” cried Morrel, “this purse is not yours!” Juliehanded to her father the letter she had received in the morning.“And did you go alone?” asked Morrel, after he had read it.“Emmanuel accompanied me, father. He was to have waited for me at thecorner of the Rue du Musée, but, strange to say, he was not there when Ireturned.”“Monsieur Morrel!” exclaimed a voice on the stairs; “MonsieurMorrel!”“It is his voice!” said Julie. At this moment Emmanuel entered, hiscountenance full of animation and joy.“The Pharaon!” he cried; “the Pharaon!”“What!—what!—the Pharaon! Are you mad, Emmanuel? Youknow the vessel is lost.”“The Pharaon, sir—they signal the Pharaon! ThePharaon is entering the harbor!”Morrel fell back in his chair, his strength was failing him; his understandingweakened by such events, refused to comprehend such incredible, unheard-of,fabulous facts. But his son came in.“Father,” cried Maximilian, “how could you say thePharaon was lost? The lookout has signalled her, and they say she is nowcoming into port.”“My dear friends,” said Morrel, “if this be so, it must be amiracle of heaven! Impossible, impossible!”But what was real and not less incredible was the purse he held in his hand,the acceptance receipted—the splendid diamond.“Ah, sir,” exclaimed Cocles, “what can it mean?—thePharaon?”“Come, dear ones,” said Morrel, rising from his seat, “let usgo and see, and Heaven have pity upon us if it be false intelligence!”They all went out, and on the stairs met Madame Morrel, who had been afraid togo up into the study. In a moment they were at the Canebière. There was a crowdon the pier. All the crowd gave way before Morrel. “The Pharaon!the Pharaon!” said every voice.And, wonderful to see, in front of the tower of Saint-Jean, was a ship bearingon her stern these words, printed in white letters, “The Pharaon,Morrel & Son, of Marseilles.” She was the exact duplicate of theother Pharaon, and loaded, as that had been, with cochineal and indigo.She cast anchor, clued up sails, and on the deck was Captain Gaumard givingorders, and good old Penelon making signals to M. Morrel. To doubt any longerwas impossible; there was the evidence of the senses, and ten thousand personswho came to corroborate the testimony.As Morrel and his son embraced on the pier-head, in the presence and amid theapplause of the whole city witnessing this event, a man, with his facehalf-covered by a black beard, and who, concealed behind the sentry-box,watched the scene with delight, uttered these words in a low tone:“Be happy, noble heart, be blessed for all the good thou hast done andwilt do hereafter, and let my gratitude remain in obscurity like your gooddeeds.”And with a smile expressive of supreme content, he left his hiding-place, andwithout being observed, descended one of the flights of steps provided fordebarkation, and hailing three times, shouted “Jacopo, Jacopo,Jacopo!”Then a launch came to shore, took him on board, and conveyed him to a yachtsplendidly fitted up, on whose deck he sprung with the activity of a sailor;thence he once again looked towards Morrel, who, weeping with joy, was shakinghands most cordially with all the crowd around him, and thanking with a lookthe unknown benefactor whom he seemed to be seeking in the skies.“And now,” said the unknown, “farewell kindness, humanity,and gratitude! Farewell to all the feelings that expand the heart! I have beenHeaven’s substitute to recompense the good—now the god of vengeanceyields to me his power to punish the wicked!”At these words he gave a signal, and, as if only awaiting this signal, theyacht instantly put out to sea. Chapter 31. Italy: Sinbadthe SailorTowards the beginning ofthe year 1838, two young men belonging to the first society of Paris, theViscount Albert de Morcerf and the Baron Franz d’Épinay, were atFlorence. They had agreed to see the Carnival at Rome that year, and thatFranz, who for the last three or four years had inhabited Italy, should act ascicerone to Albert.As it is no inconsiderable affair to spend the Carnival at Rome, especiallywhen you have no great desire to sleep on the Piazza del Popolo, or the CampoVaccino, they wrote to Signor Pastrini, the proprietor of the Hôtel de Londres,Piazza di Spagna, to reserve comfortable apartments for them. Signor Pastrinireplied that he had only two rooms and a parlor on the third floor, which heoffered at the low charge of a louis per diem. They accepted his offer; butwishing to make the best use of the time that was left, Albert started forNaples. As for Franz, he remained at Florence, and after having passed a fewdays in exploring the paradise of the Cascine, and spending two or threeevenings at the houses of the Florentine nobility, he took a fancy into hishead (having already visited Corsica, the cradle of Bonaparte) to visit Elba,the waiting-place of Napoleon.One evening he cast off the painter of a sailboat from the iron ring thatsecured it to the dock at Leghorn, wrapped himself in his coat and lay down,and said to the crew,—“To the Island of Elba!”The boat shot out of the harbor like a bird and the next morning Franzdisembarked at Porto-Ferrajo. He traversed the island, after having followedthe traces which the footsteps of the giant have left, and re-embarked forMarciana.Two hours after he again landed at Pianosa, where he was assured that redpartridges abounded. The sport was bad; Franz only succeeded in killing a fewpartridges, and, like every unsuccessful sportsman, he returned to the boatvery much out of temper.“Ah, if your excellency chose,” said the captain, “you mighthave capital sport.”“Where?”“Do you see that island?” continued the captain, pointing to aconical pile rising from the indigo sea.“Well, what is this island?”“The Island of Monte Cristo.”“But I have no permission to shoot over this island.”“Your excellency does not require a permit, for the island isuninhabited.”“Ah, indeed!” said the young man. “A desert island in themidst of the Mediterranean must be a curiosity.”“It is very natural; this island is a mass of rocks, and does not containan acre of land capable of cultivation.”“To whom does this island belong?”“To Tuscany.”“What game shall I find there!”“Thousands of wild goats.”“Who live upon the stones, I suppose,” said Franz with anincredulous smile.“No, but by browsing the shrubs and trees that grow out of the crevicesof the rocks.”“Where can I sleep?”“On shore in the grottos, or on board in your cloak; besides, if yourexcellency pleases, we can leave as soon as you like—we can sail as wellby night as by day, and if the wind drops we can use our oars.”As Franz had sufficient time, and his apartments at Rome were not yetavailable, he accepted the proposition. Upon his answer in the affirmative, thesailors exchanged a few words together in a low tone. “Well,” askedhe, “what now? Is there any difficulty in the way?”“No.” replied the captain, “but we must warn your excellencythat the island is an infected port.”“What do you mean?”“Monte Cristo although uninhabited, yet serves occasionally as a refugefor the smugglers and pirates who come from Corsica, Sardinia, and Africa, andif it becomes known that we have been there, we shall have to performquarantine for six days on our return to Leghorn.”“The deuce! That puts a different face on the matter. Six days! Why,that’s as long as the Almighty took to make the world! Too long await—too long.”“But who will say your excellency has been to Monte Cristo?”“Oh, I shall not,” cried Franz.“Nor I, nor I,” chorused the sailors.“Then steer for Monte Cristo.”The captain gave his orders, the helm was put up, and the boat was soon sailingin the direction of the island. Franz waited until all was in order, and whenthe sail was filled, and the four sailors had taken their places—threeforward, and one at the helm—he resumed the conversation.“Gaetano,” said he to the captain, “you tell me Monte Cristoserves as a refuge for pirates, who are, it seems to me, a very different kindof game from the goats.”“Yes, your excellency, and it is true.”“I knew there were smugglers, but I thought that since the capture ofAlgiers, and the destruction of the regency, pirates existed only in theromances of Cooper and Captain Marryat.”“Your excellency is mistaken; there are pirates, like the bandits whowere believed to have been exterminated by Pope Leo XII., and who yet, everyday, rob travellers at the gates of Rome. Has not your excellency heard thatthe French chargé d’affaires was robbed six months ago within fivehundred paces of Velletri?”“Oh, yes, I heard that.”“Well, then, if, like us, your excellency lived at Leghorn, you wouldhear, from time to time, that a little merchant vessel, or an English yachtthat was expected at Bastia, at Porto-Ferrajo, or at Civita Vecchia, has notarrived; no one knows what has become of it, but, doubtless, it has struck on arock and foundered. Now this rock it has met has been a long and narrow boat,manned by six or eight men, who have surprised and plundered it, some dark andstormy night, near some desert and gloomy island, as bandits plunder a carriagein the recesses of a forest.”“But,” asked Franz, who lay wrapped in his cloak at the bottom ofthe boat, “why do not those who have been plundered complain to theFrench, Sardinian, or Tuscan governments?”“Why?” said Gaetano with a smile.“Yes, why?”“Because, in the first place, they transfer from the vessel to their ownboat whatever they think worth taking, then they bind the crew hand and foot,they attach to everyone’s neck a four-and-twenty-pound ball, a large holeis chopped in the vessel’s bottom, and then they leave her. At the end often minutes the vessel begins to roll heavily and settle down. First onegun’l goes under, then the other. Then they lift and sink again, and bothgo under at once. All at once there’s a noise like acannon—that’s the air blowing up the deck. Soon the water rushesout of the scupper-holes like a whale spouting, the vessel gives a last groan,spins round and round, and disappears, forming a vast whirlpool in the ocean,and then all is over, so that in five minutes nothing but the eye of God cansee the vessel where she lies at the bottom of the sea. Do you understandnow,” said the captain, “why no complaints are made to thegovernment, and why the vessel never reaches port?”It is probable that if Gaetano had related this previous to proposing theexpedition, Franz would have hesitated, but now that they had started, hethought it would be cowardly to draw back. He was one of those men who do notrashly court danger, but if danger presents itself, combat it with the mostunalterable coolness. Calm and resolute, he treated any peril as he would anadversary in a duel,—calculated its probable method of approach;retreated, if at all, as a point of strategy and not from cowardice; was quickto see an opening for attack, and won victory at a single thrust.“Bah!” said he, “I have travelled through Sicily andCalabria—I have sailed two months in the Archipelago, and yet I never saweven the shadow of a bandit or a pirate.”“I did not tell your excellency this to deter you from yourproject,” replied Gaetano, “but you questioned me, and I haveanswered; that’s all.”“Yes, and your conversation is most interesting; and as I wish to enjoyit as long as possible, steer for Monte Cristo.”The wind blew strongly, the boat made six or seven knots an hour, and they wererapidly reaching the end of their voyage. As they drew near the island seemedto lift from the sea, and the air was so clear that they could alreadydistinguish the rocks heaped on one another, like cannon balls in an arsenal,with green bushes and trees growing in the crevices. As for the sailors,although they appeared perfectly tranquil yet it was evident that they were onthe alert, and that they carefully watched the glassy surface over which theywere sailing, and on which a few fishing-boats, with their white sails, werealone visible.They were within fifteen miles of Monte Cristo when the sun began to set behindCorsica, whose mountains appeared against the sky, showing their rugged peaksin bold relief; this mass of rock, like the giant Adamastor, rose dead ahead, aformidable barrier, and intercepting the light that gilded its massive peaks sothat the voyagers were in shadow. Little by little the shadow rose higher andseemed to drive before it the last rays of the expiring day; at last thereflection rested on the summit of the mountain, where it paused an instant,like the fiery crest of a volcano, then gloom gradually covered the summit asit had covered the base, and the island now only appeared to be a gray mountainthat grew continually darker; half an hour after, the night was quite dark.Fortunately, the mariners were used to these latitudes, and knew every rock inthe Tuscan Archipelago; for in the midst of this obscurity Franz was notwithout uneasiness—Corsica had long since disappeared, and Monte Cristoitself was invisible; but the sailors seemed, like the lynx, to see in thedark, and the pilot who steered did not evince the slightest hesitation.An hour had passed since the sun had set, when Franz fancied he saw, at aquarter of a mile to the left, a dark mass, but he could not precisely make outwhat it was, and fearing to excite the mirth of the sailors by mistaking afloating cloud for land, he remained silent; suddenly a great light appeared onthe strand; land might resemble a cloud, but the fire was not a meteor.“What is this light?” asked he.“Hush!” said the captain; “it is a fire.”“But you told me the island was uninhabited?”“I said there were no fixed habitations on it, but I said also that itserved sometimes as a harbor for smugglers.”“And for pirates?”“And for pirates,” returned Gaetano, repeating Franz’s words.“It is for that reason I have given orders to pass the island, for, asyou see, the fire is behind us.”“But this fire?” continued Franz. “It seems to me ratherreassuring than otherwise; men who did not wish to be seen would not light afire.”“Oh, that goes for nothing,” said Gaetano. “If you can guessthe position of the island in the darkness, you will see that the fire cannotbe seen from the side or from Pianosa, but only from the sea.”“You think, then, this fire indicates the presence of unpleasantneighbors?”“That is what we must find out,” returned Gaetano, fixing his eyeson this terrestrial star.“How can you find out?”“You shall see.”Gaetano consulted with his companions, and after five minutes’ discussiona manœuvre was executed which caused the vessel to tack about, they returnedthe way they had come, and in a few minutes the fire disappeared, hidden by anelevation of the land. The pilot again changed the course of the boat, whichrapidly approached the island, and was soon within fifty paces of it. Gaetanolowered the sail, and the boat came to rest. All this was done in silence, andfrom the moment that their course was changed not a word was spoken.Gaetano, who had proposed the expedition, had taken all the responsibility onhimself; the four sailors fixed their eyes on him, while they got out theiroars and held themselves in readiness to row away, which, thanks to thedarkness, would not be difficult. As for Franz, he examined his arms with theutmost coolness; he had two double-barrelled guns and a rifle; he loaded them,looked at the priming, and waited quietly.During this time the captain had thrown off his vest and shirt, and secured histrousers round his waist; his feet were naked, so he had no shoes and stockingsto take off; after these preparations he placed his finger on his lips, andlowering himself noiselessly into the sea, swam towards the shore with suchprecaution that it was impossible to hear the slightest sound; he could only betraced by the phosphorescent line in his wake. This track soon disappeared; itwas evident that he had touched the shore.Everyone on board remained motionless for half an hour, when the same luminoustrack was again observed, and the swimmer was soon on board.“Well?” exclaimed Franz and the sailors in unison.“They are Spanish smugglers,” said he; “they have with themtwo Corsican bandits.”“And what are these Corsican bandits doing here with Spanishsmugglers?”“Alas,” returned the captain with an accent of the most profoundpity, “we ought always to help one another. Very often the bandits arehard pressed by gendarmes or carbineers; well, they see a vessel, and goodfellows like us on board, they come and demand hospitality of us; youcan’t refuse help to a poor hunted devil; we receive them, and forgreater security we stand out to sea. This costs us nothing, and saves thelife, or at least the liberty, of a fellow-creature, who on the first occasionreturns the service by pointing out some safe spot where we can land our goodswithout interruption.”“Ah!” said Franz, “then you are a smuggler occasionally,Gaetano?”“Your excellency, we must live somehow,” returned the other,smiling impenetrably.“Then you know the men who are now on Monte Cristo?”“Oh, yes, we sailors are like freemasons, and recognize each other bysigns.”“And do you think we have nothing to fear if we land?”“Nothing at all; smugglers are not thieves.”“But these two Corsican bandits?” said Franz, calculating thechances of peril.“It is not their fault that they are bandits, but that of theauthorities.”“How so?”“Because they are pursued for having made a stiff, as if it was not in aCorsican’s nature to revenge himself.”“What do you mean by having made a stiff?—having assassinated aman?” said Franz, continuing his investigation.“I mean that they have killed an enemy, which is a very differentthing,” returned the captain.“Well,” said the young man, “let us demand hospitality ofthese smugglers and bandits. Do you think they will grant it?”“Without doubt.”“How many are they?”“Four, and the two bandits make six.”“Just our number, so that if they prove troublesome, we shall be able tohold them in check; so, for the last time, steer to Monte Cristo.”“Yes, but your excellency will permit us to take all dueprecautions.”“By all means, be as wise as Nestor and as prudent as Ulysses; I do morethan permit, I exhort you.”“Silence, then!” said Gaetano.Everyone obeyed. For a man who, like Franz, viewed his position in its truelight, it was a grave one. He was alone in the darkness with sailors whom hedid not know, and who had no reason to be devoted to him; who knew that he hadseveral thousand francs in his belt, and who had often examined hisweapons,—which were very beautiful,—if not with envy, at least withcuriosity. On the other hand, he was about to land, without any other escortthan these men, on an island which had, indeed, a very religious name, butwhich did not seem to Franz likely to afford him much hospitality, thanks tothe smugglers and bandits. The history of the scuttled vessels, which hadappeared improbable during the day, seemed very probable at night; placed as hewas between two possible sources of danger, he kept his eye on the crew, andhis gun in his hand.The sailors had again hoisted sail, and the vessel was once more cleaving thewaves. Through the darkness Franz, whose eyes were now more accustomed to it,could see the looming shore along which the boat was sailing, and then, as theyrounded a rocky point, he saw the fire more brilliant than ever, and about itfive or six persons seated. The blaze illumined the sea for a hundred pacesaround. Gaetano skirted the light, carefully keeping the boat in the shadow;then, when they were opposite the fire, he steered to the centre of the circle,singing a fishing song, of which his companions sung the chorus.At the first words of the song the men seated round the fire arose andapproached the landing-place, their eyes fixed on the boat, evidently seekingto know who the new-comers were and what were their intentions. They soonappeared satisfied and returned (with the exception of one, who remained at theshore) to their fire, at which the carcass of a goat was roasting. When theboat was within twenty paces of the shore, the man on the beach, who carried acarbine, presented arms after the manner of a sentinel, and cried, “Whocomes there?” in Sardinian.Franz coolly cocked both barrels. Gaetano then exchanged a few words with thisman which the traveller did not understand, but which evidently concerned him.“Will your excellency give your name, or remain incognito?”asked the captain.“My name must rest unknown,” replied Franz; “merely say I ama Frenchman travelling for pleasure.”As soon as Gaetano had transmitted this answer, the sentinel gave an order toone of the men seated round the fire, who rose and disappeared among the rocks.Not a word was spoken, everyone seemed occupied, Franz with his disembarkment,the sailors with their sails, the smugglers with their goat; but in the midstof all this carelessness it was evident that they mutually observed each other.The man who had disappeared returned suddenly on the opposite side to that bywhich he had left; he made a sign with his head to the sentinel, who, turningto the boat, said, “S’accommodi.” The Italians’accommodi is untranslatable; it means at once, “Come,enter, you are welcome; make yourself at home; you are the master.” It islike that Turkish phrase of Molière’s that so astonished the bourgeoisgentleman by the number of things implied in its utterance.The sailors did not wait for a second invitation; four strokes of the oarbrought them to land; Gaetano sprang to shore, exchanged a few words with thesentinel, then his comrades disembarked, and lastly came Franz. One of his gunswas swung over his shoulder, Gaetano had the other, and a sailor held hisrifle; his dress, half artist, half dandy, did not excite any suspicion, and,consequently, no disquietude. The boat was moored to the shore, and theyadvanced a few paces to find a comfortable bivouac; but, doubtless, the spotthey chose did not suit the smuggler who filled the post of sentinel, for hecried out:“Not that way, if you please.”Gaetano faltered an excuse, and advanced to the opposite side, while twosailors kindled torches at the fire to light them on their way.They advanced about thirty paces, and then stopped at a small esplanadesurrounded with rocks, in which seats had been cut, not unlike sentry-boxes.Around in the crevices of the rocks grew a few dwarf oaks and thick bushes ofmyrtles. Franz lowered a torch, and saw by the mass of cinders that hadaccumulated that he was not the first to discover this retreat, which was,doubtless, one of the halting-places of the wandering visitors of Monte Cristo.As for his suspicions, once on terra firma, once that he had seen theindifferent, if not friendly, appearance of his hosts, his anxiety had quitedisappeared, or rather, at sight of the goat, had turned to appetite. Hementioned this to Gaetano, who replied that nothing could be more easy than toprepare a supper when they had in their boat, bread, wine, half a dozenpartridges, and a good fire to roast them by.“Besides,” added he, “if the smell of their roast meat temptsyou, I will go and offer them two of our birds for a slice.”“You are a born diplomat,” returned Franz; “go andtry.”Meanwhile the sailors had collected dried sticks and branches with which theymade a fire. Franz waited impatiently, inhaling the aroma of the roasted meat,when the captain returned with a mysterious air.“Well,” said Franz, “anything new?—do theyrefuse?”“On the contrary,” returned Gaetano, “the chief, who was toldyou were a young Frenchman, invites you to sup with him.”“Well,” observed Franz, “this chief is very polite, and I seeno objection—the more so as I bring my share of the supper.”“Oh, it is not that; he has plenty, and to spare, for supper; but hemakes one condition, and rather a peculiar one, before he will receive you athis house.”“His house? Has he built one here, then?”“No, but he has a very comfortable one all the same, so they say.”“You know this chief, then?”“I have heard talk of him.”“Favorably or otherwise?”“Both.”“The deuce!—and what is this condition?”“That you are blindfolded, and do not take off the bandage until hehimself bids you.”Franz looked at Gaetano, to see, if possible, what he thought of this proposal.“Ah,” replied he, guessing Franz’s thought, “I knowthis is a serious matter.”“What should you do in my place?”“I, who have nothing to lose,—I should go.”“You would accept?”“Yes, were it only out of curiosity.”“There is something very peculiar about this chief, then?”“Listen,” said Gaetano, lowering his voice, “I do not know ifwhat they say is true”—he stopped to see if anyone was near.“What do they say?”“That this chief inhabits a cavern to which the Pitti Palace isnothing.”“What nonsense!” said Franz, reseating himself.“It is no nonsense; it is quite true. Cama, the pilot of the SaintFerdinand, went in once, and he came back amazed, vowing that suchtreasures were only to be heard of in fairy tales.”“Do you know,” observed Franz, “that with such stories youmake me think of Ali Baba’s enchanted cavern?”“I tell you what I have been told.”“Then you advise me to accept?”“Oh, I don’t say that; your excellency will do as you please; Ishould be sorry to advise you in the matter.”Franz pondered the matter for a few moments, concluded that a man so rich couldnot have any intention of plundering him of what little he had, and seeing onlythe prospect of a good supper, accepted. Gaetano departed with the reply. Franzwas prudent, and wished to learn all he possibly could concerning his host. Heturned towards the sailor, who, during this dialogue, had sat gravely pluckingthe partridges with the air of a man proud of his office, and asked him howthese men had landed, as no vessel of any kind was visible.“Never mind that,” returned the sailor, “I know theirvessel.”“Is it a very beautiful vessel?”“I would not wish for a better to sail round the world.”“Of what burden is she?”“About a hundred tons; but she is built to stand any weather. She is whatthe English call a yacht.”“Where was she built?”“I know not; but my own opinion is she is a Genoese.”“And how did a leader of smugglers,” continued Franz,“venture to build a vessel designed for such a purpose at Genoa?”“I did not say that the owner was a smuggler,” replied the sailor.“No; but Gaetano did, I thought.”“Gaetano had only seen the vessel from a distance, he had not then spokento anyone.”“And if this person be not a smuggler, who is he?”“A wealthy signor, who travels for his pleasure.”“Come,” thought Franz, “he is still more mysterious, sincethe two accounts do not agree.”“What is his name?”“If you ask him, he says Sinbad the Sailor; but I doubt if it be his realname.”“Sinbad the Sailor?”“Yes.”“And where does he reside?”“On the sea.”“What country does he come from?”“I do not know.”“Have you ever seen him?”“Sometimes.”“What sort of a man is he?”“Your excellency will judge for yourself.”“Where will he receive me?”“No doubt in the subterranean palace Gaetano told you of.”“Have you never had the curiosity, when you have landed and found thisisland deserted, to seek for this enchanted palace?”“Oh, yes, more than once, but always in vain; we examined the grotto allover, but we never could find the slightest trace of any opening; they say thatthe door is not opened by a key, but a magic word.”“Decidedly,” muttered Franz, “this is an ArabianNights’ adventure.”“His excellency waits for you,” said a voice, which he recognizedas that of the sentinel. He was accompanied by two of the yacht’s crew.Franz drew his handkerchief from his pocket, and presented it to the man whohad spoken to him. Without uttering a word, they bandaged his eyes with a carethat showed their apprehensions of his committing some indiscretion. Afterwardshe was made to promise that he would not make the least attempt to raise thebandage. He promised.Then his two guides took his arms, and he went on, guided by them, and precededby the sentinel. After going about thirty paces, he smelt the appetizing odorof the kid that was roasting, and knew thus that he was passing the bivouac;they then led him on about fifty paces farther, evidently advancing towardsthat part of the shore where they would not allow Gaetano to go—a refusalhe could now comprehend.Presently, by a change in the atmosphere, he knew that they were entering acave; after going on for a few seconds more he heard a crackling, and it seemedto him as though the atmosphere again changed, and became balmy and perfumed.At length his feet touched on a thick and soft carpet, and his guides let gotheir hold of him. There was a moment’s silence, and then a voice, inexcellent French, although, with a foreign accent, said:“Welcome, sir. I beg you will remove your bandage.”It may be supposed, then, Franz did not wait for a repetition of thispermission, but took off the handkerchief, and found himself in the presence ofa man from thirty-eight to forty years of age, dressed in a Tunisian costume,that is to say, a red cap with a long blue silk tassel, a vest of black clothembroidered with gold, pantaloons of deep red, large and full gaiters of thesame color, embroidered with gold like the vest, and yellow slippers; he had asplendid cashmere round his waist, and a small sharp and crooked cangiar waspassed through his girdle.Although of a paleness that was almost livid, this man had a remarkablyhandsome face; his eyes were penetrating and sparkling; his nose, quitestraight, and projecting direct from the brow, was of the pure Greek type,while his teeth, as white as pearls, were set off to admiration by the blackmoustache that encircled them.His pallor was so peculiar, that it seemed to pertain to one who had been longentombed, and who was incapable of resuming the healthy glow and hue of life.He was not particularly tall, but extremely well made, and, like the men of theSouth, had small hands and feet. But what astonished Franz, who had treatedGaetano’s description as a fable, was the splendor of the apartment inwhich he found himself.The entire chamber was lined with crimson brocade, worked with flowers of gold.In a recess was a kind of divan, surmounted with a stand of Arabian swords insilver scabbards, and the handles resplendent with gems; from the ceiling hunga lamp of Venetian glass, of beautiful shape and color, while the feet restedon a Turkey carpet, in which they sunk to the instep; tapestry hung before thedoor by which Franz had entered, and also in front of another door, leadinginto a second apartment which seemed to be brilliantly illuminated.The host gave Franz time to recover from his surprise, and, moreover, returnedlook for look, not even taking his eyes off him.“Sir,” he said, after a pause, “a thousand excuses for theprecaution taken in your introduction hither; but as, during the greaterportion of the year, this island is deserted, if the secret of this abode werediscovered, I should doubtless, find on my return my temporary retirement in astate of great disorder, which would be exceedingly annoying, not for the lossit occasioned me, but because I should not have the certainty I now possess ofseparating myself from all the rest of mankind at pleasure. Let me now endeavorto make you forget this temporary unpleasantness, and offer you what no doubtyou did not expect to find here—that is to say, a tolerable supper andpretty comfortable beds.”“Ma foi, my dear sir,” replied Franz, “make noapologies. I have always observed that they bandage people’s eyes whopenetrate enchanted palaces, for instance, those of Raoul in theHuguenots, and really I have nothing to complain of, for what I seemakes me think of the wonders of the Arabian Nights.”“Alas! I may say with Lucullus, if I could have anticipated the honor ofyour visit, I would have prepared for it. But such as is my hermitage, it is atyour disposal; such as is my supper, it is yours to share, if you will. Ali, isthe supper ready?”At this moment the tapestry moved aside, and a Nubian, black as ebony, anddressed in a plain white tunic, made a sign to his master that all was preparedin the dining-room.“Now,” said the unknown to Franz, “I do not know if you areof my opinion, but I think nothing is more annoying than to remain two or threehours together without knowing by name or appellation how to address oneanother. Pray observe, that I too much respect the laws of hospitality to askyour name or title. I only request you to give me one by which I may have thepleasure of addressing you. As for myself, that I may put you at your ease, Itell you that I am generally called ‘Sinbad the Sailor.’”“And I,” replied Franz, “will tell you, as I only require hiswonderful lamp to make me precisely like Aladdin, that I see no reason why atthis moment I should not be called Aladdin. That will keep us from going awayfrom the East whither I am tempted to think I have been conveyed by some goodgenius.”“Well, then, Signor Aladdin,” replied the singular Amphitryon,“you heard our repast announced, will you now take the trouble to enterthe dining-room, your humble servant going first to show the way?”At these words, moving aside the tapestry, Sinbad preceded his guest. Franz nowlooked upon another scene of enchantment; the table was splendidly covered, andonce convinced of this important point he cast his eyes around him. Thedining-room was scarcely less striking than the room he had just left; it wasentirely of marble, with antique bas-reliefs of priceless value; and at thefour corners of this apartment, which was oblong, were four magnificentstatues, having baskets in their hands. These baskets contained four pyramidsof most splendid fruit; there were Sicily pine-apples, pomegranates fromMalaga, oranges from the Balearic Isles, peaches from France, and dates fromTunis.The supper consisted of a roast pheasant garnished with Corsican blackbirds; aboar’s ham with jelly, a quarter of a kid with tartar sauce, a gloriousturbot, and a gigantic lobster. Between these large dishes were smaller onescontaining various dainties. The dishes were of silver, and the plates ofJapanese china.Franz rubbed his eyes in order to assure himself that this was not a dream. Alialone was present to wait at table, and acquitted himself so admirably, thatthe guest complimented his host thereupon.“Yes,” replied he, while he did the honors of the supper with muchease and grace—“yes, he is a poor devil who is much devoted to me,and does all he can to prove it. He remembers that I saved his life, and as hehas a regard for his head, he feels some gratitude towards me for having keptit on his shoulders.”Ali approached his master, took his hand, and kissed it.“Would it be impertinent, Signor Sinbad,” said Franz, “to askyou the particulars of this kindness?”“Oh, they are simple enough,” replied the host. “It seems thefellow had been caught wandering nearer to the harem of the Bey of Tunis thanetiquette permits to one of his color, and he was condemned by the Bey to havehis tongue cut out, and his hand and head cut off; the tongue the first day,the hand the second, and the head the third. I always had a desire to have amute in my service, so learning the day his tongue was cut out, I went to theBey, and proposed to give him for Ali a splendid double-barreled gun, which Iknew he was very desirous of having. He hesitated a moment, he was so verydesirous to complete the poor devil’s punishment. But when I added to thegun an English cutlass with which I had shivered his highness’s yataghanto pieces, the Bey yielded, and agreed to forgive the hand and head, but oncondition that the poor fellow never again set foot in Tunis. This was auseless clause in the bargain, for whenever the coward sees the first glimpseof the shores of Africa, he runs down below, and can only be induced to appearagain when we are out of sight of that quarter of the globe.”Franz remained a moment silent and pensive, hardly knowing what to think of thehalf-kindness, half-cruelty, with which his host related the brief narrative.“And like the celebrated sailor whose name you have assumed,” hesaid, by way of changing the conversation, “you pass your life intravelling?”“Yes. I made a vow at a time when I little thought I should ever be ableto accomplish it,” said the unknown with a singular smile; “and Imade some others also which I hope I may fulfil in due season.”Although Sinbad pronounced these words with much calmness, his eyes gave forthgleams of extraordinary ferocity.“You have suffered a great deal, sir?” said Franz inquiringly.Sinbad started and looked fixedly at him, as he replied, “What makes yousuppose so?”“Everything,” answered Franz,—“your voice, your look,your pallid complexion, and even the life you lead.”“I?—I live the happiest life possible, the real life of a pasha. Iam king of all creation. I am pleased with one place, and stay there; I gettired of it, and leave it; I am free as a bird and have wings like one; myattendants obey my slightest wish. Sometimes I amuse myself by delivering somebandit or criminal from the bonds of the law. Then I have my mode of dispensingjustice, silent and sure, without respite or appeal, which condemns or pardons,and which no one sees. Ah, if you had tasted my life, you would not desire anyother, and would never return to the world unless you had some great project toaccomplish there.”“Revenge, for instance!” observed Franz.The unknown fixed on the young man one of those looks which penetrate into thedepth of the heart and thoughts. “And why revenge?” he asked.“Because,” replied Franz, “you seem to me like a man who,persecuted by society, has a fearful account to settle with it.”“Ah!” responded Sinbad, laughing with his singular laugh, whichdisplayed his white and sharp teeth. “You have not guessed rightly. Suchas you see me I am, a sort of philosopher, and one day perhaps I shall go toParis to rival Monsieur Appert, and the man in the little blue cloak.”“And will that be the first time you ever took that journey?”“Yes; it will. I must seem to you by no means curious, but I assure youthat it is not my fault I have delayed it so long—it will happen one dayor the other.”“And do you propose to make this journey very shortly?”“I do not know; it depends on circumstances which depend on certainarrangements.”“I should like to be there at the time you come, and I will endeavor torepay you, as far as lies in my power, for your liberal hospitality displayedto me at Monte Cristo.”“I should avail myself of your offer with pleasure,” replied thehost, “but, unfortunately, if I go there, it will be, in all probability,incognito.”The supper appeared to have been supplied solely for Franz, for the unknownscarcely touched one or two dishes of the splendid banquet to which his guestdid ample justice. Then Ali brought on the dessert, or rather took the basketsfrom the hands of the statues and placed them on the table. Between the twobaskets he placed a small silver cup with a silver cover. The care with whichAli placed this cup on the table roused Franz’s curiosity. He raised thecover and saw a kind of greenish paste, something like preserved angelica, butwhich was perfectly unknown to him. He replaced the lid, as ignorant of whatthe cup contained as he was before he had looked at it, and then casting hiseyes towards his host he saw him smile at his disappointment.“You cannot guess,” said he, “what there is in that smallvase, can you?”“No, I really cannot.”“Well, then, that green preserve is nothing less than the ambrosia whichHebe served at the table of Jupiter.”“But,” replied Franz, “this ambrosia, no doubt, in passingthrough mortal hands has lost its heavenly appellation and assumed a humanname; in vulgar phrase, what may you term this composition, for which, to tellthe truth, I do not feel any particular desire?”“Ah, thus it is that our material origin is revealed,” criedSinbad; “we frequently pass so near to happiness without seeing, withoutregarding it, or if we do see and regard it, yet without recognizing it. Areyou a man for the substantials, and is gold your god? taste this, and the minesof Peru, Guzerat, and Golconda are opened to you. Are you a man ofimagination—a poet? taste this, and the boundaries of possibilitydisappear; the fields of infinite space open to you, you advance free in heart,free in mind, into the boundless realms of unfettered reverie. Are youambitious, and do you seek after the greatnesses of the earth? taste this, andin an hour you will be a king, not a king of a petty kingdom hidden in somecorner of Europe like France, Spain, or England, but king of the world, king ofthe universe, king of creation; without bowing at the feet of Satan, you willbe king and master of all the kingdoms of the earth. Is it not tempting what Ioffer you, and is it not an easy thing, since it is only to do thus?look!”At these words he uncovered the small cup which contained the substance solauded, took a teaspoonful of the magic sweetmeat, raised it to his lips, andswallowed it slowly with his eyes half shut and his head bent backwards. Franzdid not disturb him whilst he absorbed his favorite sweetmeat, but when he hadfinished, he inquired:“What, then, is this precious stuff?”“Did you ever hear,” he replied, “of the Old Man of theMountain, who attempted to assassinate Philippe Auguste?”“Of course I have.”“Well, you know he reigned over a rich valley which was overhung by themountain whence he derived his picturesque name. In this valley weremagnificent gardens planted by Hassen-ben-Sabah, and in these gardens isolatedpavilions. Into these pavilions he admitted the elect, and there, says MarcoPolo, gave them to eat a certain herb, which transported them to Paradise, inthe midst of ever-blooming shrubs, ever-ripe fruit, and ever-lovely virgins.What these happy persons took for reality was but a dream; but it was a dreamso soft, so voluptuous, so enthralling, that they sold themselves body and soulto him who gave it to them, and obedient to his orders as to those of a deity,struck down the designated victim, died in torture without a murmur, believingthat the death they underwent was but a quick transition to that life ofdelights of which the holy herb, now before you, had given them a slightforetaste.”“Then,” cried Franz, “it is hashish! I know that—byname at least.”“That is it precisely, Signor Aladdin; it is hashish—the purest andmost unadulterated hashish of Alexandria,—the hashish of Abou-Gor, thecelebrated maker, the only man, the man to whom there should be built a palace,inscribed with these words, A grateful world to the dealer inhappiness.”“Do you know,” said Franz, “I have a very great inclinationto judge for myself of the truth or exaggeration of your eulogies.”“Judge for yourself, Signor Aladdin—judge, but do not confineyourself to one trial. Like everything else, we must habituate the senses to afresh impression, gentle or violent, sad or joyous. There is a struggle innature against this divine substance,—in nature which is not made for joyand clings to pain. Nature subdued must yield in the combat, the dream mustsucceed to reality, and then the dream reigns supreme, then the dream becomeslife, and life becomes the dream. But what changes occur! It is only bycomparing the pains of actual being with the joys of the assumed existence,that you would desire to live no longer, but to dream thus forever. When youreturn to this mundane sphere from your visionary world, you would seem toleave a Neapolitan spring for a Lapland winter—to quit paradise forearth—heaven for hell! Taste the hashish, guest of mine—taste thehashish.”Franz’s only reply was to take a teaspoonful of the marvellouspreparation, about as much in quantity as his host had eaten, and lift it tohis mouth.“Diable!” he said, after having swallowed the divinepreserve. “I do not know if the result will be as agreeable as youdescribe, but the thing does not appear to me as palatable as you say.”“Because your palate his not yet been attuned to the sublimity of thesubstances it flavors. Tell me, the first time you tasted oysters, tea, porter,truffles, and sundry other dainties which you now adore, did you like them?Could you comprehend how the Romans stuffed their pheasants with assafœtida,and the Chinese eat swallows’ nests? Eh? no! Well, it is the same withhashish; only eat for a week, and nothing in the world will seem to you toequal the delicacy of its flavor, which now appears to you flat anddistasteful. Let us now go into the adjoining chamber, which is your apartment,and Ali will bring us coffee and pipes.”They both arose, and while he who called himself Sinbad—and whom we haveoccasionally named so, that we might, like his guest, have some title by whichto distinguish him—gave some orders to the servant, Franz entered stillanother apartment.It was simply yet richly furnished. It was round, and a large divan completelyencircled it. Divan, walls, ceiling, floor, were all covered with magnificentskins as soft and downy as the richest carpets; there were heavy-manedlion-skins from Atlas, striped tiger-skins from Bengal; panther-skins from theCape, spotted beautifully, like those that appeared to Dante; bear-skins fromSiberia, fox-skins from Norway, and so on; and all these skins were strewn inprofusion one on the other, so that it seemed like walking over the most mossyturf, or reclining on the most luxurious bed.Both laid themselves down on the divan; chibouques with jasmine tubes and ambermouthpieces were within reach, and all prepared so that there was no need tosmoke the same pipe twice. Each of them took one, which Ali lighted and thenretired to prepare the coffee.There was a moment’s silence, during which Sinbad gave himself up tothoughts that seemed to occupy him incessantly, even in the midst of hisconversation; and Franz abandoned himself to that mute reverie, into which wealways sink when smoking excellent tobacco, which seems to remove with its fumeall the troubles of the mind, and to give the smoker in exchange all thevisions of the soul. Ali brought in the coffee.“How do you take it?” inquired the unknown; “in the French orTurkish style, strong or weak, sugar or none, cool or boiling? As you please;it is ready in all ways.”“I will take it in the Turkish style,” replied Franz.“And you are right,” said his host; “it shows you have atendency for an Oriental life. Ah, those Orientals; they are the only men whoknow how to live. As for me,” he added, with one of those singular smileswhich did not escape the young man, “when I have completed my affairs inParis, I shall go and die in the East; and should you wish to see me again, youmust seek me at Cairo, Bagdad, or Ispahan.”“Ma foi,” said Franz, “it would be the easiest thingin the world; for I feel eagle’s wings springing out at my shoulders, andwith those wings I could make a tour of the world in four-and-twentyhours.”“Ah, yes, the hashish is beginning its work. Well, unfurl your wings, andfly into superhuman regions; fear nothing, there is a watch over you; and ifyour wings, like those of Icarus, melt before the sun, we are here to ease yourfall.”He then said something in Arabic to Ali, who made a sign of obedience andwithdrew, but not to any distance.As to Franz a strange transformation had taken place in him. All the bodilyfatigue of the day, all the preoccupation of mind which the events of theevening had brought on, disappeared as they do at the first approach of sleep,when we are still sufficiently conscious to be aware of the coming of slumber.His body seemed to acquire an airy lightness, his perception brightened in aremarkable manner, his senses seemed to redouble their power, the horizoncontinued to expand; but it was not the gloomy horizon of vague alarms, andwhich he had seen before he slept, but a blue, transparent, unbounded horizon,with all the blue of the ocean, all the spangles of the sun, all the perfumesof the summer breeze; then, in the midst of the songs of hissailors,—songs so clear and sonorous, that they would have made a divineharmony had their notes been taken down,—he saw the Island of MonteCristo, no longer as a threatening rock in the midst of the waves, but as anoasis in the desert; then, as his boat drew nearer, the songs became louder,for an enchanting and mysterious harmony rose to heaven, as if some Loreley haddecreed to attract a soul thither, or Amphion, the enchanter, intended there tobuild a city.At length the boat touched the shore, but without effort, without shock, aslips touch lips; and he entered the grotto amidst continued strains of mostdelicious melody. He descended, or rather seemed to descend, several steps,inhaling the fresh and balmy air, like that which may be supposed to reignaround the grotto of Circe, formed from such perfumes as set the minda-dreaming, and such fires as burn the very senses; and he saw again all he hadseen before his sleep, from Sinbad, his singular host, to Ali, the muteattendant; then all seemed to fade away and become confused before his eyes,like the last shadows of the magic lantern before it is extinguished, and hewas again in the chamber of statues, lighted only by one of those pale andantique lamps which watch in the dead of the night over the sleep of pleasure.They were the same statues, rich in form, in attraction, and poesy, with eyesof fascination, smiles of love, and bright and flowing hair. They were Phryne,Cleopatra, Messalina, those three celebrated courtesans. Then among them glidedlike a pure ray, like a Christian angel in the midst of Olympus, one of thosechaste figures, those calm shadows, those soft visions, which seemed to veilits virgin brow before these marble wantons.Then the three statues advanced towards him with looks of love, and approachedthe couch on which he was reposing, their feet hidden in their long whitetunics, their throats bare, hair flowing like waves, and assuming attitudeswhich the gods could not resist, but which saints withstood, and looksinflexible and ardent like those with which the serpent charms the bird; andthen he gave way before looks that held him in a torturing grasp and delightedhis senses as with a voluptuous kiss.It seemed to Franz that he closed his eyes, and in a last look about him sawthe vision of modesty completely veiled; and then followed a dream of passionlike that promised by the Prophet to the elect. Lips of stone turned to flame,breasts of ice became like heated lava, so that to Franz, yielding for thefirst time to the sway of the drug, love was a sorrow and voluptuousness atorture, as burning mouths were pressed to his thirsty lips, and he was held incool serpent-like embraces. The more he strove against this unhallowed passionthe more his senses yielded to its thrall, and at length, weary of a strugglethat taxed his very soul, he gave way and sank back breathless and exhaustedbeneath the kisses of these marble goddesses, and the enchantment of hismarvellous dream. Chapter 32. The WakingWhen Franz returned tohimself, he seemed still to be in a dream. He thought himself in a sepulchre,into which a ray of sunlight in pity scarcely penetrated. He stretched forthhis hand, and touched stone; he rose to his seat, and found himself lying onhis bournous in a bed of dry heather, very soft and odoriferous. The vision hadfled; and as if the statues had been but shadows from the tomb, they hadvanished at his waking.He advanced several paces towards the point whence the light came, and to allthe excitement of his dream succeeded the calmness of reality. He found that hewas in a grotto, went towards the opening, and through a kind of fanlight saw ablue sea and an azure sky. The air and water were shining in the beams of themorning sun; on the shore the sailors were sitting, chatting and laughing; andat ten yards from them the boat was at anchor, undulating gracefully on thewater.There for some time he enjoyed the fresh breeze which played on his brow, andlistened to the dash of the waves on the beach, that left against the rocks alace of foam as white as silver. He was for some time without reflection orthought for the divine charm which is in the things of nature, specially aftera fantastic dream; then gradually this view of the outer world, so calm, sopure, so grand, reminded him of the illusiveness of his vision, and once moreawakened memory. He recalled his arrival on the island, his presentation to asmuggler chief, a subterranean palace full of splendor, an excellent supper,and a spoonful of hashish.It seemed, however, even in the very face of open day, that at least a year hadelapsed since all these things had passed, so deep was the impression made inhis mind by the dream, and so strong a hold had it taken of his imagination.Thus every now and then he saw in fancy amid the sailors, seated on a rock, orundulating in the vessel, one of the shadows which had shared his dream withlooks and kisses. Otherwise, his head was perfectly clear, and his bodyrefreshed; he was free from the slightest headache; on the contrary, he felt acertain degree of lightness, a faculty for absorbing the pure air, and enjoyingthe bright sunshine more vividly than ever.He went gayly up to the sailors, who rose as soon as they perceived him; andthe patron, accosting him, said:“The Signor Sinbad has left his compliments for your excellency, anddesires us to express the regret he feels at not being able to take his leavein person; but he trusts you will excuse him, as very important business callshim to Malaga.”“So, then, Gaetano,” said Franz, “this is, then, all reality;there exists a man who has received me in this island, entertained me rightroyally, and has departed while I was asleep?”“He exists as certainly as that you may see his small yacht with all hersails spread; and if you will use your glass, you will, in all probability,recognize your host in the midst of his crew.”So saying, Gaetano pointed in a direction in which a small vessel was makingsail towards the southern point of Corsica. Franz adjusted his telescope, anddirected it towards the yacht. Gaetano was not mistaken. At the stern themysterious stranger was standing up looking towards the shore, and holding aspy-glass in his hand. He was attired as he had been on the previous evening,and waved his pocket-handkerchief to his guest in token of adieu. Franzreturned the salute by shaking his handkerchief as an exchange of signals.After a second, a slight cloud of smoke was seen at the stern of the vessel,which rose gracefully as it expanded in the air, and then Franz heard a slightreport.“There, do you hear?” observed Gaetano; “he is bidding youadieu.”The young man took his carbine and fired it in the air, but without any ideathat the noise could be heard at the distance which separated the yacht fromthe shore.“What are your excellency’s orders?” inquired Gaetano.“In the first place, light me a torch.”“Ah, yes, I understand,” replied the patron, “to find theentrance to the enchanted apartment. With much pleasure, your excellency, if itwould amuse you; and I will get you the torch you ask for. But I too have hadthe idea you have, and two or three times the same fancy has come over me; butI have always given it up. Giovanni, light a torch,” he added, “andgive it to his excellency.”Giovanni obeyed. Franz took the lamp, and entered the subterranean grotto,followed by Gaetano. He recognized the place where he had awaked by the bed ofheather that was there; but it was in vain that he carried his torch all roundthe exterior surface of the grotto. He saw nothing, unless that, by traces ofsmoke, others had before him attempted the same thing, and, like him, in vain.Yet he did not leave a foot of this granite wall, as impenetrable as futurity,without strict scrutiny; he did not see a fissure without introducing the bladeof his hunting sword into it, or a projecting point on which he did not leanand press in the hopes it would give way. All was vain; and he lost two hoursin his attempts, which were at last utterly useless. At the end of this time hegave up his search, and Gaetano smiled.When Franz appeared again on the shore, the yacht only seemed like a smallwhite speck on the horizon. He looked again through his glass, but even then hecould not distinguish anything.Gaetano reminded him that he had come for the purpose of shooting goats, whichhe had utterly forgotten. He took his fowling-piece, and began to hunt over theisland with the air of a man who is fulfilling a duty, rather than enjoying apleasure; and at the end of a quarter of an hour he had killed a goat and twokids. These animals, though wild and agile as chamois, were too much likedomestic goats, and Franz could not consider them as game. Moreover, otherideas, much more enthralling, occupied his mind. Since, the evening before, hehad really been the hero of one of the tales of the Thousand and OneNights, and he was irresistibly attracted towards the grotto.Then, in spite of the failure of his first search, he began a second, afterhaving told Gaetano to roast one of the two kids. The second visit was a longone, and when he returned the kid was roasted and the repast ready. Franz wassitting on the spot where he was on the previous evening when his mysterioushost had invited him to supper; and he saw the little yacht, now like asea-gull on the wave, continuing her flight towards Corsica.“Why,” he remarked to Gaetano, “you told me that SignorSinbad was going to Malaga, while it seems he is in the direction ofPorto-Vecchio.”“Don’t you remember,” said the patron, “I told you thatamong the crew there were two Corsican brigands?”“True; and he is going to land them,” added Franz.“Precisely so,” replied Gaetano. “Ah, he is one who fearsneither God nor Satan, they say, and would at any time run fifty leagues out ofhis course to do a poor devil a service.”“But such services as these might involve him with the authorities of thecountry in which he practices this kind of philanthropy,” said Franz.“And what cares he for that,” replied Gaetano with a laugh,“or any authorities? He smiles at them. Let them try to pursue him! Why,in the first place, his yacht is not a ship, but a bird, and he would beat anyfrigate three knots in every nine; and if he were to throw himself on thecoast, why, is he not certain of finding friends everywhere?”It was perfectly clear that the Signor Sinbad, Franz’s host, had thehonor of being on excellent terms with the smugglers and bandits along thewhole coast of the Mediterranean, and so enjoyed exceptional privileges. As toFranz, he had no longer any inducement to remain at Monte Cristo. He had lostall hope of detecting the secret of the grotto; he consequently despatched hisbreakfast, and, his boat being ready, he hastened on board, and they were soonunder way. At the moment the boat began her course they lost sight of theyacht, as it disappeared in the gulf of Porto-Vecchio. With it was effaced thelast trace of the preceding night; and then supper, Sinbad, hashish,statues,—all became a dream for Franz.The boat sailed on all day and all night, and next morning, when the sun rose,they had lost sight of Monte Cristo.When Franz had once again set foot on shore, he forgot, for the moment atleast, the events which had just passed, while he finished his affairs ofpleasure at Florence, and then thought of nothing but how he should rejoin hiscompanion, who was awaiting him at Rome.He set out, and on the Saturday evening reached the Place de la Douane by themail-coach. An apartment, as we have said, had been retained beforehand, andthus he had but to go to Signor Pastrini’s hotel. But this was not soeasy a matter, for the streets were thronged with people, and Rome was alreadya prey to that low and feverish murmur which precedes all great events; and atRome there are four great events in every year,—the Carnival, Holy Week,Corpus Christi, and the Feast of St. Peter.All the rest of the year the city is in that state of dull apathy, between lifeand death, which renders it similar to a kind of station between this world andthe next—a sublime spot, a resting-place full of poetry and character,and at which Franz had already halted five or six times, and at each time foundit more marvellous and striking.At last he made his way through the mob, which was continually increasing andgetting more and more turbulent, and reached the hotel. On his first inquiry hewas told, with the impertinence peculiar to hired hackney-coachmen andinnkeepers with their houses full, that there was no room for him at the Hôtelde Londres. Then he sent his card to Signor Pastrini, and asked for Albert deMorcerf. This plan succeeded; and Signor Pastrini himself ran to him, excusinghimself for having made his excellency wait, scolding the waiters, taking thecandlestick from the porter, who was ready to pounce on the traveller and wasabout to lead him to Albert, when Morcerf himself appeared.The apartment consisted of two small rooms and a parlor. The two rooms lookedon to the street—a fact which Signor Pastrini commented upon as aninappreciable advantage. The rest of the floor was hired by a very richgentleman who was supposed to be a Sicilian or Maltese; but the host was unableto decide to which of the two nations the traveller belonged.“Very good, signor Pastrini,” said Franz; “but we must havesome supper instantly, and a carriage for tomorrow and the followingdays.”“As to supper,” replied the landlord, “you shall be servedimmediately; but as for the carriage——”“What as to the carriage?” exclaimed Albert. “Come, come,Signor Pastrini, no joking; we must have a carriage.”“Sir,” replied the host, “we will do all in our power toprocure you one—this is all I can say.”“And when shall we know?” inquired Franz.“Tomorrow morning,” answered the innkeeper.“Oh, the deuce! then we shall pay the more, that’s all, I seeplainly enough. At Drake’s or Aaron’s one pays twenty-five lire forcommon days, and thirty or thirty-five lire a day more for Sundays and feastdays; add five lire a day more for extras, that will make forty, andthere’s an end of it.”“I am afraid if we offer them double that we shall not procure acarriage.”“Then they must put horses to mine. It is a little worse for the journey,but that’s no matter.”“There are no horses.”Albert looked at Franz like a man who hears a reply he does not understand.“Do you understand that, my dear Franz—no horses?” he said,“but can’t we have post-horses?”“They have been all hired this fortnight, and there are none left butthose absolutely requisite for posting.”“What are we to say to this?” asked Franz.“I say, that when a thing completely surpasses my comprehension, I amaccustomed not to dwell on that thing, but to pass to another. Is supper ready,Signor Pastrini?”“Yes, your excellency.”“Well, then, let us sup.”“But the carriage and horses?” said Franz.“Be easy, my dear boy; they will come in due season; it is only aquestion of how much shall be charged for them.” Morcerf then, with thatdelighted philosophy which believes that nothing is impossible to a full purseor well-lined pocketbook, supped, went to bed, slept soundly, and dreamed hewas racing all over Rome at Carnival time in a coach with six horses. Chapter 33. RomanBanditsThe next morning Franzwoke first, and instantly rang the bell. The sound had not yet died away whenSignor Pastrini himself entered.“Well, excellency,” said the landlord triumphantly, and withoutwaiting for Franz to question him, “I feared yesterday, when I would notpromise you anything, that you were too late—there is not a singlecarriage to be had—that is, for the three last days”“Yes,” returned Franz, “for the very three days it is mostneeded.”“What is the matter?” said Albert, entering; “no carriage tobe had?”“Just so,” returned Franz, “you have guessed it.”“Well, your Eternal City is a nice sort of place.”“That is to say, excellency,” replied Pastrini, who was desirous ofkeeping up the dignity of the capital of the Christian world in the eyes of hisguest, “that there are no carriages to be had from Sunday to Tuesdayevening, but from now till Sunday you can have fifty if you please.”“Ah, that is something,” said Albert; “today is Thursday, andwho knows what may arrive between this and Sunday?”“Ten or twelve thousand travellers will arrive,” replied Franz,“which will make it still more difficult.”“My friend,” said Morcerf, “let us enjoy the present withoutgloomy forebodings for the future.”“At least we can have a window?”“Where?”“In the Corso.”“Ah, a window!” exclaimed Signor Pastrini,—“utterlyimpossible; there was only one left on the fifth floor of the Doria Palace, andthat has been let to a Russian prince for twenty sequins a day.”The two young men looked at each other with an air of stupefaction.“Well,” said Franz to Albert, “do you know what is the bestthing we can do? It is to pass the Carnival at Venice; there we are sure ofobtaining gondolas if we cannot have carriages.”“Ah, the devil, no,” cried Albert; “I came to Rome to see theCarnival, and I will, though I see it on stilts.”“Bravo! an excellent idea. We will disguise ourselves as monsterpulchinellos or shepherds of the Landes, and we shall have completesuccess.”“Do your excellencies still wish for a carriage from now to Sundaymorning?”“Parbleu!” said Albert, “do you think we are going torun about on foot in the streets of Rome, like lawyers’ clerks?”“I hasten to comply with your excellencies’ wishes; only, I tellyou beforehand, the carriage will cost you six piastres a day.”“And, as I am not a millionaire, like the gentleman in the nextapartments,” said Franz, “I warn you, that as I have been fourtimes before at Rome, I know the prices of all the carriages; we will give youtwelve piastres for today, tomorrow, and the day after, and then you will makea good profit.”“But, excellency”—said Pastrini, still striving to gain hispoint.“Now go,” returned Franz, “or I shall go myself and bargainwith your affettatore, who is mine also; he is an old friend of mine,who has plundered me pretty well already, and, in the hope of making more outof me, he will take a less price than the one I offer you; you will lose thepreference, and that will be your fault.”“Do not give yourselves the trouble, excellency,” returned SignorPastrini, with the smile peculiar to the Italian speculator when he confessesdefeat; “I will do all I can, and I hope you will be satisfied.”“And now we understand each other.”“When do you wish the carriage to be here?”“In an hour.”“In an hour it will be at the door.”An hour after the vehicle was at the door; it was a hack conveyance which waselevated to the rank of a private carriage in honor of the occasion, but, inspite of its humble exterior, the young men would have thought themselves happyto have secured it for the last three days of the Carnival.“Excellency,” cried the cicerone, seeing Franz approach thewindow, “shall I bring the carriage nearer to the palace?”Accustomed as Franz was to the Italian phraseology, his first impulse was tolook round him, but these words were addressed to him. Franz was the“excellency,” the vehicle was the “carriage,” and theHôtel de Londres was the “palace.” The genius for laudationcharacteristic of the race was in that phrase.Franz and Albert descended, the carriage approached the palace; theirexcellencies stretched their legs along the seats; the cicerone spranginto the seat behind.“Where do your excellencies wish to go?” asked he.“To Saint Peter’s first, and then to the Colosseum,” returnedAlbert. But Albert did not know that it takes a day to see Saint Peter’s,and a month to study it. The day was passed at Saint Peter’s alone.Suddenly the daylight began to fade away; Franz took out his watch—it washalf-past four. They returned to the hotel; at the door Franz ordered thecoachman to be ready at eight. He wished to show Albert the Colosseum bymoonlight, as he had shown him Saint Peter’s by daylight. When we show afriend a city one has already visited, we feel the same pride as when we pointout a woman whose lover we have been.He was to leave the city by the Porta del Popolo, skirt the outer wall, andre-enter by the Porta San Giovanni; thus they would behold the Colosseumwithout finding their impressions dulled by first looking on the Capitol, theForum, the Arch of Septimus Severus, the Temple of Antoninus and Faustina, andthe Via Sacra.They sat down to dinner. Signor Pastrini had promised them a banquet; he gavethem a tolerable repast. At the end of the dinner he entered in person. Franzthought that he came to hear his dinner praised, and began accordingly, but atthe first words he was interrupted.“Excellency,” said Pastrini, “I am delighted to have yourapprobation, but it was not for that I came.”“Did you come to tell us you have procured a carriage?” askedAlbert, lighting his cigar.“No; and your excellencies will do well not to think of that any longer;at Rome things can or cannot be done; when you are told anything cannot bedone, there is an end of it.”“It is much more convenient at Paris,—when anything cannot be done,you pay double, and it is done directly.”“That is what all the French say,” returned Signor Pastrini,somewhat piqued; “for that reason, I do not understand why theytravel.”“But,” said Albert, emitting a volume of smoke and balancing hischair on its hind legs, “only madmen, or blockheads like us, ever dotravel. Men in their senses do not quit their hotel in the Rue du Helder, theirwalk on the Boulevard de Gand, and the Café de Paris.”It is of course understood that Albert resided in the aforesaid street,appeared every day on the fashionable walk, and dined frequently at the onlyrestaurant where you can really dine, that is, if you are on good terms withits waiters.Signor Pastrini remained silent a short time; it was evident that he was musingover this answer, which did not seem very clear.“But,” said Franz, in his turn interrupting his host’smeditations, “you had some motive for coming here, may I beg to know whatit was?”“Ah, yes; you have ordered your carriage at eight o’clockprecisely?”“I have.”“You intend visiting Il Colosseo.”“You mean the Colosseum?”“It is the same thing. You have told your coachman to leave the city bythe Porta del Popolo, to drive round the walls, and re-enter by the Porta SanGiovanni?”“These are my words exactly.”“Well, this route is impossible.”“Impossible!”“Very dangerous, to say the least.”“Dangerous!—and why?”“On account of the famous Luigi Vampa.”“Pray, who may this famous Luigi Vampa be?” inquired Albert;“he may be very famous at Rome, but I can assure you he is quite unknownat Paris.”“What! do you not know him?”“I have not that honor.”“You have never heard his name?”“Never.”“Well, then, he is a bandit, compared to whom the Decesaris and theGasparones were mere children.”“Now then, Albert,” cried Franz, “here is a bandit for you atlast.”“I forewarn you, Signor Pastrini, that I shall not believe one word ofwhat you are going to tell us; having told you this, begin. ‘Once upon atime——’ Well, go on.”Signor Pastrini turned toward Franz, who seemed to him the more reasonable ofthe two; we must do him justice,—he had had a great many Frenchmen in hishouse, but had never been able to comprehend them.“Excellency,” said he gravely, addressing Franz, “if you lookupon me as a liar, it is useless for me to say anything; it was for yourinterest I——”“Albert does not say you are a liar, Signor Pastrini,” said Franz,“but that he will not believe what you are going to tell us,—but Iwill believe all you say; so proceed.”“But if your excellency doubt my veracity——”“Signor Pastrini,” returned Franz, “you are more susceptiblethan Cassandra, who was a prophetess, and yet no one believed her; while you,at least, are sure of the credence of half your audience. Come, sit down, andtell us all about this Signor Vampa.”“I had told your excellency he is the most famous bandit we have hadsince the days of Mastrilla.”“Well, what has this bandit to do with the order I have given thecoachman to leave the city by the Porta del Popolo, and to re-enter by thePorta San Giovanni?”“This,” replied Signor Pastrini, “that you will go out byone, but I very much doubt your returning by the other.”“Why?” asked Franz.“Because, after nightfall, you are not safe fifty yards from thegates.”“On your honor, is that true?” cried Albert.“Count,” returned Signor Pastrini, hurt at Albert’s repeateddoubts of the truth of his assertions, “I do not say this to you, but toyour companion, who knows Rome, and knows, too, that these things are not to belaughed at.”“My dear fellow,” said Albert, turning to Franz, “here is anadmirable adventure; we will fill our carriage with pistols, blunderbusses, anddouble-barrelled guns. Luigi Vampa comes to take us, and we take him—webring him back to Rome, and present him to his holiness the Pope, who asks howhe can repay so great a service; then we merely ask for a carriage and a pairof horses, and we see the Carnival in the carriage, and doubtless the Romanpeople will crown us at the Capitol, and proclaim us, like Curtius and HoratiusCocles, the preservers of their country.”Whilst Albert proposed this scheme, Signor Pastrini’s face assumed anexpression impossible to describe.“And pray,” asked Franz, “where are these pistols,blunderbusses, and other deadly weapons with which you intend filling thecarriage?”“Not out of my armory, for at Terracina I was plundered even of myhunting-knife. And you?”“I shared the same fate at Aquapendente.”“Do you know, Signor Pastrini,” said Albert, lighting a secondcigar at the first, “that this practice is very convenient for bandits,and that it seems to be due to an arrangement of their own.”Doubtless Signor Pastrini found this pleasantry compromising, for he onlyanswered half the question, and then he spoke to Franz, as the only one likelyto listen with attention. “Your excellency knows that it is not customaryto defend yourself when attacked by bandits.”“What!” cried Albert, whose courage revolted at the idea of beingplundered tamely, “not make any resistance!”“No, for it would be useless. What could you do against a dozen banditswho spring out of some pit, ruin, or aqueduct, and level their pieces atyou?”“Eh, parbleu!—they should kill me.”The innkeeper turned to Franz with an air that seemed to say, “Yourfriend is decidedly mad.”“My dear Albert,” returned Franz, “your answer is sublime,and worthy the ‘Let him die,’ of Corneille, only, whenHorace made that answer, the safety of Rome was concerned; but, as for us, itis only to gratify a whim, and it would be ridiculous to risk our lives for sofoolish a motive.”Albert poured himself out a glass of lacryma Christi, which he sipped atintervals, muttering some unintelligible words.“Well, Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, “now that my companionis quieted, and you have seen how peaceful my intentions are, tell me who isthis Luigi Vampa. Is he a shepherd or a nobleman?—young orold?—tall or short? Describe him, in order that, if we meet him bychance, like Jean Sbogar or Lara, we may recognize him.”“You could not apply to anyone better able to inform you on all thesepoints, for I knew him when he was a child, and one day that I fell into hishands, going from Ferentino to Alatri, he, fortunately for me, recollected me,and set me free, not only without ransom, but made me a present of a verysplendid watch, and related his history to me.”“Let us see the watch,” said Albert.Signor Pastrini drew from his fob a magnificent Bréguet, bearing the name ofits maker, of Parisian manufacture, and a count’s coronet.“Here it is,” said he.“Peste!” returned Albert, “I compliment you on it; Ihave its fellow”—he took his watch from his waistcoatpocket—“and it cost me 3,000 francs.”“Let us hear the history,” said Franz, motioning Signor Pastrini toseat himself.“Your excellencies permit it?” asked the host.“Pardieu!” cried Albert, “you are not a preacher, toremain standing!”The host sat down, after having made each of them a respectful bow, which meantthat he was ready to tell them all they wished to know concerning Luigi Vampa.“You tell me,” said Franz, at the moment Signor Pastrini was aboutto open his mouth, “that you knew Luigi Vampa when he was achild—he is still a young man, then?”“A young man? he is only two-and-twenty;—he will gain himself areputation.”“What do you think of that, Albert?—at two-and-twenty to be thusfamous?”“Yes, and at his age, Alexander, Cæsar, and Napoleon, who have all madesome noise in the world, were quite behind him.”“So,” continued Franz, “the hero of this history is onlytwo-and-twenty?”“Scarcely so much.”“Is he tall or short?”“Of the middle height—about the same stature as hisexcellency,” returned the host, pointing to Albert.“Thanks for the comparison,” said Albert, with a bow.“Go on, Signor Pastrini,” continued Franz, smiling at hisfriend’s susceptibility. “To what class of society does hebelong?”“He was a shepherd-boy attached to the farm of the Count of San-Felice,situated between Palestrina and the Lake of Gabri; he was born at Pampinara,and entered the count’s service when he was five years old; his fatherwas also a shepherd, who owned a small flock, and lived by the wool and themilk, which he sold at Rome. When quite a child, the little Vampa displayed amost extraordinary precocity. One day, when he was seven years old, he came tothe curate of Palestrina, and asked to be taught to read; it was somewhatdifficult, for he could not quit his flock; but the good curate went every dayto say mass at a little hamlet too poor to pay a priest and which, having noother name, was called Borgo; he told Luigi that he might meet him on hisreturn, and that then he would give him a lesson, warning him that it would beshort, and that he must profit as much as possible by it. The child acceptedjoyfully. Every day Luigi led his flock to graze on the road that leads fromPalestrina to Borgo; every day, at nine o’clock in the morning, thepriest and the boy sat down on a bank by the wayside, and the little shepherdtook his lesson out of the priest’s breviary. At the end of three monthshe had learned to read. This was not enough—he must now learn to write.The priest had a writing teacher at Rome make three alphabets—one large,one middling, and one small; and pointed out to him that by the help of a sharpinstrument he could trace the letters on a slate, and thus learn to write. Thesame evening, when the flock was safe at the farm, the little Luigi hastened tothe smith at Palestrina, took a large nail, heated and sharpened it, and formeda sort of stylus. The next morning he gathered an armful of pieces of slate andbegan. At the end of three months he had learned to write. The curate,astonished at his quickness and intelligence, made him a present of pens,paper, and a penknife. This demanded new effort, but nothing compared to thefirst; at the end of a week he wrote as well with this pen as with the stylus.The curate related the incident to the Count of San-Felice, who sent for thelittle shepherd, made him read and write before him, ordered his attendant tolet him eat with the domestics, and to give him two piastres a month. Withthis, Luigi purchased books and pencils. He applied his imitative powers toeverything, and, like Giotto, when young, he drew on his slate sheep, houses,and trees. Then, with his knife, he began to carve all sorts of objects inwood; it was thus that Pinelli, the famous sculptor, had commenced.“A girl of six or seven—that is, a little younger thanVampa—tended sheep on a farm near Palestrina; she was an orphan, born atValmontone and was named Teresa. The two children met, sat down near eachother, let their flocks mingle together, played, laughed, and conversedtogether; in the evening they separated the Count of San-Felice’s flockfrom those of Baron Cervetri, and the children returned to their respectivefarms, promising to meet the next morning. The next day they kept their word,and thus they grew up together. Vampa was twelve, and Teresa eleven. And yettheir natural disposition revealed itself. Beside his taste for the fine arts,which Luigi had carried as far as he could in his solitude, he was given toalternating fits of sadness and enthusiasm, was often angry and capricious, andalways sarcastic. None of the lads of Pampinara, Palestrina, or Valmontone hadbeen able to gain any influence over him or even to become his companion. Hisdisposition (always inclined to exact concessions rather than to make them)kept him aloof from all friendships. Teresa alone ruled by a look, a word, agesture, this impetuous character, which yielded beneath the hand of a woman,and which beneath the hand of a man might have broken, but could never havebeen bended. Teresa was lively and gay, but coquettish to excess. The twopiastres that Luigi received every month from the Count of San-Felice’ssteward, and the price of all the little carvings in wood he sold at Rome, wereexpended in ear-rings, necklaces, and gold hairpins. So that, thanks to herfriend’s generosity, Teresa was the most beautiful and the best-attiredpeasant near Rome.“The two children grew up together, passing all their time with eachother, and giving themselves up to the wild ideas of their differentcharacters. Thus, in all their dreams, their wishes, and their conversations,Vampa saw himself the captain of a vessel, general of an army, or governor of aprovince. Teresa saw herself rich, superbly attired, and attended by a train ofliveried domestics. Then, when they had thus passed the day in building castlesin the air, they separated their flocks, and descended from the elevation oftheir dreams to the reality of their humble position.“One day the young shepherd told the count’s steward that he hadseen a wolf come out of the Sabine mountains, and prowl around his flock. Thesteward gave him a gun; this was what Vampa longed for. This gun had anexcellent barrel, made at Brescia, and carrying a ball with the precision of anEnglish rifle; but one day the count broke the stock, and had then cast the gunaside. This, however, was nothing to a sculptor like Vampa; he examined thebroken stock, calculated what change it would require to adapt the gun to hisshoulder, and made a fresh stock, so beautifully carved that it would havefetched fifteen or twenty piastres, had he chosen to sell it. But nothing couldbe farther from his thoughts.“For a long time a gun had been the young man’s greatest ambition.In every country where independence has taken the place of liberty, the firstdesire of a manly heart is to possess a weapon, which at once renders himcapable of defence or attack, and, by rendering its owner terrible, often makeshim feared. From this moment Vampa devoted all his leisure time to perfectinghimself in the use of his precious weapon; he purchased powder and ball, andeverything served him for a mark—the trunk of some old and moss-grownolive-tree, that grew on the Sabine mountains; the fox, as he quitted his earthon some marauding excursion; the eagle that soared above their heads: and thushe soon became so expert, that Teresa overcame the terror she at first felt atthe report, and amused herself by watching him direct the ball wherever hepleased, with as much accuracy as if he placed it by hand.“One evening a wolf emerged from a pine-wood near which they were usuallystationed, but the wolf had scarcely advanced ten yards ere he was dead. Proudof this exploit, Vampa took the dead animal on his shoulders, and carried himto the farm. These exploits had gained Luigi considerable reputation. The manof superior abilities always finds admirers, go where he will. He was spoken ofas the most adroit, the strongest, and the most courageous contadino forten leagues around; and although Teresa was universally allowed to be the mostbeautiful girl of the Sabines, no one had ever spoken to her of love, becauseit was known that she was beloved by Vampa. And yet the two young people hadnever declared their affection; they had grown together like two trees whoseroots are mingled, whose branches intertwined, and whose intermingled perfumerises to the heavens. Only their wish to see each other had become a necessity,and they would have preferred death to a day’s separation.“Teresa was sixteen, and Vampa seventeen. About this time, a band ofbrigands that had established itself in the Lepini mountains began to be muchspoken of. The brigands have never been really extirpated from the neighborhoodof Rome. Sometimes a chief is wanted, but when a chief presents himself herarely has to wait long for a band of followers.“The celebrated Cucumetto, pursued in the Abruzzo, driven out of thekingdom of Naples, where he had carried on a regular war, had crossed theGarigliano, like Manfred, and had taken refuge on the banks of the Amasinebetween Sonnino and Juperno. He strove to collect a band of followers, andfollowed the footsteps of Decesaris and Gasparone, whom he hoped to surpass.Many young men of Palestrina, Frascati, and Pampinara had disappeared. Theirdisappearance at first caused much disquietude; but it was soon known that theyhad joined Cucumetto. After some time Cucumetto became the object of universalattention; the most extraordinary traits of ferocious daring and brutality wererelated of him.“One day he carried off a young girl, the daughter of a surveyor ofFrosinone. The bandit’s laws are positive; a young girl belongs first tohim who carries her off, then the rest draw lots for her, and she is abandonedto their brutality until death relieves her sufferings. When their parents aresufficiently rich to pay a ransom, a messenger is sent to negotiate; theprisoner is hostage for the security of the messenger; should the ransom berefused, the prisoner is irrevocably lost. The young girl’s lover was inCucumetto’s troop; his name was Carlini. When she recognized her lover,the poor girl extended her arms to him, and believed herself safe; but Carlinifelt his heart sink, for he but too well knew the fate that awaited her.However, as he was a favorite with Cucumetto, as he had for three yearsfaithfully served him, and as he had saved his life by shooting a dragoon whowas about to cut him down, he hoped the chief would have pity on him. He tookCucumetto one side, while the young girl, seated at the foot of a huge pinethat stood in the centre of the forest, made a veil of her picturesquehead-dress to hide her face from the lascivious gaze of the bandits. There hetold the chief all—his affection for the prisoner, their promises ofmutual fidelity, and how every night, since he had been near, they had met insome neighboring ruins.“It so happened that night that Cucumetto had sent Carlini to a village,so that he had been unable to go to the place of meeting. Cucumetto had beenthere, however, by accident, as he said, and had carried the maiden off.Carlini besought his chief to make an exception in Rita’s favor, as herfather was rich, and could pay a large ransom. Cucumetto seemed to yield to hisfriend’s entreaties, and bade him find a shepherd to send to Rita’sfather at Frosinone.“Carlini flew joyfully to Rita, telling her she was saved, and biddingher write to her father, to inform him what had occurred, and that her ransomwas fixed at three hundred piastres. Twelve hours’ delay was all that wasgranted—that is, until nine the next morning. The instant the letter waswritten, Carlini seized it, and hastened to the plain to find a messenger. Hefound a young shepherd watching his flock. The natural messengers of thebandits are the shepherds who live between the city and the mountains, betweencivilized and savage life. The boy undertook the commission, promising to be inFrosinone in less than an hour. Carlini returned, anxious to see his mistress,and announce the joyful intelligence. He found the troop in the glade, suppingoff the provisions exacted as contributions from the peasants; but his eyevainly sought Rita and Cucumetto among them.“He inquired where they were, and was answered by a burst of laughter. Acold perspiration burst from every pore, and his hair stood on end. He repeatedhis question. One of the bandits rose, and offered him a glass filled withOrvietto, saying, ‘To the health of the brave Cucumetto and the fairRita.’ At this moment Carlini heard a woman’s cry; he divined thetruth, seized the glass, broke it across the face of him who presented it, andrushed towards the spot whence the cry came. After a hundred yards he turnedthe corner of the thicket; he found Rita senseless in the arms of Cucumetto. Atthe sight of Carlini, Cucumetto rose, a pistol in each hand. The two brigandslooked at each other for a moment—the one with a smile of lasciviousnesson his lips, the other with the pallor of death on his brow. A terrible battlebetween the two men seemed imminent; but by degrees Carlini’s featuresrelaxed, his hand, which had grasped one of the pistols in his belt, fell tohis side. Rita lay between them. The moon lighted the group.“‘Well,’ said Cucumetto, ‘have you executed yourcommission?’“‘Yes, captain,’ returned Carlini. ‘At nineo’clock tomorrow Rita’s father will be here with the money.’“‘It is well; in the meantime, we will have a merry night; thisyoung girl is charming, and does credit to your taste. Now, as I am notegotistical, we will return to our comrades and draw lots for her.’“‘You have determined, then, to abandon her to the commonlaw?’ said Carlini.“‘Why should an exception be made in her favor?’“‘I thought that my entreaties——’“‘What right have you, any more than the rest, to ask for anexception?’“‘It is true.’“‘But never mind,’ continued Cucumetto, laughing,‘sooner or later your turn will come.’ Carlini’s teethclenched convulsively.“‘Now, then,’ said Cucumetto, advancing towards the otherbandits, ‘are you coming?’“‘I follow you.’“Cucumetto departed, without losing sight of Carlini, for, doubtless, hefeared lest he should strike him unawares; but nothing betrayed a hostiledesign on Carlini’s part. He was standing, his arms folded, near Rita,who was still insensible. Cucumetto fancied for a moment the young man wasabout to take her in his arms and fly; but this mattered little to him now Ritahad been his; and as for the money, three hundred piastres distributed amongthe band was so small a sum that he cared little about it. He continued tofollow the path to the glade; but, to his great surprise, Carlini arrivedalmost as soon as himself.“‘Let us draw lots! let us draw lots!’ cried all thebrigands, when they saw the chief.“Their demand was fair, and the chief inclined his head in sign ofacquiescence. The eyes of all shone fiercely as they made their demand, and thered light of the fire made them look like demons. The names of all, includingCarlini, were placed in a hat, and the youngest of the band drew forth aticket; the ticket bore the name of Diavolaccio. He was the man who hadproposed to Carlini the health of their chief, and to whom Carlini replied bybreaking the glass across his face. A large wound, extending from the temple tothe mouth, was bleeding profusely. Diavolaccio, seeing himself thus favored byfortune, burst into a loud laugh.“‘Captain,’ said he, ‘just now Carlini would not drinkyour health when I proposed it to him; propose mine to him, and let us see ifhe will be more condescending to you than to me.’“Everyone expected an explosion on Carlini’s part; but to theirgreat surprise, he took a glass in one hand and a flask in the other, andfilling it,—“‘Your health, Diavolaccio,’ said he calmly, and he drank itoff, without his hand trembling in the least. Then sitting down by the fire,‘My supper,’ said he; ‘my expedition has given me anappetite.’“‘Well done, Carlini!’ cried the brigands; ‘that isacting like a good fellow;’ and they all formed a circle round the fire,while Diavolaccio disappeared.“Carlini ate and drank as if nothing had happened. The bandits looked onwith astonishment at this singular conduct until they heard footsteps. Theyturned round, and saw Diavolaccio bearing the young girl in his arms. Her headhung back, and her long hair swept the ground. As they entered the circle, thebandits could perceive, by the firelight, the unearthly pallor of the younggirl and of Diavolaccio. This apparition was so strange and so solemn, thateveryone rose, with the exception of Carlini, who remained seated, and ate anddrank calmly. Diavolaccio advanced amidst the most profound silence, and laidRita at the captain’s feet. Then everyone could understand the cause ofthe unearthly pallor in the young girl and the bandit. A knife was plunged upto the hilt in Rita’s left breast. Everyone looked at Carlini; the sheathat his belt was empty.“‘Ah, ah,’ said the chief, ‘I now understand whyCarlini stayed behind.’“All savage natures appreciate a desperate deed. No other of the banditswould, perhaps, have done the same; but they all understood what Carlini haddone.“‘Now, then,’ cried Carlini, rising in his turn, andapproaching the corpse, his hand on the butt of one of his pistols, ‘doesanyone dispute the possession of this woman with me?’“‘No,’ returned the chief, ‘she is thine.’“Carlini raised her in his arms, and carried her out of the circle offirelight. Cucumetto placed his sentinels for the night, and the banditswrapped themselves in their cloaks, and lay down before the fire. At midnightthe sentinel gave the alarm, and in an instant all were on the alert. It wasRita’s father, who brought his daughter’s ransom in person.“‘Here,’ said he, to Cucumetto, ‘here are three hundredpiastres; give me back my child.“But the chief, without taking the money, made a sign to him to follow.The old man obeyed. They both advanced beneath the trees, through whosebranches streamed the moonlight. Cucumetto stopped at last, and pointed to twopersons grouped at the foot of a tree.“‘There,’ said he, ‘demand thy child of Carlini; hewill tell thee what has become of her;’ and he returned to hiscompanions.“The old man remained motionless; he felt that some great and unforeseenmisfortune hung over his head. At length he advanced toward the group, themeaning of which he could not comprehend. As he approached, Carlini raised hishead, and the forms of two persons became visible to the old man’s eyes.A woman lay on the ground, her head resting on the knees of a man, who wasseated by her; as he raised his head, the woman’s face became visible.The old man recognized his child, and Carlini recognized the old man.“‘I expected thee,’ said the bandit to Rita’s father.“‘Wretch!’ returned the old man, ‘what hast thoudone?’ and he gazed with terror on Rita, pale and bloody, a knife buriedin her bosom. A ray of moonlight poured through the trees, and lighted up theface of the dead.“‘Cucumetto had violated thy daughter,’ said the bandit;‘I loved her, therefore I slew her; for she would have served as thesport of the whole band.’ The old man spoke not, and grew pale as death.‘Now,’ continued Carlini, ‘if I have done wrongly, avengeher;’ and withdrawing the knife from the wound in Rita’s bosom, heheld it out to the old man with one hand, while with the other he tore open hisvest.“‘Thou hast done well!’ returned the old man in a hoarsevoice; ‘embrace me, my son.’Carlini threw himself, sobbing like a child, into the arms of hismistress’s father. These were the first tears the man of blood had everwept.“‘Now,’ said the old man, ‘aid me to bury mychild.’ Carlini fetched two pickaxes; and the father and the lover beganto dig at the foot of a huge oak, beneath which the young girl was to repose.When the grave was formed, the father embraced her first, and then the lover;afterwards, one taking the head, the other the feet, they placed her in thegrave. Then they knelt on each side of the grave, and said the prayers of thedead. Then, when they had finished, they cast the earth over the corpse, untilthe grave was filled. Then, extending his hand, the old man said; ‘Ithank you, my son; and now leave me alone.’“‘Yet——’ replied Carlini.“‘Leave me, I command you.’“Carlini obeyed, rejoined his comrades, folded himself in his cloak, andsoon appeared to sleep as soundly as the rest. It had been resolved the nightbefore to change their encampment. An hour before daybreak, Cucumetto arousedhis men, and gave the word to march. But Carlini would not quit the forest,without knowing what had become of Rita’s father. He went toward theplace where he had left him. He found the old man suspended from one of thebranches of the oak which shaded his daughter’s grave. He then took anoath of bitter vengeance over the dead body of the one and the tomb of theother. But he was unable to complete this oath, for two days afterwards, in anencounter with the Roman carbineers, Carlini was killed. There was somesurprise, however, that, as he was with his face to the enemy, he should havereceived a ball between his shoulders. That astonishment ceased when one of thebrigands remarked to his comrades that Cucumetto was stationed ten paces inCarlini’s rear when he fell. On the morning of the departure from theforest of Frosinone he had followed Carlini in the darkness, and heard thisoath of vengeance, and, like a wise man, anticipated it.“They told ten other stories of this bandit chief, each more singularthan the other. Thus, from Fondi to Perusia, everyone trembles at the name ofCucumetto.“These narratives were frequently the theme of conversation between Luigiand Teresa. The young girl trembled very much at hearing the stories; but Vampareassured her with a smile, tapping the butt of his good fowling-piece, whichthrew its ball so well; and if that did not restore her courage, he pointed toa crow, perched on some dead branch, took aim, touched the trigger, and thebird fell dead at the foot of the tree. Time passed on, and the two youngpeople had agreed to be married when Vampa should be twenty and Teresa nineteenyears of age. They were both orphans, and had only their employers’ leaveto ask, which had been already sought and obtained. One day when they weretalking over their plans for the future, they heard two or three reports offirearms, and then suddenly a man came out of the wood, near which the twoyoung persons used to graze their flocks, and hurried towards them. When hecame within hearing, he exclaimed:‘I am pursued; can you conceal me?’“They knew full well that this fugitive must be a bandit; but there is aninnate sympathy between the Roman brigand and the Roman peasant and the latteris always ready to aid the former. Vampa, without saying a word, hastened tothe stone that closed up the entrance to their grotto, drew it away, made asign to the fugitive to take refuge there, in a retreat unknown to everyone,closed the stone upon him, and then went and resumed his seat by Teresa.Instantly afterwards four carbineers, on horseback, appeared on the edge of thewood; three of them appeared to be looking for the fugitive, while the fourthdragged a brigand prisoner by the neck. The three carbineers looked aboutcarefully on every side, saw the young peasants, and galloping up, began toquestion them. They had seen no one.“‘That is very annoying,’ said the brigadier; for the man weare looking for is the chief.’“‘Cucumetto?’ cried Luigi and Teresa at the same moment.“‘Yes,’ replied the brigadier; ‘and as his head isvalued at a thousand Roman crowns, there would have been five hundred for you,if you had helped us to catch him.’ The two young persons exchangedlooks. The brigadier had a moment’s hope. Five hundred Roman crowns arethree thousand lire, and three thousand lire are a fortune for two poor orphanswho are going to be married.“‘Yes, it is very annoying,’ said Vampa; ‘but we havenot seen him.’“Then the carbineers scoured the country in different directions, but invain; then, after a time, they disappeared. Vampa then removed the stone, andCucumetto came out. Through the crevices in the granite he had seen the twoyoung peasants talking with the carbineers, and guessed the subject of theirparley. He had read in the countenances of Luigi and Teresa their steadfastresolution not to surrender him, and he drew from his pocket a purse full ofgold, which he offered to them. But Vampa raised his head proudly; as toTeresa, her eyes sparkled when she thought of all the fine gowns and gayjewellery she could buy with this purse of gold.“Cucumetto was a cunning fiend, and had assumed the form of a brigandinstead of a serpent, and this look from Teresa showed to him that she was aworthy daughter of Eve, and he returned to the forest, pausing several times onhis way, under the pretext of saluting his protectors.“Several days elapsed, and they neither saw nor heard of Cucumetto. Thetime of the Carnival was at hand. The Count of San-Felice announced a grandmasked ball, to which all that were distinguished in Rome were invited. Teresahad a great desire to see this ball. Luigi asked permission of his protector,the steward, that she and he might be present amongst the servants of thehouse. This was granted. The ball was given by the Count for the particularpleasure of his daughter Carmela, whom he adored. Carmela was precisely the ageand figure of Teresa, and Teresa was as handsome as Carmela. On the evening ofthe ball Teresa was attired in her best, her most brilliant ornaments in herhair, and gayest glass beads,—she was in the costume of the women ofFrascati. Luigi wore the very picturesque garb of the Roman peasant at holidaytime. They both mingled, as they had leave to do, with the servants andpeasants.“The festa was magnificent; not only was the villa brilliantlyilluminated, but thousands of colored lanterns were suspended from the trees inthe garden; and very soon the palace overflowed to the terraces, and theterraces to the garden-walks. At each cross-path was an orchestra, and tablesspread with refreshments; the guests stopped, formed quadrilles, and danced inany part of the grounds they pleased. Carmela was attired like a woman ofSonnino. Her cap was embroidered with pearls, the pins in her hair were of goldand diamonds, her girdle was of Turkey silk, with large embroidered flowers,her bodice and skirt were of cashmere, her apron of Indian muslin, and thebuttons of her corset were of jewels. Two of her companions were dressed, theone as a woman of Nettuno, and the other as a woman of La Riccia. Four youngmen of the richest and noblest families of Rome accompanied them with thatItalian freedom which has not its parallel in any other country in the world.They were attired as peasants of Albano, Velletri, Civita-Castellana, and Sora.We need hardly add that these peasant costumes, like those of the young women,were brilliant with gold and jewels.“Carmela wished to form a quadrille, but there was one lady wanting.Carmela looked all around her, but not one of the guests had a costume similarto her own, or those of her companions. The Count of San-Felice pointed outTeresa, who was hanging on Luigi’s arm in a group of peasants.“‘Will you allow me, father?’ said Carmela.“‘Certainly,’ replied the count, ‘are we not inCarnival time?’“Carmela turned towards the young man who was talking with her, andsaying a few words to him, pointed with her finger to Teresa. The young manlooked, bowed in obedience, and then went to Teresa, and invited her to dancein a quadrille directed by the count’s daughter. Teresa felt a flush passover her face; she looked at Luigi, who could not refuse his assent. Luigislowly relinquished Teresa’s arm, which he had held beneath his own, andTeresa, accompanied by her elegant cavalier, took her appointed place with muchagitation in the aristocratic quadrille. Certainly, in the eyes of an artist,the exact and strict costume of Teresa had a very different character from thatof Carmela and her companions; and Teresa was frivolous and coquettish, andthus the embroidery and muslins, the cashmere waist-girdles, all dazzled her,and the reflection of sapphires and diamonds almost turned her giddy brain.“Luigi felt a sensation hitherto unknown arising in his mind. It was likean acute pain which gnawed at his heart, and then thrilled through his wholebody. He followed with his eye each movement of Teresa and her cavalier; whentheir hands touched, he felt as though he should swoon; every pulse beat withviolence, and it seemed as though a bell were ringing in his ears. When theyspoke, although Teresa listened timidly and with downcast eyes to theconversation of her cavalier, as Luigi could read in the ardent looks of thegood-looking young man that his language was that of praise, it seemed as ifthe whole world was turning round with him, and all the voices of hell werewhispering in his ears ideas of murder and assassination. Then fearing that hisparoxysm might get the better of him, he clutched with one hand the branch of atree against which he was leaning, and with the other convulsively grasped thedagger with a carved handle which was in his belt, and which, unwittingly, hedrew from the scabbard from time to time.“Luigi was jealous!“He felt that, influenced by her ambitions and coquettish disposition,Teresa might escape him.“The young peasant girl, at first timid and scared, soon recoveredherself. We have said that Teresa was handsome, but this is not all; Teresa wasendowed with all those wild graces which are so much more potent than ouraffected and studied elegancies. She had almost all the honors of thequadrille, and if she were envious of the Count of San-Felice’s daughter,we will not undertake to say that Carmela was not jealous of her. And withoverpowering compliments her handsome cavalier led her back to the place whencehe had taken her, and where Luigi awaited her. Twice or thrice during the dancethe young girl had glanced at Luigi, and each time she saw that he was pale andthat his features were agitated, once even the blade of his knife, half drawnfrom its sheath, had dazzled her eyes with its sinister glare. Thus, it wasalmost tremblingly that she resumed her lover’s arm. The quadrille hadbeen most perfect, and it was evident there was a great demand for arepetition, Carmela alone objecting to it, but the Count of San-Felice besoughthis daughter so earnestly, that she acceded.“One of the cavaliers then hastened to invite Teresa, without whom it wasimpossible for the quadrille to be formed, but the young girl had disappeared.“The truth was, that Luigi had not felt the strength to support anothersuch trial, and, half by persuasion and half by force, he had removed Teresatoward another part of the garden. Teresa had yielded in spite of herself, butwhen she looked at the agitated countenance of the young man, she understood byhis silence and trembling voice that something strange was passing within him.She herself was not exempt from internal emotion, and without having doneanything wrong, yet fully comprehended that Luigi was right in reproaching her.Why, she did not know, but yet she did not the less feel that these reproacheswere merited.“However, to Teresa’s great astonishment, Luigi remained mute, andnot a word escaped his lips the rest of the evening. When the chill of thenight had driven away the guests from the gardens, and the gates of the villawere closed on them for the festa in-doors, he took Teresa quite away,and as he left her at her home, he said:“‘Teresa, what were you thinking of as you danced opposite theyoung Countess of San-Felice?’“‘I thought,’ replied the young girl, with all the franknessof her nature, ‘that I would give half my life for a costume such as shewore.’“‘And what said your cavalier to you?’“‘He said it only depended on myself to have it, and I had only oneword to say.’“‘He was right,’ said Luigi. ‘Do you desire it asardently as you say?’“‘Yes.’“‘Well, then, you shall have it!’“The young girl, much astonished, raised her head to look at him, but hisface was so gloomy and terrible that her words froze to her lips. As Luigispoke thus, he left her. Teresa followed him with her eyes into the darkness aslong as she could, and when he had quite disappeared, she went into the housewith a sigh.“That night a memorable event occurred, due, no doubt, to the imprudenceof some servant who had neglected to extinguish the lights. The Villa ofSan-Felice took fire in the rooms adjoining the very apartment of the lovelyCarmela. Awakened in the night by the light of the flames, she sprang out ofbed, wrapped herself in a dressing-gown, and attempted to escape by the door,but the corridor by which she hoped to fly was already a prey to the flames.She then returned to her room, calling for help as loudly as she could, whensuddenly her window, which was twenty feet from the ground, was opened, a youngpeasant jumped into the chamber, seized her in his arms, and with superhumanskill and strength conveyed her to the turf of the grass-plot, where shefainted. When she recovered, her father was by her side. All the servantssurrounded her, offering her assistance. An entire wing of the villa was burntdown; but what of that, as long as Carmela was safe and uninjured?“Her preserver was everywhere sought for, but he did not appear; he wasinquired after, but no one had seen him. Carmela was greatly troubled that shehad not recognized him.“As the count was immensely rich, excepting the danger Carmela hadrun,—and the marvellous manner in which she had escaped, made that appearto him rather a favor of Providence than a real misfortune,—the lossoccasioned by the conflagration was to him but a trifle.“The next day, at the usual hour, the two young peasants were on theborders of the forest. Luigi arrived first. He came toward Teresa in highspirits, and seemed to have completely forgotten the events of the previousevening. The young girl was very pensive, but seeing Luigi so cheerful, she onher part assumed a smiling air, which was natural to her when she was notexcited or in a passion.“Luigi took her arm beneath his own, and led her to the door of thegrotto. Then he paused. The young girl, perceiving that there was somethingextraordinary, looked at him steadfastly.“‘Teresa,’ said Luigi, ‘yesterday evening you told meyou would give all the world to have a costume similar to that of thecount’s daughter.’“‘Yes,’ replied Teresa with astonishment; ‘but I wasmad to utter such a wish.’“‘And I replied, “Very well, you shall have it.”’“‘Yes,’ replied the young girl, whose astonishment increasedat every word uttered by Luigi, ‘but of course your reply was only toplease me.’“‘I have promised no more than I have given you, Teresa,’said Luigi proudly. ‘Go into the grotto and dress yourself.’“At these words he drew away the stone, and showed Teresa the grotto,lighted up by two wax lights, which burnt on each side of a splendid mirror; ona rustic table, made by Luigi, were spread out the pearl necklace and thediamond pins, and on a chair at the side was laid the rest of the costume.“Teresa uttered a cry of joy, and, without inquiring whence this attirecame, or even thanking Luigi, darted into the grotto, transformed into adressing-room.“Luigi pushed the stone behind her, for on the crest of a small adjacenthill which cut off the view toward Palestrina, he saw a traveller on horseback,stopping a moment, as if uncertain of his road, and thus presenting against theblue sky that perfect outline which is peculiar to distant objects in southernclimes. When he saw Luigi, he put his horse into a gallop and advanced towardhim.“Luigi was not mistaken. The traveller, who was going from Palestrina toTivoli, had mistaken his way; the young man directed him; but as at a distanceof a quarter of a mile the road again divided into three ways, and on reachingthese the traveller might again stray from his route, he begged Luigi to be hisguide.“Luigi threw his cloak on the ground, placed his carbine on his shoulder,and freed from his heavy covering, preceded the traveller with the rapid stepof a mountaineer, which a horse can scarcely keep up with. In ten minutes Luigiand the traveller reached the cross-roads. On arriving there, with an air asmajestic as that of an emperor, he stretched his hand towards that one of theroads which the traveller was to follow.“‘That is your road, excellency, and now you cannot againmistake.’“‘And here is your recompense,’ said the traveller, offeringthe young herdsman some small pieces of money.“‘Thank you,’ said Luigi, drawing back his hand; ‘Irender a service, I do not sell it.’“‘Well,’ replied the traveller, who seemed used to thisdifference between the servility of a man of the cities and the pride of themountaineer, ‘if you refuse wages, you will, perhaps, accept agift.’“‘Ah, yes, that is another thing.’“‘Then,’ said the traveller, ‘take these two Venetiansequins and give them to your bride, to make herself a pair of earrings.’“‘And then do you take this poniard,’ said the youngherdsman; ‘you will not find one better carved between Albano andCivita-Castellana.’“‘I accept it,’ answered the traveller, ‘but then theobligation will be on my side, for this poniard is worth more than twosequins.’“‘For a dealer perhaps; but for me, who engraved it myself, it ishardly worth a piastre.’“‘What is your name?’ inquired the traveller.“‘Luigi Vampa,’ replied the shepherd, with the same air as hewould have replied, Alexander, King of Macedon. ‘And yours?’“‘I,’ said the traveller, ‘am called Sinbad theSailor.’”Franz d’Épinay started with surprise.“Sinbad the Sailor?” he said.“Yes,” replied the narrator; “that was the name which thetraveller gave to Vampa as his own.”“Well, and what may you have to say against this name?” inquiredAlbert; “it is a very pretty name, and the adventures of the gentleman ofthat name amused me very much in my youth, I must confess.”Franz said no more. The name of Sinbad the Sailor, as may well be supposed,awakened in him a world of recollections, as had the name of the Count of MonteCristo on the previous evening.“Proceed!” said he to the host.“Vampa put the two sequins haughtily into his pocket, and slowly returnedby the way he had gone. As he came within two or three hundred paces of thegrotto, he thought he heard a cry. He listened to know whence this sound couldproceed. A moment afterwards he thought he heard his own name pronounceddistinctly.“The cry proceeded from the grotto. He bounded like a chamois, cockinghis carbine as he went, and in a moment reached the summit of a hill oppositeto that on which he had perceived the traveller. Three cries for help came moredistinctly to his ear. He cast his eyes around him and saw a man carrying offTeresa, as Nessus, the centaur, carried Deianira.“This man, who was hastening towards the wood, was already three-quartersof the way on the road from the grotto to the forest. Vampa measured thedistance; the man was at least two hundred paces in advance of him, and therewas not a chance of overtaking him. The young shepherd stopped, as if his feethad been rooted to the ground; then he put the butt of his carbine to hisshoulder, took aim at the ravisher, followed him for a second in his track, andthen fired.“The ravisher stopped suddenly, his knees bent under him, and he fellwith Teresa in his arms. The young girl rose instantly, but the man lay on theearth struggling in the agonies of death. Vampa then rushed towards Teresa; forat ten paces from the dying man her legs had failed her, and she had dropped onher knees, so that the young man feared that the ball that had brought down hisenemy, had also wounded his betrothed.“Fortunately, she was unscathed, and it was fright alone that hadovercome Teresa. When Luigi had assured himself that she was safe and unharmed,he turned towards the wounded man. He had just expired, with clenched hands,his mouth in a spasm of agony, and his hair on end in the sweat of death. Hiseyes remained open and menacing. Vampa approached the corpse, and recognizedCucumetto.“From the day on which the bandit had been saved by the two youngpeasants, he had been enamoured of Teresa, and had sworn she should be his.From that time he had watched them, and profiting by the moment when her loverhad left her alone, had carried her off, and believed he at length had her inhis power, when the ball, directed by the unerring skill of the young herdsman,had pierced his heart. Vampa gazed on him for a moment without betraying theslightest emotion; while, on the contrary, Teresa, shuddering in every limb,dared not approach the slain ruffian but by degrees, and threw a hesitatingglance at the dead body over the shoulder of her lover. Suddenly Vampa turnedtoward his mistress:“‘Ah,’ said he—‘good, good! You are dressed; itis now my turn to dress myself.’“Teresa was clothed from head to foot in the garb of the Count ofSan-Felice’s daughter. Vampa took Cucumetto’s body in his arms andconveyed it to the grotto, while in her turn Teresa remained outside. If asecond traveller had passed, he would have seen a strange thing,—ashepherdess watching her flock, clad in a cashmere grown, with ear-rings andnecklace of pearls, diamond pins, and buttons of sapphires, emeralds, andrubies. He would, no doubt, have believed that he had returned to the times ofFlorian, and would have declared, on reaching Paris, that he had met an Alpineshepherdess seated at the foot of the Sabine Hill.“At the end of a quarter of an hour Vampa quitted the grotto; his costumewas no less elegant than that of Teresa. He wore a vest of garnet-coloredvelvet, with buttons of cut gold; a silk waistcoat covered with embroidery; aRoman scarf tied round his neck; a cartridge-box worked with gold, and red andgreen silk; sky-blue velvet breeches, fastened above the knee with diamondbuckles; garters of deerskin, worked with a thousand arabesques, and a hatwhereon hung ribbons of all colors; two watches hung from his girdle, and asplendid poniard was in his belt.“Teresa uttered a cry of admiration. Vampa in this attire resembled apainting by Léopold Robert or Schnetz. He had assumed the entire costume ofCucumetto. The young man saw the effect produced on his betrothed, and a smileof pride passed over his lips.“‘Now,’ he said to Teresa, ‘are you ready to share myfortune, whatever it may be?’“‘Oh, yes!’ exclaimed the young girl enthusiastically.“‘And follow me wherever I go?’“‘To the world’s end.’“‘Then take my arm, and let us on; we have no time to lose.’“The young girl did so without questioning her lover as to where he wasconducting her, for he appeared to her at this moment as handsome, proud, andpowerful as a god. They went towards the forest, and soon entered it.“We need scarcely say that all the paths of the mountain were known toVampa; he therefore went forward without a moment’s hesitation, althoughthere was no beaten track, but he knew his path by looking at the trees andbushes, and thus they kept on advancing for nearly an hour and a half. At theend of this time they had reached the thickest part of the forest. A torrent,whose bed was dry, led into a deep gorge. Vampa took this wild road, which,enclosed between two ridges, and shadowed by the tufted umbrage of the pines,seemed, but for the difficulties of its descent, that path to Avernus of whichVirgil speaks. Teresa had become alarmed at the wild and deserted look of theplain around her, and pressed closely against her guide, not uttering asyllable; but as she saw him advance with even step and composed countenance,she endeavored to repress her emotion.“Suddenly, about ten paces from them, a man advanced from behind a treeand aimed at Vampa.“‘Not another step,’ he said, ‘or you are a deadman.’“‘What, then,’ said Vampa, raising his hand with a gesture ofdisdain, while Teresa, no longer able to restrain her alarm, clung closely tohim, ‘do wolves rend each other?’“‘Who are you?’ inquired the sentinel.“‘I am Luigi Vampa, shepherd of the San-Felice farm.’“‘What do you want?’“‘I would speak with your companions who are in the glade at RoccaBianca.’“‘Follow me, then,’ said the sentinel; ‘or, as you knowyour way, go first.’“Vampa smiled disdainfully at this precaution on the part of the bandit,went before Teresa, and continued to advance with the same firm and easy stepas before. At the end of ten minutes the bandit made them a sign to stop. Thetwo young persons obeyed. Then the bandit thrice imitated the cry of a crow; acroak answered this signal.“‘Good!’ said the sentry, ‘you may now go on.’“Luigi and Teresa again set forward; as they went on Teresa clungtremblingly to her lover at the sight of weapons and the glistening of carbinesthrough the trees. The retreat of Rocca Bianca was at the top of a smallmountain, which no doubt in former days had been a volcano—an extinctvolcano before the days when Remus and Romulus had deserted Alba to come andfound the city of Rome.“Teresa and Luigi reached the summit, and all at once found themselves inthe presence of twenty bandits.“‘Here is a young man who seeks and wishes to speak to you,’said the sentinel.“‘What has he to say?’ inquired the young man who was incommand in the chief’s absence.“‘I wish to say that I am tired of a shepherd’s life,’was Vampa’s reply.“‘Ah, I understand,’ said the lieutenant; ‘and you seekadmittance into our ranks?’“‘Welcome!’ cried several bandits from Ferrusino, Pampinara,and Anagni, who had recognized Luigi Vampa.“‘Yes, but I came to ask something more than to be yourcompanion.’“‘And what may that be?’ inquired the bandits withastonishment.“‘I come to ask to be your captain,’ said the young man.“The bandits shouted with laughter.“‘And what have you done to aspire to this honor?’ demandedthe lieutenant.“‘I have killed your chief, Cucumetto, whose dress I now wear; andI set fire to the villa San-Felice to procure a wedding-dress for mybetrothed.’“An hour afterwards Luigi Vampa was chosen captain, vice Cucumetto,deceased.”“Well, my dear Albert,” said Franz, turning towards his friend;“what think you of citizen Luigi Vampa?”“I say he is a myth,” replied Albert, “and never had anexistence.”“And what may a myth be?” inquired Pastrini.“The explanation would be too long, my dear landlord,” repliedFranz.“And you say that Signor Vampa exercises his profession at this moment inthe environs of Rome?”“And with a boldness of which no bandit before him ever gave anexample.”“Then the police have vainly tried to lay hands on him?”“Why, you see, he has a good understanding with the shepherds in theplains, the fishermen of the Tiber, and the smugglers of the coast. They seekfor him in the mountains, and he is on the waters; they follow him on thewaters, and he is on the open sea; then they pursue him, and he has suddenlytaken refuge in the islands, at Giglio, Giannutri, or Monte Cristo; and whenthey hunt for him there, he reappears suddenly at Albano, Tivoli, or LaRiccia.”“And how does he behave towards travellers?”“Alas! his plan is very simple. It depends on the distance he may be fromthe city, whether he gives eight hours, twelve hours, or a day wherein to paytheir ransom; and when that time has elapsed he allows another hour’sgrace. At the sixtieth minute of this hour, if the money is not forthcoming, heblows out the prisoner’s brains with a pistol-shot, or plants his daggerin his heart, and that settles the account.”“Well, Albert,” inquired Franz of his companion, “are youstill disposed to go to the Colosseum by the outer wall?”“Quite so,” said Albert, “if the way be picturesque.”The clock struck nine as the door opened, and a coachman appeared.“Excellencies,” said he, “the coach is ready.”“Well, then,” said Franz, “let us to the Colosseum.”“By the Porta del Popolo or by the streets, your excellencies?”“By the streets, morbleu! by the streets!” cried Franz.“Ah, my dear fellow,” said Albert, rising, and lighting his thirdcigar, “really, I thought you had more courage.”So saying, the two young men went down the staircase, and got into thecarriage. Chapter 34. TheColosseumFranz had so managed hisroute, that during the ride to the Colosseum they passed not a single ancientruin, so that no preliminary impression interfered to mitigate the colossalproportions of the gigantic building they came to admire. The road selected wasa continuation of the Via Sistina; then by cutting off the right angle of thestreet in which stands Santa Maria Maggiore and proceeding by the Via Urbanaand San Pietro in Vincoli, the travellers would find themselves directlyopposite the Colosseum.This itinerary possessed another great advantage,—that of leaving Franzat full liberty to indulge his deep reverie upon the subject of SignorPastrini’s story, in which his mysterious host of Monte Cristo was sostrangely mixed up. Seated with folded arms in a corner of the carriage, hecontinued to ponder over the singular history he had so lately listened to, andto ask himself an interminable number of questions touching its variouscircumstances without, however, arriving at a satisfactory reply to any ofthem.One fact more than the rest brought his friend “Sinbad the Sailor”back to his recollection, and that was the mysterious sort of intimacy thatseemed to exist between the brigands and the sailors; and Pastrini’saccount of Vampa’s having found refuge on board the vessels of smugglersand fishermen, reminded Franz of the two Corsican bandits he had found suppingso amicably with the crew of the little yacht, which had even deviated from itscourse and touched at Porto-Vecchio for the sole purpose of landing them. Thevery name assumed by his host of Monte Cristo and again repeated by thelandlord of the Hôtel de Londres, abundantly proved to him that his islandfriend was playing his philanthropic part on the shores of Piombino, CivitaVecchia, Ostia, and Gaëta, as on those of Corsica, Tuscany, and Spain; andfurther, Franz bethought him of having heard his singular entertainer speakboth of Tunis and Palermo, proving thereby how largely his circle ofacquaintances extended.But however the mind of the young man might be absorbed in these reflections,they were at once dispersed at the sight of the dark frowning ruins of thestupendous Colosseum, through the various openings of which the pale moonlightplayed and flickered like the unearthly gleam from the eyes of the wanderingdead. The carriage stopped near the Meta Sudans; the door was opened, and theyoung men, eagerly alighting, found themselves opposite a cicerone, whoappeared to have sprung up from the ground, so unexpected was his appearance.The usual guide from the hotel having followed them, they had paid twoconductors, nor is it possible, at Rome, to avoid this abundant supply ofguides; besides the ordinary cicerone, who seizes upon you directly youset foot in your hotel, and never quits you while you remain in the city, thereis also a special cicerone belonging to each monument—nay, almostto each part of a monument. It may, therefore, be easily imagined there is noscarcity of guides at the Colosseum, that wonder of all ages, which Martialthus eulogizes:“Let Memphis cease to boast the barbarous miracles of her pyramids, andthe wonders of Babylon be talked of no more among us; all must bow to thesuperiority of the gigantic labor of the Cæsars, and the many voices of Famespread far and wide the surpassing merits of this incomparable monument.”As for Albert and Franz, they essayed not to escape from theirciceronian tyrants; and, indeed, it would have been so much the moredifficult to break their bondage, as the guides alone are permitted to visitthese monuments with torches in their hands. Thus, then, the young men made noattempt at resistance, but blindly and confidingly surrendered themselves intothe care and custody of their conductors.Franz had already made seven or eight similar excursions to the Colosseum,while his less favored companion trod for the first time in his life theclassic ground forming the monument of Flavius Vespasian; and, to his credit beit spoken, his mind, even amid the glib loquacity of the guides, was duly anddeeply touched with awe and enthusiastic admiration of all he saw; andcertainly no adequate notion of these stupendous ruins can be formed save bysuch as have visited them, and more especially by moonlight, at which time thevast proportions of the building appear twice as large when viewed by themysterious beams of a southern moonlit sky, whose rays are sufficiently clearand vivid to light the horizon with a glow equal to the soft twilight of awestern clime.Scarcely, therefore, had the reflective Franz walked a hundred steps beneaththe interior porticoes of the ruin, when, abandoning Albert to the guides (whowould by no means yield their prescriptive right of carrying their victimsthrough the routine regularly laid down, and as regularly followed by them, butdragged the unconscious visitor to the various objects with a pertinacity thatadmitted of no appeal, beginning, as a matter of course, with the“Lions’ Den”, the “Hall of the Gladiators” andfinishing with “Cæsar’s Podium”), to escape a jargon andmechanical survey of the wonders by which he was surrounded, Franz ascended ahalf-dilapidated staircase, and, leaving them to follow their monotonous round,seated himself at the foot of a column, and immediately opposite a largeaperture, which permitted him to enjoy a full and undisturbed view of thegigantic dimensions of the majestic ruin.Franz had remained for nearly a quarter of an hour perfectly hidden by theshadow of the vast column at whose base he had found a resting-place, and fromwhence his eyes followed the motions of Albert and his guides, who, holdingtorches in their hands, had emerged from a vomitorium at the opposite extremityof the Colosseum, and then again disappeared down the steps conducting to theseats reserved for the Vestal virgins, resembling, as they glided along, somerestless shades following the flickering glare of so many ignes fatui.All at once his ear caught a sound resembling that of a stone rolling down thestaircase opposite the one by which he had himself ascended. There was nothingremarkable in the circumstance of a fragment of granite giving way and fallingheavily below; but it seemed to him that the substance that fell gave waybeneath the pressure of a foot, and also that someone, who endeavored as muchas possible to prevent his footsteps from being heard, was approaching the spotwhere he sat.Conjecture soon became certainty, for the figure of a man was distinctlyvisible to Franz, gradually emerging from the staircase opposite, upon whichthe moon was at that moment pouring a full tide of silvery brightness.The stranger thus presenting himself was probably a person who, like Franz,preferred the enjoyment of solitude and his own thoughts to the frivolousgabble of the guides. And his appearance had nothing extraordinary in it; butthe hesitation with which he proceeded, stopping and listening with anxiousattention at every step he took, convinced Franz that he expected the arrivalof some person.By a sort of instinctive impulse, Franz withdrew as much as possible behind hispillar.About ten feet from the spot where he and the stranger were, the roof had givenway, leaving a large round opening, through which might be seen the blue vaultof heaven, thickly studded with stars.Around this opening, which had, possibly, for ages permitted a free entrance tothe brilliant moonbeams that now illumined the vast pile, grew a quantity ofcreeping plants, whose delicate green branches stood out in bold relief againstthe clear azure of the firmament, while large masses of thick, strong fibrousshoots forced their way through the chasm, and hung floating to and fro, likeso many waving strings.The person whose mysterious arrival had attracted the attention of Franz stoodin a kind of half-light, that rendered it impossible to distinguish hisfeatures, although his dress was easily made out. He wore a large brown mantle,one fold of which, thrown over his left shoulder, served likewise to mask thelower part of his countenance, while the upper part was completely hidden byhis broad-brimmed hat. The lower part of his dress was more distinctly visibleby the bright rays of the moon, which, entering through the broken ceiling,shed their refulgent beams on feet cased in elegantly made boots of polishedleather, over which descended fashionably cut trousers of black cloth.From the imperfect means Franz had of judging, he could only come to oneconclusion,—that the person whom he was thus watching certainly belongedto no inferior station of life.Some few minutes had elapsed, and the stranger began to show manifest signs ofimpatience, when a slight noise was heard outside the aperture in the roof, andalmost immediately a dark shadow seemed to obstruct the flood of light that hadentered it, and the figure of a man was clearly seen gazing with eager scrutinyon the immense space beneath him; then, as his eye caught sight of him in themantle, he grasped a floating mass of thickly matted boughs, and glided down bytheir help to within three or four feet of the ground, and then leaped lightlyon his feet. The man who had performed this daring act with so muchindifference wore the Transtevere costume.“I beg your excellency’s pardon for keeping you waiting,”said the man, in the Roman dialect, “but I don’t think I’mmany minutes after my time, ten o’clock has just struck by the clock ofSaint John Lateran.”“Say not a word about being late,” replied the stranger in purestTuscan; “’tis I who am too soon. But even if you had caused me towait a little while, I should have felt quite sure that the delay was notoccasioned by any fault of yours.”“Your excellency is perfectly right in so thinking,” said the man;“I came here direct from the Castle of St. Angelo, and I had an immensedeal of trouble before I could get a chance to speak to Beppo.”“And who is Beppo?”“Oh, Beppo is employed in the prison, and I give him so much a year tolet me know what is going on within his holiness’s castle.”“Indeed! You are a provident person, I see.”“Why, you see, no one knows what may happen. Perhaps some of these days Imay be entrapped, like poor Peppino and may be very glad to have some littlenibbling mouse to gnaw the meshes of my net, and so help me out ofprison.”“Briefly, what did you learn?”“That two executions of considerable interest will take place the dayafter tomorrow at two o’clock, as is customary at Rome at thecommencement of all great festivals. One of the culprits will bemazzolato;[3]he is an atrocious villain, who murdered the priest who brought him up, anddeserves not the smallest pity. The other sufferer is sentenced to bedecapitato;[4]and he, your excellency, is poor Peppino.”“The fact is, that you have inspired not only the pontifical government,but also the neighboring states, with such extreme fear, that they are glad ofall opportunity of making an example.”“But Peppino did not even belong to my band; he was merely a poorshepherd, whose only crime consisted in furnishing us with provisions.”“Which makes him your accomplice to all intents and purposes. But markthe distinction with which he is treated; instead of being knocked on the headas you would be if once they caught hold of you, he is simply sentenced to beguillotined, by which means, too, the amusements of the day are diversified,and there is a spectacle to please every spectator.”“Without reckoning the wholly unexpected one I am preparing to surprisethem with.”“My good friend,” said the man in the cloak, “excuse me forsaying that you seem to me precisely in the mood to commit some wild orextravagant act.”“Perhaps I am; but one thing I have resolved on, and that is, to stop atnothing to restore a poor devil to liberty, who has got into this scrape solelyfrom having served me. I should hate and despise myself as a coward did Idesert the brave fellow in his present extremity.”“And what do you mean to do?”“To surround the scaffold with twenty of my best men, who, at a signalfrom me, will rush forward directly Peppino is brought for execution, and, bythe assistance of their stilettos, drive back the guard, and carry off theprisoner.”“That seems to me as hazardous as uncertain, and convinces me that myscheme is far better than yours.”“And what is your excellency’s project?”“Just this. I will so advantageously bestow 2,000 piastres, that theperson receiving them shall obtain a respite till next year for Peppino; andduring that year, another skilfully placed 1,000 piastres will afford him themeans of escaping from his prison.”“And do you feel sure of succeeding?”“Pardieu!” exclaimed the man in the cloak, suddenlyexpressing himself in French.“What did your excellency say?” inquired the other.“I said, my good fellow, that I would do more single-handed by the meansof gold than you and all your troop could effect with stilettos, pistols,carbines, and blunderbusses included. Leave me, then, to act, and have no fearsfor the result.”“At least, there can be no harm in myself and party being in readiness,in case your excellency should fail.”“None whatever. Take what precautions you please, if it is anysatisfaction to you to do so; but rely upon my obtaining the reprieve Iseek.”“Remember, the execution is fixed for the day after tomorrow, and thatyou have but one day to work in.”“And what of that? Is not a day divided into twenty-four hours, each hourinto sixty minutes, and every minute sub-divided into sixty seconds? Now in86,400 seconds very many things can be done.”“And how shall I know whether your excellency has succeeded ornot.”“Oh, that is very easily arranged. I have engaged the three lower windowsat the Café Rospoli; should I have obtained the requisite pardon for Peppino,the two outside windows will be hung with yellow damasks, and the centre withwhite, having a large cross in red marked on it.”“And whom will you employ to carry the reprieve to the officer directingthe execution?”“Send one of your men, disguised as a penitent friar, and I will give itto him. His dress will procure him the means of approaching the scaffolditself, and he will deliver the official order to the officer, who, in histurn, will hand it to the executioner; in the meantime, it will be as well toacquaint Peppino with what we have determined on, if it be only to prevent hisdying of fear or losing his senses, because in either case a very uselessexpense will have been incurred.”“Your excellency,” said the man, “you are fully persuaded ofmy entire devotion to you, are you not?”“Nay, I flatter myself that there can be no doubt of it,” repliedthe cavalier in the cloak.“Well, then, only fulfil your promise of rescuing Peppino, andhenceforward you shall receive not only devotion, but the most absoluteobedience from myself and those under me that one human being can render toanother.”“Have a care how far you pledge yourself, my good friend, for I mayremind you of your promise at some, perhaps, not very distant period, when I,in my turn, may require your aid and influence.”“Let that day come sooner or later, your excellency will find me what Ihave found you in this my heavy trouble; and if from the other end of the worldyou but write me word to do such or such a thing, you may regard it as done,for done it shall be, on the word and faith of——”“Hush!” interrupted the stranger; “I hear a noise.”“’Tis some travellers, who are visiting the Colosseum bytorchlight.”“’Twere better we should not be seen together; those guides arenothing but spies, and might possibly recognize you; and, however I may behonored by your friendship, my worthy friend, if once the extent of ourintimacy were known, I am sadly afraid both my reputation and credit wouldsuffer thereby.”“Well, then, if you obtain the reprieve?”“The middle window at the Café Rospoli will be hung with white damask,bearing a red cross.”“And if you fail?”“Then all three windows will have yellow draperies.”“And then?”“And then, my good fellow, use your daggers in any way you please, and Ifurther promise you to be there as a spectator of your prowess.”“We understand each other perfectly, then. Adieu, your excellency; dependupon me as firmly as I do upon you.”Saying these words, the Transteverin disappeared down the staircase, while hiscompanion, muffling his features more closely than before in the folds of hismantle, passed almost close to Franz, and descended to the arena by an outwardflight of steps. The next minute Franz heard himself called by Albert, who madethe lofty building re-echo with the sound of his friend’s name. Franz,however, did not obey the summons till he had satisfied himself that the twomen whose conversation he had overheard were at a sufficient distance toprevent his encountering them in his descent. In ten minutes after thestrangers had departed, Franz was on the road to the Piazza di Spagna,listening with studied indifference to the learned dissertation delivered byAlbert, after the manner of Pliny and Calpurnius, touching the iron-pointednets used to prevent the ferocious beasts from springing on the spectators.Franz let him proceed without interruption, and, in fact, did not hear what wassaid; he longed to be alone, and free to ponder over all that had occurred. Oneof the two men, whose mysterious meeting in the Colosseum he had sounintentionally witnessed, was an entire stranger to him, but not so the other;and though Franz had been unable to distinguish his features, from his beingeither wrapped in his mantle or obscured by the shadow, the tones of his voicehad made too powerful an impression on him the first time he had heard them forhim ever again to forget them, hear them when or where he might. It was moreespecially when this man was speaking in a manner half jesting, half bitter,that Franz’s ear recalled most vividly the deep sonorous, yetwell-pitched voice that had addressed him in the grotto of Monte Cristo, andwhich he heard for the second time amid the darkness and ruined grandeur of theColosseum. And the more he thought, the more entire was his conviction, thatthe person who wore the mantle was no other than his former host andentertainer, “Sinbad the Sailor.”Under any other circumstances, Franz would have found it impossible to resisthis extreme curiosity to know more of so singular a personage, and with thatintent have sought to renew their short acquaintance; but in the presentinstance, the confidential nature of the conversation he had overheard madehim, with propriety, judge that his appearance at such a time would be anythingbut agreeable. As we have seen, therefore, he permitted his former host toretire without attempting a recognition, but fully promising himself a richindemnity for his present forbearance should chance afford him anotheropportunity.In vain did Franz endeavor to forget the many perplexing thoughts whichassailed him; in vain did he court the refreshment of sleep. Slumber refused tovisit his eyelids and the night was passed in feverish contemplation of thechain of circumstances tending to prove the identity of the mysterious visitantto the Colosseum with the inhabitant of the grotto of Monte Cristo; and themore he thought, the firmer grew his opinion on the subject.Worn out at length, he fell asleep at daybreak, and did not awake till late.Like a genuine Frenchman, Albert had employed his time in arranging for theevening’s diversion; he had sent to engage a box at the Teatro Argentina;and Franz, having a number of letters to write, relinquished the carriage toAlbert for the whole of the day.At five o’clock Albert returned, delighted with his day’s work; hehad been occupied in leaving his letters of introduction, and had received inreturn more invitations to balls and routs than it would be possible for him toaccept; besides this, he had seen (as he called it) all the remarkable sightsat Rome. Yes, in a single day he had accomplished what his more serious-mindedcompanion would have taken weeks to effect. Neither had he neglected toascertain the name of the piece to be played that night at the TeatroArgentina, and also what performers appeared in it. The opera ofParisina was announced for representation, and the principal actors wereCoselli, Moriani, and La Specchia.The young men, therefore, had reason to consider themselves fortunate in havingthe opportunity of hearing one of the best works by the composer of Lucia diLammermoor, supported by three of the most renowned vocalists of Italy.Albert had never been able to endure the Italian theatres, with theirorchestras from which it is impossible to see, and the absence of balconies, oropen boxes; all these defects pressed hard on a man who had had his stall atthe Bouffes, and had shared a lower box at the Opera. Still, in spite of this,Albert displayed his most dazzling and effective costumes each time he visitedthe theatres; but, alas, his elegant toilet was wholly thrown away, and one ofthe most worthy representatives of Parisian fashion had to carry with him themortifying reflection that he had nearly overrun Italy without meeting with asingle adventure.Sometimes Albert would affect to make a joke of his want of success; butinternally he was deeply wounded, and his self-love immensely piqued, to thinkthat Albert de Morcerf, the most admired and most sought after of any youngperson of his day, should thus be passed over, and merely have his labor forhis pains. And the thing was so much the more annoying, as, according to thecharacteristic modesty of a Frenchman, Albert had quitted Paris with the fullconviction that he had only to show himself in Italy to carry all before him,and that upon his return he should astonish the Parisian world with the recitalof his numerous love-affairs.Alas, poor Albert! None of those interesting adventures fell in his way; thelovely Genoese, Florentines, and Neapolitans were all faithful, if not to theirhusbands, at least to their lovers, and thought not of changing even for thesplendid appearance of Albert de Morcerf; and all he gained was the painfulconviction that the ladies of Italy have this advantage over those of France,that they are faithful even in their infidelity.Yet he could not restrain a hope that in Italy, as elsewhere, there might be anexception to the general rule.Albert, besides being an elegant, well-looking young man, was also possessed ofconsiderable talent and ability; moreover, he was a viscount—a recentlycreated one, certainly, but in the present day it is not necessary to go as farback as Noah in tracing a descent, and a genealogical tree is equallyestimated, whether dated from 1399 or merely 1815; but to crown all theseadvantages, Albert de Morcerf commanded an income of 50,000 livres, a more thansufficient sum to render him a personage of considerable importance in Paris.It was therefore no small mortification to him to have visited most of theprincipal cities in Italy without having excited the most trifling observation.Albert, however, hoped to indemnify himself for all these slights andindifferences during the Carnival, knowing full well that among the differentstates and kingdoms in which this festivity is celebrated, Rome is the spotwhere even the wisest and gravest throw off the usual rigidity of their lives,and deign to mingle in the follies of this time of liberty and relaxation. TheCarnival was to commence on the morrow; therefore Albert had not an instant tolose in setting forth the programme of his hopes, expectations, and claims tonotice.With this design he had engaged a box in the most conspicuous part of thetheatre, and exerted himself to set off his personal attractions by the aid ofthe most rich and elaborate toilet. The box taken by Albert was in the firstcircle; although each of the three tiers of boxes is deemed equallyaristocratic, and is, for this reason, generally styled the“nobility’s boxes,” and although the box engaged for the twofriends was sufficiently capacious to contain at least a dozen persons, it hadcost less than would be paid at some of the French theatres for one admittingmerely four occupants.Another motive had influenced Albert’s selection of his seat,—whoknew but that, thus advantageously placed, he might not in truth attract thenotice of some fair Roman, and an introduction might ensue that would procurehim the offer of a seat in a carriage, or a place in a princely balcony, fromwhich he might behold the gayeties of the Carnival?These united considerations made Albert more lively and anxious to please thanhe had hitherto been. Totally disregarding the business of the stage, he leanedfrom his box and began attentively scrutinizing the beauty of each prettywoman, aided by a powerful opera-glass; but, alas, this attempt to attractnotice wholly failed; not even curiosity had been excited, and it was but tooapparent that the lovely creatures, into whose good graces he was desirous ofstealing, were all so much engrossed with themselves, their lovers, or theirown thoughts, that they had not so much as noticed him or the manipulation ofhis glass.The truth was, that the anticipated pleasures of the Carnival, with the“Holy Week” that was to succeed it, so filled every fair breast, asto prevent the least attention being bestowed even on the business of thestage. The actors made their entries and exits unobserved or unthought of; atcertain conventional moments, the spectators would suddenly cease theirconversation, or rouse themselves from their musings, to listen to somebrilliant effort of Moriani’s, a well-executed recitative by Coselli, orto join in loud applause at the wonderful powers of La Specchia; but thatmomentary excitement over, they quickly relapsed into their former state ofpreoccupation or interesting conversation.Towards the close of the first act, the door of a box which had been hithertovacant was opened; a lady entered to whom Franz had been introduced in Paris,where indeed, he had imagined she still was. The quick eye of Albert caught theinvoluntary start with which his friend beheld the new arrival, and, turning tohim, he said hastily:“Do you know the woman who has just entered that box?”“Yes; what do you think of her?”“Oh, she is perfectly lovely—what a complexion! And suchmagnificent hair! Is she French?”“No; a Venetian.”“And her name is——”“Countess G——.”“Ah, I know her by name!” exclaimed Albert; “she is said topossess as much wit and cleverness as beauty. I was to have been presented toher when I met her at Madame Villefort’s ball.”“Shall I assist you in repairing your negligence?” asked Franz.“My dear fellow, are you really on such good terms with her as to ventureto take me to her box?”“Why, I have only had the honor of being in her society and conversingwith her three or four times in my life; but you know that even such anacquaintance as that might warrant my doing what you ask.”At that instant, the countess perceived Franz, and graciously waved her hand tohim, to which he replied by a respectful inclination of the head. “Uponmy word,” said Albert, “you seem to be on excellent terms with thebeautiful countess.”“You are mistaken in thinking so,” returned Franz calmly;“but you merely fall into the same error which leads so many of ourcountrymen to commit the most egregious blunders,—I mean that of judgingthe habits and customs of Italy and Spain by our Parisian notions; believe me,nothing is more fallacious than to form any estimate of the degree of intimacyyou may suppose existing among persons by the familiar terms they seem upon;there is a similarity of feeling at this instant between ourselves and thecountess—nothing more.”“Is there, indeed, my good fellow? Pray tell me, is it sympathy ofheart?”“No; of taste,” continued Franz gravely.“And in what manner has this congeniality of mind been evinced?”“By the countess’s visiting the Colosseum, as we did last night, bymoonlight, and nearly alone.”“You were with her, then?”“I was.”“And what did you say to her?”“Oh, we talked of the illustrious dead of whom that magnificent ruin is aglorious monument!”“Upon my word,” cried Albert, “you must have been a veryentertaining companion alone, or all but alone, with a beautiful woman in sucha place of sentiment as the Colosseum, and yet to find nothing better to talkabout than the dead! All I can say is, if ever I should get such a chance, theliving should be my theme.”“And you will probably find your theme ill-chosen.”“But,” said Albert, breaking in upon his discourse, “nevermind the past; let us only remember the present. Are you not going to keep yourpromise of introducing me to the fair subject of our remarks?”“Certainly, directly the curtain falls on the stage.”“What a confounded long time this first act lasts. I believe, on my soul,that they never mean to finish it.”“Oh, yes, they will; only listen to that charming finale. How exquisitelyCoselli sings his part.”“But what an awkward, inelegant fellow he is.”“Well, then, what do you say to La Specchia? Did you ever see anythingmore perfect than her acting?”“Why, you know, my dear fellow, when one has been accustomed to Malibranand Sontag, such singers as these don’t make the same impression on youthey perhaps do on others.”“At least, you must admire Moriani’s style and execution.”“I never fancied men of his dark, ponderous appearance singing with avoice like a woman’s.”“My good friend,” said Franz, turning to him, while Albertcontinued to point his glass at every box in the theatre, “you seemdetermined not to approve; you are really too difficult to please.”The curtain at length fell on the performances, to the infinite satisfaction ofthe Viscount of Morcerf, who seized his hat, rapidly passed his fingers throughhis hair, arranged his cravat and wristbands, and signified to Franz that hewas waiting for him to lead the way.Franz, who had mutely interrogated the countess, and received from her agracious smile in token that he would be welcome, sought not to retard thegratification of Albert’s eager impatience, but began at once the tour ofthe house, closely followed by Albert, who availed himself of the few minutesrequired to reach the opposite side of the theatre to settle the height andsmoothness of his collar, and to arrange the lappets of his coat. Thisimportant task was just completed as they arrived at the countess’s box.At the knock, the door was immediately opened, and the young man who was seatedbeside the countess, in obedience to the Italian custom, instantly rose andsurrendered his place to the strangers, who, in turn, would be expected toretire upon the arrival of other visitors.Franz presented Albert as one of the most distinguished young men of the day,both as regarded his position in society and extraordinary talents; nor did hesay more than the truth, for in Paris and the circle in which the viscountmoved, he was looked upon and cited as a model of perfection. Franz added thathis companion, deeply grieved at having been prevented the honor of beingpresented to the countess during her sojourn in Paris, was most anxious to makeup for it, and had requested him (Franz) to remedy the past misfortune byconducting him to her box, and concluded by asking pardon for his presumptionin having taken it upon himself to do so.The countess, in reply, bowed gracefully to Albert, and extended her hand withcordial kindness to Franz; then, inviting Albert to take the vacant seat besideher, she recommended Franz to take the next best, if he wished to view theballet, and pointed to the one behind her own chair.Albert was soon deeply engrossed in discoursing upon Paris and Parisianmatters, speaking to the countess of the various persons they both knew there.Franz perceived how completely he was in his element; and, unwilling tointerfere with the pleasure he so evidently felt, took up Albert’s glass,and began in his turn to survey the audience.Sitting alone, in the front of a box immediately opposite, but situated on thethird row, was a woman of exquisite beauty, dressed in a Greek costume, whichevidently, from the ease and grace with which she wore it, was her nationalattire. Behind her, but in deep shadow, was the outline of a masculine figure;but the features of this latter personage it was not possible to distinguish.Franz could not forbear breaking in upon the apparently interestingconversation passing between the countess and Albert, to inquire of the formerif she knew who was the fair Albanian opposite, since beauty such as hers waswell worthy of being observed by either sex.“All I can tell about her,” replied the countess, “is, thatshe has been at Rome since the beginning of the season; for I saw her where shenow sits the very first night of the season, and since then she has nevermissed a performance. Sometimes she is accompanied by the person who is nowwith her, and at others she is merely attended by a black servant.”“And what do you think of her personal appearance?”“Oh, I consider her perfectly lovely—she is just my idea of whatMedora must have been.”Franz and the countess exchanged a smile, and then the latter resumed herconversation with Albert, while Franz returned to his previous survey of thehouse and company. The curtain rose on the ballet, which was one of thoseexcellent specimens of the Italian school, admirably arranged and put on thestage by Henri, who has established for himself a great reputation throughoutItaly for his taste and skill in the choreographic art—one of thosemasterly productions of grace, method, and elegance in which the whole corpsde ballet, from the principal dancers to the humblest supernumerary, areall engaged on the stage at the same time; and a hundred and fifty persons maybe seen exhibiting the same attitude, or elevating the same arm or leg with asimultaneous movement, that would lead you to suppose that but one mind, oneact of volition, influenced the moving mass.The ballet was called Poliska.However much the ballet might have claimed his attention, Franz was too deeplyoccupied with the beautiful Greek to take any note of it; while she seemed toexperience an almost childlike delight in watching it, her eager, animatedlooks contrasting strongly with the utter indifference of her companion, who,during the whole time the piece lasted, never even moved, not even when thefurious, crashing din produced by the trumpets, cymbals, and Chinese bellssounded their loudest from the orchestra. Of this he took no heed, but was, asfar as appearances might be trusted, enjoying soft repose and bright celestialdreams.The ballet at length came to a close, and the curtain fell amid the loud,unanimous plaudits of an enthusiastic and delighted audience.Owing to the very judicious plan of dividing the two acts of the opera with aballet, the pauses between the performances are very short, the singers in theopera having time to repose themselves and change their costume, whennecessary, while the dancers are executing their pirouettes and exhibitingtheir graceful steps.The overture to the second act began; and, at the first sound of theleader’s bow across his violin, Franz observed the sleeper slowly ariseand approach the Greek girl, who turned around to say a few words to him, andthen, leaning forward again on the railing of her box, she became as absorbedas before in what was going on.The countenance of the person who had addressed her remained so completely inthe shade, that, though Franz tried his utmost, he could not distinguish asingle feature. The curtain rose, and the attention of Franz was attracted bythe actors; and his eyes turned from the box containing the Greek girl and herstrange companion to watch the business of the stage.Most of my readers are aware that the second act of Parisina opens withthe celebrated and effective duet in which Parisina, while sleeping, betrays toAzzo the secret of her love for Ugo. The injured husband goes through all theemotions of jealousy, until conviction seizes on his mind, and then, in afrenzy of rage and indignation, he awakens his guilty wife to tell her that heknows her guilt and to threaten her with his vengeance.This duet is one of the most beautiful, expressive and terrible conceptionsthat has ever emanated from the fruitful pen of Donizetti. Franz now listenedto it for the third time; yet its notes, so tenderly expressive and fearfullygrand as the wretched husband and wife give vent to their different griefs andpassions, thrilled through the soul of Franz with an effect equal to his firstemotions upon hearing it. Excited beyond his usual calm demeanor, Franz rosewith the audience, and was about to join the loud, enthusiastic applause thatfollowed; but suddenly his purpose was arrested, his hands fell by his sides,and the half-uttered “bravos” expired on his lips.The occupant of the box in which the Greek girl sat appeared to share theuniversal admiration that prevailed; for he left his seat to stand up in front,so that, his countenance being fully revealed, Franz had no difficulty inrecognizing him as the mysterious inhabitant of Monte Cristo, and the very sameperson he had encountered the preceding evening in the ruins of the Colosseum,and whose voice and figure had seemed so familiar to him.All doubt of his identity was now at an end; his singular host evidentlyresided at Rome. The surprise and agitation occasioned by this fullconfirmation of Franz’s former suspicion had no doubt imparted acorresponding expression to his features; for the countess, after gazing with apuzzled look at his face, burst into a fit of laughter, and begged to know whathad happened.“Countess,” returned Franz, totally unheeding her raillery,“I asked you a short time since if you knew any particulars respectingthe Albanian lady opposite; I must now beseech you to inform me who and what isher husband?”“Nay,” answered the countess, “I know no more of him thanyourself.”“Perhaps you never before noticed him?”“What a question—so truly French! Do you not know that we Italianshave eyes only for the man we love?”“True,” replied Franz.“All I can say is,” continued the countess, taking up thelorgnette, and directing it toward the box in question, “that thegentleman, whose history I am unable to furnish, seems to me as though he hadjust been dug up; he looks more like a corpse permitted by some friendlygrave-digger to quit his tomb for a while, and revisit this earth of ours, thananything human. How ghastly pale he is!”“Oh, he is always as colorless as you now see him,” said Franz.“Then you know him?” almost screamed the countess. “Oh, praydo, for heaven’s sake, tell us all about—is he a vampire, or aresuscitated corpse, or what?”“I fancy I have seen him before; and I even think he recognizesme.”“And I can well understand,” said the countess, shrugging up herbeautiful shoulders, as though an involuntary shudder passed through her veins,“that those who have once seen that man will never be likely to forgethim.”The sensation experienced by Franz was evidently not peculiar to himself;another, and wholly uninterested person, felt the same unaccountable awe andmisgiving.“Well.” inquired Franz, after the countess had a second timedirected her lorgnette at the box, “what do you think of ouropposite neighbor?”“Why, that he is no other than Lord Ruthven himself in a livingform.”This fresh allusion to Byron[5]drew a smile to Franz’s countenance; although he could but allow that ifanything was likely to induce belief in the existence of vampires, it would bethe presence of such a man as the mysterious personage before him.“I must positively find out who and what he is,” said Franz, risingfrom his seat.“No, no,” cried the countess; “you must not leave me. Idepend upon you to escort me home. Oh, indeed, I cannot permit you togo.”“Is it possible,” whispered Franz, “that you entertain anyfear?”“I’ll tell you,” answered the countess. “Byron had themost perfect belief in the existence of vampires, and even assured me that hehad seen them. The description he gave me perfectly corresponds with thefeatures and character of the man before us. Oh, he is the exactpersonification of what I have been led to expect! The coal-black hair, largebright, glittering eyes, in which a wild, unearthly fire seemsburning,—the same ghastly paleness. Then observe, too, that the womanwith him is altogether unlike all others of her sex. She is a foreigner—astranger. Nobody knows who she is, or where she comes from. No doubt shebelongs to the same horrible race he does, and is, like himself, a dealer inmagical arts. I entreat of you not to go near him—at least tonight; andif tomorrow your curiosity still continues as great, pursue your researches ifyou will; but tonight you neither can nor shall. For that purpose I mean tokeep you all to myself.”Franz protested he could not defer his pursuit till the following day, for manyreasons.“Listen to me,” said the countess, “and do not be so veryheadstrong. I am going home. I have a party at my house tonight, and thereforecannot possibly remain till the end of the opera. Now, I cannot for one instantbelieve you so devoid of gallantry as to refuse a lady your escort when sheeven condescends to ask you for it.”There was nothing else left for Franz to do but to take up his hat, open thedoor of the box, and offer the countess his arm. It was quite evident, by hermanner, that her uneasiness was not feigned; and Franz himself could not resista feeling of superstitious dread—so much the stronger in him, as it arosefrom a variety of corroborative recollections, while the terror of the countesssprang from an instinctive belief, originally created in her mind by the wildtales she had listened to till she believed them truths. Franz could even feelher arm tremble as he assisted her into the carriage. Upon arriving at herhotel, Franz perceived that she had deceived him when she spoke of expectingcompany; on the contrary, her own return before the appointed hour seemedgreatly to astonish the servants.“Excuse my little subterfuge,” said the countess, in reply to hercompanion’s half-reproachful observation on the subject; “but thathorrid man had made me feel quite uncomfortable, and I longed to be alone, thatI might compose my startled mind.”Franz essayed to smile.“Nay,” said she, “do not smile; it ill accords with theexpression of your countenance, and I am sure it does not spring from yourheart. However, promise me one thing.”“What is it?”“Promise me, I say.”“I will do anything you desire, except relinquish my determination offinding out who this man is. I have more reasons than you can imagine fordesiring to know who he is, from whence he came, and whither he isgoing.”“Where he comes from I am ignorant; but I can readily tell you where heis going to, and that is down below, without the least doubt.”“Let us only speak of the promise you wished me to make,” saidFranz.“Well, then, you must give me your word to return immediately to yourhotel, and make no attempt to follow this man tonight. There are certainaffinities between the persons we quit and those we meet afterwards. Forheaven’s sake, do not serve as a conductor between that man and me.Pursue your chase after him tomorrow as eagerly as you please; but never bringhim near me, if you would not see me die of terror. And now, good-night; go toyour rooms, and try to sleep away all recollections of this evening. For my ownpart, I am quite sure I shall not be able to close my eyes.”So saying, the countess quitted Franz, leaving him unable to decide whether shewere merely amusing herself at his expense, or whether her fears and agitationswere genuine.Upon his return to the hotel, Franz found Albert in his dressing-gown andslippers, listlessly extended on a sofa, smoking a cigar.“My dear fellow!” cried he, springing up, “is it really you?Why, I did not expect to see you before tomorrow.”“My dear Albert,” replied Franz, “I am glad of thisopportunity to tell you, once and forever, that you entertain a most erroneousnotion concerning Italian women. I should have thought the continual failuresyou have met with in all your own love affairs might have taught you better bythis time.”“Upon my soul, these women would puzzle the very Devil to read themaright. Why, here—they give you their hand—they press yours inreturn—they keep up a whispering conversation—permit you toaccompany them home. Why, if a Parisian were to indulge in a quarter of thesemarks of flattering attention, her reputation would be gone forever.”“And the very reason why the women of this fine country, ‘wheresounds the si,’ as Dante writes, put so little restraint on theirwords and actions, is because they live so much in public, and have reallynothing to conceal. Besides, you must have perceived that the countess wasreally alarmed.”“At what? At the sight of that respectable gentleman sitting opposite tous in the same box with the lovely Greek girl? Now, for my part, I met them inthe lobby after the conclusion of the piece; and hang me, if I can guess whereyou took your notions of the other world from. I can assure you that thishobgoblin of yours is a deuced fine-looking fellow—admirably dressed.Indeed, I feel quite sure, from the cut of his clothes, they are made by afirst-rate Paris tailor—probably Blin or Humann. He was rather too pale,certainly; but then, you know, paleness is always looked upon as a strong proofof aristocratic descent and distinguished breeding.”Franz smiled; for he well remembered that Albert particularly prided himself onthe entire absence of color in his own complexion.“Well, that tends to confirm my own ideas,” said Franz, “thatthe countess’s suspicions were destitute alike of sense and reason. Didhe speak in your hearing? and did you catch any of his words?”“I did; but they were uttered in the Romaic dialect. I knew that from themixture of Greek words. I don’t know whether I ever told you that when Iwas at college I was rather—rather strong in Greek.”“He spoke the Romaic language, did he?”“I think so.”“That settles it,” murmured Franz. “’Tis he, past alldoubt.”“What do you say?”“Nothing, nothing. But tell me, what were you thinking about when I camein?”“Oh, I was arranging a little surprise for you.”“Indeed. Of what nature?”“Why, you know it is quite impossible to procure a carriage.”“Certainly; and I also know that we have done all that human meansafforded to endeavor to get one.”“Now, then, in this difficulty a bright idea has flashed across mybrain.”Franz looked at Albert as though he had not much confidence in the suggestionsof his imagination.“I tell you what, M. Franz,” cried Albert, “you deserve to becalled out for such a misgiving and incredulous glance as that you were pleasedto bestow on me just now.”“And I promise to give you the satisfaction of a gentleman if your schemeturns out as ingenious as you assert.”“Well, then, hearken to me.”“I listen.”“You agree, do you not, that obtaining a carriage is out of thequestion?”“I do.”“Neither can we procure horses?”“True; we have offered any sum, but have failed.”“Well, now, what do you say to a cart? I dare say such a thing might behad.”“Very possibly.”“And a pair of oxen?”“As easily found as the cart.”“Then you see, my good fellow, with a cart and a couple of oxen ourbusiness can be managed. The cart must be tastefully ornamented; and if you andI dress ourselves as Neapolitan reapers, we may get up a striking tableau,after the manner of that splendid picture by Léopold Robert. It would addgreatly to the effect if the countess would join us in the costume of a peasantfrom Puzzoli or Sorrento. Our group would then be quite complete, moreespecially as the countess is quite beautiful enough to represent aMadonna.”“Well,” said Franz, “this time, M. Albert, I am bound to giveyou credit for having hit upon a most capital idea.”“And quite a national one, too,” replied Albert with gratifiedpride. “A mere masque borrowed from our own festivities. Ha, ha, yeRomans! you thought to make us, unhappy strangers, trot at the heels of yourprocessions, like so many lazzaroni, because no carriages or horses are to behad in your beggarly city. But you don’t know us; when we can’thave one thing we invent another.”“And have you communicated your triumphant idea to anybody?”“Only to our host. Upon my return home I sent for him, and I thenexplained to him what I wished to procure. He assured me that nothing would beeasier than to furnish all I desired. One thing I was sorry for; when I badehim have the horns of the oxen gilded, he told me there would not be time, asit would require three days to do that; so you see we must do without thislittle superfluity.”“And where is he now?”“Who?”“Our host.”“Gone out in search of our equipage, by tomorrow it might be toolate.”“Then he will be able to give us an answer tonight.”“Oh, I expect him every minute.”At this instant the door opened, and the head of Signor Pastrini appeared.“Permesso?” inquired he.“Certainly—certainly,” cried Franz. “Come in, myhost.”“Now, then,” asked Albert eagerly, “have you found thedesired cart and oxen?”“Better than that!” replied Signor Pastrini, with the air of a manperfectly well satisfied with himself.“Take care, my worthy host,” said Albert, “better is asure enemy to well.”“Let your excellencies only leave the matter to me,” returnedSignor Pastrini in a tone indicative of unbounded self-confidence.“But what have you done?” asked Franz. “Speak out,there’s a worthy fellow.”“Your excellencies are aware,” responded the landlord, swellingwith importance, “that the Count of Monte Cristo is living on the samefloor with yourselves!”“I should think we did know it,” exclaimed Albert, “since itis owing to that circumstance that we are packed into these small rooms, liketwo poor students in the back streets of Paris.”“When, then, the Count of Monte Cristo, hearing of the dilemma in whichyou are placed, has sent to offer you seats in his carriage and two places athis windows in the Palazzo Rospoli.” The friends looked at each otherwith unutterable surprise.“But do you think,” asked Albert, “that we ought to acceptsuch offers from a perfect stranger?”“What sort of person is this Count of Monte Cristo?” asked Franz ofhis host.“A very great nobleman, but whether Maltese or Sicilian I cannot exactlysay; but this I know, that he is noble as a Borghese and rich as a goldmine.”“It seems to me,” said Franz, speaking in an undertone to Albert,“that if this person merited the high panegyrics of our landlord, hewould have conveyed his invitation through another channel, and not permittedit to be brought to us in this unceremonious way. He would havewritten—or——”At this instant someone knocked at the door.“Come in,” said Franz.A servant, wearing a livery of considerable style and richness, appeared at thethreshold, and, placing two cards in the landlord’s hands, who forthwithpresented them to the two young men, he said:“Please to deliver these, from the Count of Monte Cristo to VicomteAlbert de Morcerf and M. Franz d’Épinay. The Count of MonteCristo,” continued the servant, “begs these gentlemen’spermission to wait upon them as their neighbor, and he will be honored by anintimation of what time they will please to receive him.”“Faith, Franz,” whispered Albert, “there is not much to findfault with here.”“Tell the count,” replied Franz, “that we will do ourselvesthe pleasure of calling on him.”The servant bowed and retired.“That is what I call an elegant mode of attack,” said Albert,“You were quite correct in what you said, Signor Pastrini. The Count ofMonte Cristo is unquestionably a man of first-rate breeding and knowledge ofthe world.”“Then you accept his offer?” said the host.“Of course we do,” replied Albert. “Still, I must own I amsorry to be obliged to give up the cart and the group of reapers—it wouldhave produced such an effect! And were it not for the windows at the PalazzoRospoli, by way of recompense for the loss of our beautiful scheme, Idon’t know but what I should have held on by my original plan. What sayyou, Franz?”“Oh, I agree with you; the windows in the Palazzo Rospoli alone decidedme.”The truth was, that the mention of two places in the Palazzo Rospoli hadrecalled to Franz the conversation he had overheard the preceding evening inthe ruins of the Colosseum between the mysterious unknown and the Transteverin,in which the stranger in the cloak had undertaken to obtain the freedom of acondemned criminal; and if this muffled-up individual proved (as Franz feltsure he would) the same as the person he had just seen in the Teatro Argentina,then he should be able to establish his identity, and also to prosecute hisresearches respecting him with perfect facility and freedom.Franz passed the night in confused dreams respecting the two meetings he hadalready had with his mysterious tormentor, and in waking speculations as towhat the morrow would produce. The next day must clear up every doubt; andunless his near neighbor and would-be friend, the Count of Monte Cristo,possessed the ring of Gyges, and by its power was able to render himselfinvisible, it was very certain he could not escape this time.Eight o’clock found Franz up and dressed, while Albert, who had not thesame motives for early rising, was still soundly asleep. The first act of Franzwas to summon his landlord, who presented himself with his accustomedobsequiousness.“Pray, Signor Pastrini,” asked Franz, “is not some executionappointed to take place today?”“Yes, your excellency; but if your reason for inquiry is that you mayprocure a window to view it from, you are much too late.”“Oh, no,” answered Franz, “I had no such intention; and evenif I had felt a wish to witness the spectacle, I might have done so from MontePincio; could I not?”“Ah!” exclaimed mine host, “I did not think it likely yourexcellency would have chosen to mingle with such a rabble as are alwayscollected on that hill, which, indeed, they consider as exclusively belongingto themselves.”“Very possibly I may not go,” answered Franz; “but in case Ifeel disposed, give me some particulars of today’s executions.”“What particulars would your excellency like to hear?”“Why, the number of persons condemned to suffer, their names, anddescription of the death they are to die.”“That happens just lucky, your excellency! Only a few minutes ago theybrought me the tavolettas.”“What are they?”“Sort of wooden tablets hung up at the corners of streets the eveningbefore an execution, on which is pasted up a paper containing the names of thecondemned persons, their crimes, and mode of punishment. The reason for sopublicly announcing all this is, that all good and faithful Catholics may offerup their prayers for the unfortunate culprits, and, above all, beseech ofHeaven to grant them a sincere repentance.”“And these tablets are brought to you that you may add your prayers tothose of the faithful, are they?” asked Franz somewhat incredulously.“Oh, dear, no, your excellency! I have not time for anybody’saffairs but my own and those of my honorable guests; but I make an agreementwith the man who pastes up the papers, and he brings them to me as he would theplaybills, that in case any person staying at my hotel should like to witnessan execution, he may obtain every requisite information concerning the time andplace etc.”“Upon my word, that is a most delicate attention on your part, SignorPastrini,” cried Franz.“Why, your excellency,” returned the landlord, chuckling andrubbing his hands with infinite complacency, “I think I may take uponmyself to say I neglect nothing to deserve the support and patronage of thenoble visitors to this poor hotel.”“I see that plainly enough, my most excellent host, and you may rely uponme to proclaim so striking a proof of your attention to your guests wherever Igo. Meanwhile, oblige me by a sight of one of these tavolettas.”“Nothing can be easier than to comply with your excellency’swish,” said the landlord, opening the door of the chamber; “I havecaused one to be placed on the landing, close by your apartment.”Then, taking the tablet from the wall, he handed it to Franz, who read asfollows:“‘The public is informed that on Wednesday, February 23rd, beingthe first day of the Carnival, executions will take place in the Piazza delPopolo, by order of the Tribunal of the Rota, of two persons, named AndreaRondolo, and Peppino, otherwise called Rocca Priori; the former found guilty ofthe murder of a venerable and exemplary priest, named Don César Torlini, canonof the church of St. John Lateran; and the latter convicted of being anaccomplice of the atrocious and sanguinary bandit, Luigi Vampa, and his band.The first-named malefactor will be mazzolato, the second culpritdecapitato.“‘The prayers of all good Christians are entreated for theseunfortunate men, that it may please God to awaken them to a sense of theirguilt, and to grant them a hearty and sincere repentance for theircrimes.’”This was precisely what Franz had heard the evening before in the ruins of theColosseum. No part of the programme differed,—the names of the condemnedpersons, their crimes, and mode of punishment, all agreed with his previousinformation. In all probability, therefore, the Transteverin was no other thanthe bandit Luigi Vampa himself, and the man shrouded in the mantle the same hehad known as “Sinbad the Sailor,” but who, no doubt, was stillpursuing his philanthropic expedition in Rome, as he had already done atPorto-Vecchio and Tunis.Time was getting on, however, and Franz deemed it advisable to awaken Albert;but at the moment he prepared to proceed to his chamber, his friend entered theroom in perfect costume for the day. The anticipated delights of the Carnivalhad so run in his head as to make him leave his pillow long before his usualhour.“Now, my excellent Signor Pastrini,” said Franz, addressing hislandlord, “since we are both ready, do you think we may proceed at onceto visit the Count of Monte Cristo?”“Most assuredly,” replied he. “The Count of Monte Cristo isalways an early riser; and I can answer for his having been up these twohours.”“Then you really consider we shall not be intruding if we pay ourrespects to him directly?”“Oh, I am quite sure. I will take all the blame on myself if you find Ihave led you into an error.”“Well, then, if it be so, are you ready, Albert?”“Perfectly.”“Let us go and return our best thanks for his courtesy.”“Yes, let us do so.”The landlord preceded the friends across the landing, which was all thatseparated them from the apartments of the count, rang at the bell, and, uponthe door being opened by a servant, said:“I signori Francesi.”The domestic bowed respectfully, and invited them to enter. They passed throughtwo rooms, furnished in a luxurious manner they had not expected to see underthe roof of Signor Pastrini, and were shown into an elegantly fitted-updrawing-room. The richest Turkey carpets covered the floor, and the softest andmost inviting couches, easy-chairs, and sofas, offered their high-piled andyielding cushions to such as desired repose or refreshment. Splendid paintingsby the first masters were ranged against the walls, intermingled withmagnificent trophies of war, while heavy curtains of costly tapestry weresuspended before the different doors of the room.“If your excellencies will please to be seated,” said the man,“I will let the count know that you are here.”And with these words he disappeared behind one of the tapestriedportières. As the door opened, the sound of a guzla reached theears of the young men, but was almost immediately lost, for the rapid closingof the door merely allowed one rich swell of harmony to enter. Franz and Albertlooked inquiringly at each other, then at the gorgeous furnishings of theapartment. Everything seemed more magnificent at a second view than it had doneat their first rapid survey.“Well,” said Franz to his friend, “what think you of allthis?”“Why, upon my soul, my dear fellow, it strikes me that our elegant andattentive neighbor must either be some successful stock-jobber who hasspeculated in the fall of the Spanish funds, or some prince travellingincog.”“Hush, hush!” replied Franz; “we shall ascertain who and whathe is—he comes!”As Franz spoke, he heard the sound of a door turning on its hinges, and almostimmediately afterwards the tapestry was drawn aside, and the owner of all theseriches stood before the two young men. Albert instantly rose to meet him, butFranz remained, in a manner, spellbound on his chair; for in the person of himwho had just entered he recognized not only the mysterious visitant to theColosseum, and the occupant of the box at the Teatro Argentina, but also hisextraordinary host of Monte Cristo. Chapter 35. LaMazzolataGentlemen,” saidthe Count of Monte Cristo as he entered, “I pray you excuse me forsuffering my visit to be anticipated; but I feared to disturb you by presentingmyself earlier at your apartments; besides, you sent me word that you wouldcome to me, and I have held myself at your disposal.”“Franz and I have to thank you a thousand times, count,” returnedAlbert; “you extricated us from a great dilemma, and we were on the pointof inventing a very fantastic vehicle when your friendly invitation reachedus.”“Indeed,” returned the count, motioning the two young men to sitdown. “It was the fault of that blockhead Pastrini, that I did not soonerassist you in your distress. He did not mention a syllable of yourembarrassment to me, when he knows that, alone and isolated as I am, I seekevery opportunity of making the acquaintance of my neighbors. As soon as Ilearned I could in any way assist you, I most eagerly seized the opportunity ofoffering my services.”The two young men bowed. Franz had, as yet, found nothing to say; he had cometo no determination, and as nothing in the count’s manner manifested thewish that he should recognize him, he did not know whether to make any allusionto the past, or wait until he had more proof; besides, although sure it was hewho had been in the box the previous evening, he could not be equally positivethat this was the man he had seen at the Colosseum. He resolved, therefore, tolet things take their course without making any direct overture to the count.Moreover, he had this advantage, he was master of the count’s secret,while the count had no hold on Franz, who had nothing to conceal. However, heresolved to lead the conversation to a subject which might possibly clear uphis doubts.“Count,” said he, “you have offered us places in yourcarriage, and at your windows in the Rospoli Palace. Can you tell us where wecan obtain a sight of the Piazza del Popolo?”“Ah,” said the count negligently, looking attentively at Morcerf,“is there not something like an execution upon the Piazza delPopolo?”“Yes,” returned Franz, finding that the count was coming to thepoint he wished.“Stay, I think I told my steward yesterday to attend to this; perhaps Ican render you this slight service also.”He extended his hand, and rang the bell thrice.“Did you ever occupy yourself,” said he to Franz, “with theemployment of time and the means of simplifying the summoning your servants? Ihave. When I ring once, it is for my valet; twice, for my majordomo; thrice,for my steward,—thus I do not waste a minute or a word. Here heis.”A man of about forty-five or fifty entered, exactly resembling the smuggler whohad introduced Franz into the cavern; but he did not appear to recognize him.It was evident he had his orders.“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “you have procured mewindows looking on the Piazza del Popolo, as I ordered you yesterday.”“Yes, excellency,” returned the steward; “but it was verylate.”“Did I not tell you I wished for one?” replied the count, frowning.“And your excellency has one, which was let to Prince Lobanieff; but Iwas obliged to pay a hundred——”“That will do—that will do, Monsieur Bertuccio; spare thesegentlemen all such domestic arrangements. You have the window, that issufficient. Give orders to the coachman; and be in readiness on the stairs toconduct us to it.”The steward bowed, and was about to quit the room.“Ah!” continued the count, “be good enough to ask Pastrini ifhe has received the tavoletta, and if he can send us an account of theexecution.”“There is no need to do that,” said Franz, taking out his tablets;“for I saw the account, and copied it down.”“Very well, you can retire, M. Bertuccio; I need you no longer. Let usknow when breakfast is ready. These gentlemen,” added he, turning to thetwo friends, “will, I trust, do me the honor to breakfast with me?”“But, my dear count,” said Albert, “we shall abuse yourkindness.”“Not at all; on the contrary, you will give me great pleasure. You will,one or other of you, perhaps both, return it to me at Paris. M. Bertuccio, laycovers for three.”He then took Franz’s tablets out of his hand. “‘Weannounce,’ he read, in the same tone with which he would have read anewspaper, ‘that today, the 23rd of February, will be executed AndreaRondolo, guilty of murder on the person of the respected and venerated DonCésar Torlini, canon of the church of St. John Lateran, and Peppino, calledRocca Priori, convicted of complicity with the detestable bandit Luigi Vampa,and the men of his band.’“Hum! ‘The first will be mazzolato, the seconddecapitato.’ Yes,” continued the count, “it was atfirst arranged in this way; but I think since yesterday some change has takenplace in the order of the ceremony.”“Really?” said Franz.“Yes, I passed the evening at the Cardinal Rospigliosi’s, and theremention was made of something like a pardon for one of the two men.”“For Andrea Rondolo?” asked Franz.“No,” replied the count, carelessly; “for the other (heglanced at the tablets as if to recall the name), for Peppino, called RoccaPriori. You are thus deprived of seeing a man guillotined; but themazzolata still remains, which is a very curious punishment when seenfor the first time, and even the second, while the other, as you must know, isvery simple. The mandaïa[6]never fails, never trembles, never strikes thirty times ineffectually, like thesoldier who beheaded the Count of Chalais, and to whose tender mercy Richelieuhad doubtless recommended the sufferer. Ah,” added the count, in acontemptuous tone, “do not tell me of European punishments, they are inthe infancy, or rather the old age, of cruelty.”“Really, count,” replied Franz, “one would think that you hadstudied the different tortures of all the nations of the world.”“There are, at least, few that I have not seen,” said the countcoldly.“And you took pleasure in beholding these dreadful spectacles?”“My first sentiment was horror, the second indifference, the thirdcuriosity.”“Curiosity—that is a terrible word.”“Why so? In life, our greatest preoccupation is death; is it not then,curious to study the different ways by which the soul and body can part; andhow, according to their different characters, temperaments, and even thedifferent customs of their countries, different persons bear the transitionfrom life to death, from existence to annihilation? As for myself, I can assureyou of one thing,—the more men you see die, the easier it becomes to dieyourself; and in my opinion, death may be a torture, but it is not anexpiation.”“I do not quite understand you,” replied Franz; “pray explainyour meaning, for you excite my curiosity to the highest pitch.”“Listen,” said the count, and deep hatred mounted to his face, asthe blood would to the face of any other. “If a man had by unheard-of andexcruciating tortures destroyed your father, your mother, yourbetrothed,—a being who, when torn from you, left a desolation, a woundthat never closes, in your breast,—do you think the reparation thatsociety gives you is sufficient when it interposes the knife of the guillotinebetween the base of the occiput and the trapezal muscles of the murderer, andallows him who has caused us years of moral sufferings to escape with a fewmoments of physical pain?”“Yes, I know,” said Franz, “that human justice isinsufficient to console us; she can give blood in return for blood, that isall; but you must demand from her only what it is in her power to grant.”“I will put another case to you,” continued the count; “thatwhere society, attacked by the death of a person, avenges death by death. Butare there not a thousand tortures by which a man may be made to suffer withoutsociety taking the least cognizance of them, or offering him even theinsufficient means of vengeance, of which we have just spoken? Are there notcrimes for which the impalement of the Turks, the augers of the Persians, thestake and the brand of the Iroquois Indians, are inadequate tortures, and whichare unpunished by society? Answer me, do not these crimes exist?”“Yes,” answered Franz; “and it is to punish them thatduelling is tolerated.”“Ah, duelling,” cried the count; “a pleasant manner, upon mysoul, of arriving at your end when that end is vengeance! A man has carried offyour mistress, a man has seduced your wife, a man has dishonored your daughter;he has rendered the whole life of one who had the right to expect from Heaventhat portion of happiness God has promised to everyone of his creatures, anexistence of misery and infamy; and you think you are avenged because you senda ball through the head, or pass a sword through the breast, of that man whohas planted madness in your brain, and despair in your heart. And remember,moreover, that it is often he who comes off victorious from the strife,absolved of all crime in the eyes of the world. No, no,” continued thecount, “had I to avenge myself, it is not thus I would takerevenge.”“Then you disapprove of duelling? You would not fight a duel?”asked Albert in his turn, astonished at this strange theory.“Oh, yes,” replied the count; “understand me, I would fight aduel for a trifle, for an insult, for a blow; and the more so that, thanks tomy skill in all bodily exercises, and the indifference to danger I havegradually acquired, I should be almost certain to kill my man. Oh, I wouldfight for such a cause; but in return for a slow, profound, eternal torture, Iwould give back the same, were it possible; an eye for an eye, a tooth for atooth, as the Orientalists say,—our masters in everything,—thosefavored creatures who have formed for themselves a life of dreams and aparadise of realities.”“But,” said Franz to the count, “with this theory, whichrenders you at once judge and executioner of your own cause, it would bedifficult to adopt a course that would forever prevent your falling under thepower of the law. Hatred is blind, rage carries you away; and he who pours outvengeance runs the risk of tasting a bitter draught.”“Yes, if he be poor and inexperienced, not if he be rich and skilful;besides, the worst that could happen to him would be the punishment of which wehave already spoken, and which the philanthropic French Revolution hassubstituted for being torn to pieces by horses or broken on the wheel. Whatmatters this punishment, as long as he is avenged? On my word, I almost regretthat in all probability this miserable Peppino will not be beheaded, as youmight have had an opportunity then of seeing how short a time the punishmentlasts, and whether it is worth even mentioning; but, really this is a mostsingular conversation for the Carnival, gentlemen; how did it arise? Ah, Irecollect, you asked for a place at my window; you shall have it; but let usfirst sit down to table, for here comes the servant to inform us that breakfastis ready.”As he spoke, a servant opened one of the four doors of the apartment, saying:“Al suo commodo!”The two young men arose and entered the breakfast-room.During the meal, which was excellent, and admirably served, Franz lookedrepeatedly at Albert, in order to observe the impressions which he doubted nothad been made on him by the words of their entertainer; but whether with hisusual carelessness he had paid but little attention to him, whether theexplanation of the Count of Monte Cristo with regard to duelling had satisfiedhim, or whether the events which Franz knew of had had their effect on himalone, he remarked that his companion did not pay the least regard to them, buton the contrary ate like a man who for the last four or five months had beencondemned to partake of Italian cookery—that is, the worst in the world.As for the count, he just touched the dishes; he seemed to fulfil the duties ofa host by sitting down with his guests, and awaited their departure to beserved with some strange or more delicate food. This brought back to Franz, inspite of himself, the recollection of the terror with which the count hadinspired the Countess G——, and her firm conviction that the man inthe opposite box was a vampire.At the end of the breakfast Franz took out his watch.“Well,” said the count, “what are you doing?”“You must excuse us, count,” returned Franz, “but we havestill much to do.”“What may that be?”“We have no masks, and it is absolutely necessary to procure them.”“Do not concern yourself about that; we have, I think, a private room inthe Piazza del Popolo; I will have whatever costumes you choose brought to us,and you can dress there.”“After the execution?” cried Franz.“Before or after, whichever you please.”“Opposite the scaffold?”“The scaffold forms part of the fête.”“Count, I have reflected on the matter,” said Franz, “I thankyou for your courtesy, but I shall content myself with accepting a place inyour carriage and at your window at the Rospoli Palace, and I leave you atliberty to dispose of my place at the Piazza del Popolo.”“But I warn you, you will lose a very curious sight,” returned thecount.“You will describe it to me,” replied Franz, “and the recitalfrom your lips will make as great an impression on me as if I had witnessed it.I have more than once intended witnessing an execution, but I have never beenable to make up my mind; and you, Albert?”“I,” replied the viscount,—“I saw Castaing executed,but I think I was rather intoxicated that day, for I had quitted college thesame morning, and we had passed the previous night at a tavern.”“Besides, it is no reason because you have not seen an execution atParis, that you should not see one anywhere else; when you travel, it is to seeeverything. Think what a figure you will make when you are asked, ‘How dothey execute at Rome?’ and you reply, ‘I do not know!’ And,besides, they say that the culprit is an infamous scoundrel, who killed with alog of wood a worthy canon who had brought him up like his own son.Diable! when a churchman is killed, it should be with a different weaponthan a log, especially when he has behaved like a father. If you went to Spain,would you not see the bull-fights? Well, suppose it is a bull-fight you aregoing to see? Recollect the ancient Romans of the Circus, and the sports wherethey killed three hundred lions and a hundred men. Think of the eighty thousandapplauding spectators, the sage matrons who took their daughters, and thecharming Vestals who made with the thumb of their white hands the fatal signthat said, ‘Come, despatch the dying.’”“Shall you go, then, Albert?” asked Franz.“Ma foi, yes; like you, I hesitated, but the count’seloquence decides me.”“Let us go, then,” said Franz, “since you wish it; but on ourway to the Piazza del Popolo, I wish to pass through the Corso. Is thispossible, count?”“On foot, yes, in a carriage, no.”“I will go on foot, then.”“Is it important that you should go that way?”“Yes, there is something I wish to see.”“Well, we will go by the Corso. We will send the carriage to wait for uson the Piazza del Popolo, by the Via del Babuino, for I shall be glad to pass,myself, through the Corso, to see if some orders I have given have beenexecuted.”“Excellency,” said a servant, opening the door, “a man in thedress of a penitent wishes to speak to you.”“Ah! yes,” returned the count, “I know who he is, gentlemen;will you return to the salon? you will find good cigars on the centre table. Iwill be with you directly.”The young men rose and returned into the salon, while the count, againapologizing, left by another door. Albert, who was a great smoker, and who hadconsidered it no small sacrifice to be deprived of the cigars of the Café deParis, approached the table, and uttered a cry of joy at perceiving someveritable puros.“Well,” asked Franz, “what think you of the Count of MonteCristo?”“What do I think?” said Albert, evidently surprised at such aquestion from his companion; “I think he is a delightful fellow, who doesthe honors of his table admirably; who has travelled much, read much, is, likeBrutus, of the Stoic school, and moreover,” added he, sending a volume ofsmoke up towards the ceiling, “that he has excellent cigars.”Such was Albert’s opinion of the count, and as Franz well knew thatAlbert professed never to form an opinion except upon long reflection, he madeno attempt to change it.“But,” said he, “did you observe one very singularthing?”“What?”“How attentively he looked at you.”“At me?”“Yes.”Albert reflected. “Ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is notvery surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my clothesare of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a provincial. The firstopportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and tell him I am nothing of thekind.”Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.“I am now quite at your service, gentlemen,” said he. “Thecarriage is going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we will go another;and, if you please, by the Corso. Take some more of these cigars, M. deMorcerf.”“With all my heart,” returned Albert; “Italian cigars arehorrible. When you come to Paris, I will return all this.”“I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since you allow me, Iwill pay you a visit. Come, we have not any time to lose, it is half-pasttwelve—let us set off.”All three descended; the coachman received his master’s orders, and drovedown the Via del Babuino. While the three gentlemen walked along the Piazza diSpagna and the Via Frattina, which led directly between the Fiano and Rospolipalaces, Franz’s attention was directed towards the windows of that lastpalace, for he had not forgotten the signal agreed upon between the man in themantle and the Transtevere peasant.“Which are your windows?” asked he of the count, with as muchindifference as he could assume.“The three last,” returned he, with a negligence evidentlyunaffected, for he could not imagine with what intention the question was put.Franz glanced rapidly towards the three windows. The side windows were hungwith yellow damask, and the centre one with white damask and a red cross. Theman in the mantle had kept his promise to the Transteverin, and there could nowbe no doubt that he was the count.The three windows were still untenanted. Preparations were making on everyside; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, and windows were hung withflags. The masks could not appear; the carriages could not move about; but themasks were visible behind the windows, the carriages, and the doors.Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso. As they approachedthe Piazza del Popolo, the crowd became more dense, and above the heads of themultitude two objects were visible: the obelisk, surmounted by a cross, whichmarks the centre of the square, and in front of the obelisk, at the point wherethe three streets, del Babuino, del Corso, and di Ripetta, meet, the twouprights of the scaffold, between which glittered the curved knife of themandaïa.At the corner of the street they met the count’s steward, who wasawaiting his master. The window, let at an exorbitant price, which the counthad doubtless wished to conceal from his guests, was on the second floor of thegreat palace, situated between the Via del Babuino and the Monte Pincio. Itconsisted, as we have said, of a small dressing-room, opening into a bedroom,and, when the door of communication was shut, the inmates were quite alone. Onchairs were laid elegant masquerade costumes of blue and white satin.“As you left the choice of your costumes to me,” said the count tothe two friends, “I have had these brought, as they will be the most wornthis year; and they are most suitable, on account of the confetti(sweetmeats), as they do not show the flour.”Franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and he perhaps did notfully appreciate this new attention to their wishes; for he was wholly absorbedby the spectacle that the Piazza del Popolo presented, and by the terribleinstrument that was in the centre.It was the first time Franz had ever seen a guillotine,—we sayguillotine, because the Roman mandaïa is formed on almost the same modelas the French instrument.[7]The knife, which is shaped like a crescent, that cuts with the convex side,falls from a less height, and that is all the difference.Two men, seated on the movable plank on which the victim is laid, were eatingtheir breakfasts, while waiting for the criminal. Their repast consistedapparently of bread and sausages. One of them lifted the plank, took out aflask of wine, drank some, and then passed it to his companion. These two menwere the executioner’s assistants.At this sight Franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his brow.The prisoners, transported the previous evening from the Carceri Nuove to thelittle church of Santa Maria del Popolo, had passed the night, each accompaniedby two priests, in a chapel closed by a grating, before which were twosentinels, who were relieved at intervals. A double line of carbineers, placedon each side of the door of the church, reached to the scaffold, and formed acircle around it, leaving a path about ten feet wide, and around the guillotinea space of nearly a hundred feet.All the rest of the square was paved with heads. Many women held their infantson their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view. The Monte Pincioseemed a vast amphitheatre filled with spectators; the balconies of the twochurches at the corner of the Via del Babuino and the Via di Ripetta werecrammed; the steps even seemed a parti-colored sea, that was impelled towardsthe portico; every niche in the wall held its living statue. What the countsaid was true—the most curious spectacle in life is that of death.And yet, instead of the silence and the solemnity demanded by the occasion,laughter and jests arose from the crowd. It was evident that the execution was,in the eyes of the people, only the commencement of the Carnival.Suddenly the tumult ceased, as if by magic, and the doors of the church opened.A brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes of graysackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in their hands lighted tapers,appeared first; the chief marched at the head.Behind the penitents came a man of vast stature and proportions. He was naked,with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which hung a largeknife in a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a heavy ironsledge-hammer.This man was the executioner.He had, moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords.Behind the executioner came, in the order in which they were to die, firstPeppino and then Andrea. Each was accompanied by two priests. Neither had hiseyes bandaged.Peppino walked with a firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him. Andreawas supported by two priests. Each of them, from time to time, kissed thecrucifix a confessor held out to them.At this sight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He looked atAlbert—he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away hiscigar, although he had not half smoked it. The count alone seemedunmoved—nay, more, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his palecheeks. His nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its prey,and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and sharp likethose of a jackal. And yet his features wore an expression of smilingtenderness, such as Franz had never before witnessed in them; his black eyesespecially were full of kindness and pity.However, the two culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces becamevisible. Peppino was a handsome young man of four or five-and-twenty, bronzedby the sun; he carried his head erect, and seemed on the watch to see on whichside his liberator would appear. Andrea was short and fat; his visage, markedwith brutal cruelty, did not indicate age; he might be thirty. In prison he hadsuffered his beard to grow; his head fell on his shoulder, his legs bentbeneath him, and his movements were apparently automatic and unconscious.“I thought,” said Franz to the count, “that you told me therewould be but one execution.”“I told you true,” replied he coldly.“And yet here are two culprits.”“Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many yearsto live.”“If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose.”“And see, here it is,” said the count. At the moment when Peppinoreached the foot of the mandaïa, a priest arrived in some haste, forcedhis way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the brotherhood,gave him a folded paper. The piercing eye of Peppino had noticed all. The chieftook the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his hand, “Heaven be praised,and his Holiness also,” said he in a loud voice; “here is a pardonfor one of the prisoners!”“A pardon!” cried the people with one voice; “apardon!”At this cry Andrea raised his head.“Pardon for whom?” cried he.Peppino remained breathless.“A pardon for Peppino, called Rocca Priori,” said the principalfriar. And he passed the paper to the officer commanding the carbineers, whoread and returned it to him.“For Peppino!” cried Andrea, who seemed roused from the torpor inwhich he had been plunged. “Why for him and not for me? We ought to dietogether. I was promised he should die with me. You have no right to put me todeath alone. I will not die alone—I will not!”And he broke from the priests struggling and raving like a wild beast, andstriving desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. The executionermade a sign, and his two assistants leaped from the scaffold and seized him.“What is going on?” asked Franz of the count; for, as all the talkwas in the Roman dialect, he had not perfectly understood it.“Do you not see?” returned the count, “that this humancreature who is about to die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does notperish with him? and, were he able, he would rather tear him to pieces with histeeth and nails than let him enjoy the life he himself is about to be deprivedof. Oh, man, man—race of crocodiles,” cried the count, extendinghis clenched hands towards the crowd, “how well do I recognize you there,and that at all times you are worthy of yourselves!”Meanwhile Andrea and the two executioners were struggling on the ground, and hekept exclaiming, “He ought to die!—he shall die!—I will notdie alone!”“Look, look,” cried the count, seizing the young men’s hands;“look, for on my soul it is curious. Here is a man who had resignedhimself to his fate, who was going to the scaffold to die—like a coward,it is true, but he was about to die without resistance. Do you know what gavehim strength? do you know what consoled him? It was, that another partook ofhis punishment—that another partook of his anguish—that another wasto die before him! Lead two sheep to the butcher’s, two oxen to theslaughterhouse, and make one of them understand that his companion will notdie; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will bellow with joy. Butman—man, whom God created in his own image—man, upon whom God haslaid his first, his sole commandment, to love his neighbor—man, to whomGod has given a voice to express his thoughts—what is his first cry whenhe hears his fellow-man is saved? A blasphemy. Honor to man, this masterpieceof nature, this king of the creation!”And the count burst into a laugh; a terrible laugh, that showed he must havesuffered horribly to be able thus to laugh.However, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadful to witness. The twoassistants carried Andrea up to the scaffold; the people all took part againstAndrea, and twenty thousand voices cried, “Put him to death! put him todeath!”Franz sprang back, but the count seized his arm, and held him before thewindow.“What are you doing?” said he. “Do you pity him? If you heardthe cry of ‘Mad dog!’ you would take your gun—you wouldunhesitatingly shoot the poor beast, who, after all, was only guilty of havingbeen bitten by another dog. And yet you pity a man who, without being bitten byone of his race, has yet murdered his benefactor; and who, now unable to killanyone, because his hands are bound, wishes to see his companion in captivityperish. No, no—look, look!”The recommendation was needless. Franz was fascinated by the horriblespectacle.The two assistants had borne Andrea to the scaffold, and there, in spite of hisstruggles, his bites, and his cries, had forced him to his knees. During thistime the executioner had raised his mace, and signed to them to get out of theway; the criminal strove to rise, but, ere he had time, the mace fell on hisleft temple. A dull and heavy sound was heard, and the man dropped like an oxon his face, and then turned over on his back.The executioner let fall his mace, drew his knife, and with one stroke openedhis throat, and mounting on his stomach, stamped violently on it with his feet.At every stroke a jet of blood sprang from the wound.This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank, half fainting, intoa seat.Albert, with his eyes closed, was standing grasping the window-curtains.The count was erect and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel! Chapter 36. The Carnival atRomeWhen Franz recovered hissenses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of water, of which, to judge from hispallor, he stood in great need; and the count, who was assuming his masqueradecostume. He glanced mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was whollychanged; scaffold, executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the peopleremained, full of noise and excitement. The bell of Monte Citorio, which onlysounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the Carnival, was ringinga joyous peal.“Well,” asked he of the count, “what has, then,happened?”“Nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the Carnivalhas commenced. Make haste and dress yourself.”“In fact,” said Franz, “this horrible scene has passed awaylike a dream.”“It is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you.”“Yes, that I have suffered; but the culprit?”“That is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, while you haveawakened; and who knows which of you is the most fortunate?”“But Peppino—what has become of him?”“Peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are happy inproportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see that the general attentionwas directed towards his companion. He profited by this distraction to slipaway among the crowd, without even thanking the worthy priests who accompaniedhim. Decidedly man is an ungrateful and egotistical animal. But dress yourself;see, M. de Morcerf sets you the example.”Albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and varnishedboots.“Well, Albert,” said Franz, “do you feel much inclined tojoin the revels? Come, answer frankly.”“Ma foi, no,” returned Albert. “But I am really gladto have seen such a sight; and I understand what the count said—that whenyou have once habituated yourself to a similar spectacle, it is the only onethat causes you any emotion.”“Without reflecting that this is the only moment in which you can studycharacter,” said the count; “on the steps of the scaffold deathtears off the mask that has been worn through life, and the real visage isdisclosed. It must be allowed that Andrea was not very handsome, the hideousscoundrel! Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress yourselves.”Franz felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions’example. He assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask that scarcelyequalled the pallor of his own face. Their toilet finished, they descended; thecarriage awaited them at the door, filled with sweetmeats and bouquets. Theyfell into the line of carriages.It is difficult to form an idea of the perfect change that had taken place.Instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silent death, the Piazza del Popolopresented a spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry. A crowd of masksflowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors, descending from the windows.From every street and every corner drove carriages filled with clowns,harlequins, dominoes, mummers, pantomimists, Transteverins, knights, andpeasants, screaming, fighting, gesticulating, throwing eggs filled with flour,confetti, nosegays, attacking, with their sarcasms and their missiles, friendsand foes, companions and strangers, indiscriminately, and no one took offence,or did anything but laugh.Franz and Albert were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow, haverecourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated, feel a thickveil drawn between the past and the present. They saw, or rather continued tosee, the image of what they had witnessed; but little by little the generalvertigo seized them, and they felt themselves obliged to take part in the noiseand confusion.A handful of confetti that came from a neighboring carriage, and which, whileit covered Morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked his neck and thatportion of his face uncovered by his mask like a hundred pins, incited him tojoin in the general combat, in which all the masks around him were engaged. Herose in his turn, and seizing handfuls of confetti and sweetmeats, with whichthe carriage was filled, cast them with all the force and skill he was masterof.The strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of what they had seen half anhour before was gradually effaced from the young men’s minds, so muchwere they occupied by the gay and glittering procession they now beheld.As for the Count of Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown anyappearance of having been moved. Imagine the large and splendid Corso, borderedfrom one end to the other with lofty palaces, with their balconies hung withcarpets, and their windows with flags. At these balconies are three hundredthousand spectators—Romans, Italians, strangers from all parts of theworld, the united aristocracy of birth, wealth, and genius. Lovely women,yielding to the influence of the scene, bend over their balconies, or lean fromtheir windows, and shower down confetti, which are returned by bouquets; theair seems darkened with the falling confetti and flying flowers. In the streetsthe lively crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes—giganticcabbages walk gravely about, buffaloes’ heads bellow from men’sshoulders, dogs walk on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a mask islifted, and, as in Callot’s Temptation of St. Anthony, a lovely face isexhibited, which we would fain follow, but from which we are separated bytroops of fiends. This will give a faint idea of the Carnival at Rome.At the second turn, the count stopped the carriage, and requested permission towithdraw, leaving the vehicle at their disposal. Franz looked up—theywere opposite the Rospoli Palace. At the centre window, the one hung with whitedamask with a red cross, was a blue domino, beneath which Franz’simagination easily pictured the beautiful Greek of the Argentina.“Gentlemen,” said the count, springing out, “when you aretired of being actors, and wish to become spectators of this scene, you knowyou have places at my windows. In the meantime, dispose of my coachman, mycarriage, and my servants.”We have forgotten to mention, that the count’s coachman was attired in abear-skin, exactly resembling Odry’s in The Bear and the Pasha;and the two footmen behind were dressed up as green monkeys, with spring masks,with which they made grimaces at everyone who passed.Franz thanked the count for his attention. As for Albert, he was busilyoccupied throwing bouquets at a carriage full of Roman peasants that waspassing near him. Unfortunately for him, the line of carriages moved on again,and while he descended the Piazza del Popolo, the other ascended towards thePalazzo di Venezia.“Ah, my dear fellow,” said he to Franz; “you did notsee?”“What?”“There,—that calash filled with Roman peasants.”“No.”“Well, I am convinced they are all charming women.”“How unfortunate that you were masked, Albert,” said Franz;“here was an opportunity of making up for past disappointments.”“Oh,” replied he, half laughing, half serious; “I hope theCarnival will not pass without some amends in one shape or the other.”But, in spite of Albert’s hope, the day passed unmarked by any incident,excepting two or three encounters with the carriage full of Roman peasants. Atone of these encounters, accidentally or purposely, Albert’s mask felloff. He instantly rose and cast the remainder of the bouquets into thecarriage. Doubtless one of the charming females Albert had detected beneaththeir coquettish disguise was touched by his gallantry; for, as the carriage ofthe two friends passed her, she threw a bunch of violets. Albert seized it, andas Franz had no reason to suppose it was meant for him, he suffered Albert toretain it. Albert placed it in his button-hole, and the carriage wenttriumphantly on.“Well,” said Franz to him; “there is the beginning of anadventure.”“Laugh if you please—I really think so. So I will not abandon thisbouquet.”“Pardieu,” returned Franz, laughing, “in token of youringratitude.”The jest, however, soon appeared to become earnest; for when Albert and Franzagain encountered the carriage with the contadini, the one who hadthrown the violets to Albert, clapped her hands when she beheld them in hisbutton-hole.“Bravo, bravo,” said Franz; “things go wonderfully. Shall Ileave you? Perhaps you would prefer being alone?”“No,” replied he; “I will not be caught like a fool at afirst disclosure by a rendezvous under the clock, as they say at theopera-balls. If the fair peasant wishes to carry matters any further, we shallfind her, or rather, she will find us tomorrow; then she will give me some signor other, and I shall know what I have to do.”“On my word,” said Franz, “you are as wise as Nestor andprudent as Ulysses, and your fair Circe must be very skilful or very powerfulif she succeed in changing you into a beast of any kind.”Albert was right; the fair unknown had resolved, doubtless, to carry theintrigue no farther; for although the young men made several more turns, theydid not again see the calash, which had turned up one of the neighboringstreets. Then they returned to the Rospoli Palace; but the count and the bluedomino had also disappeared; the two windows, hung with yellow damask, werestill occupied by the persons whom the count had invited.At this moment the same bell that had proclaimed the beginning of themascherata sounded the retreat. The file on the Corso broke the line, and in asecond all the carriages had disappeared. Franz and Albert were opposite theVia delle Muratte; the coachman, without saying a word, drove up it, passedalong the Piazza di Spagna and the Rospoli Palace and stopped at the door ofthe hotel. Signor Pastrini came to the door to receive his guests.Franz hastened to inquire after the count, and to express regret that he hadnot returned in sufficient time; but Pastrini reassured him by saying that theCount of Monte Cristo had ordered a second carriage for himself, and that ithad gone at four o’clock to fetch him from the Rospoli Palace.The count had, moreover, charged him to offer the two friends the key of hisbox at the Argentina. Franz questioned Albert as to his intentions; but Alberthad great projects to put into execution before going to the theatre; andinstead of making any answer, he inquired if Signor Pastrini could procure hima tailor.“A tailor,” said the host; “and for what?”“To make us between now and tomorrow two Roman peasant costumes,”returned Albert.The host shook his head.“To make you two costumes between now and tomorrow? I ask yourexcellencies’ pardon, but this is quite a French demand; for the nextweek you will not find a single tailor who would consent to sew six buttons ona waistcoat if you paid him a crown a piece for each button.”“Then I must give up the idea?”“No; we have them ready-made. Leave all to me; and tomorrow, when youawake, you shall find a collection of costumes with which you will besatisfied.”“My dear Albert,” said Franz, “leave all to our host; he hasalready proved himself full of resources; let us dine quietly, and afterwardsgo and see l’Italienne à Alger!“Agreed,” returned Albert; “but remember, Signor Pastrini,that both my friend and myself attach the greatest importance to havingtomorrow the costumes we have asked for.”The host again assured them they might rely on him, and that their wishesshould be attended to; upon which Franz and Albert mounted to their apartments,and proceeded to disencumber themselves of their costumes. Albert, as he tookoff his dress, carefully preserved the bunch of violets; it was his tokenreserved for the morrow.The two friends sat down to table; but they could not refrain from remarkingthe difference between the Count of Monte Cristo’s table and that ofSignor Pastrini. Truth compelled Franz, in spite of the dislike he seemed tohave taken to the count, to confess that the advantage was not onPastrini’s side. During dessert, the servant inquired at what time theywished for the carriage. Albert and Franz looked at each other, fearing reallyto abuse the count’s kindness. The servant understood them.“His excellency the Count of Monte Cristo had,” he said,“given positive orders that the carriage was to remain at theirlordships’ orders all day, and they could therefore dispose of it withoutfear of indiscretion.”They resolved to profit by the count’s courtesy, and ordered the horsesto be harnessed, while they substituted evening dress for that which they hadon, and which was somewhat the worse for the numerous combats they hadsustained.This precaution taken, they went to the theatre, and installed themselves inthe count’s box. During the first act, the Countess G——entered. Her first look was at the box where she had seen the count theprevious evening, so that she perceived Franz and Albert in the place of thevery person concerning whom she had expressed so strange an opinion to Franz.Her opera-glass was so fixedly directed towards them, that Franz saw it wouldbe cruel not to satisfy her curiosity; and, availing himself of one of theprivileges of the spectators of the Italian theatres, who use their boxes tohold receptions, the two friends went to pay their respects to the countess.Scarcely had they entered, when she motioned to Franz to assume the seat ofhonor. Albert, in his turn, sat behind.“Well,” said she, hardly giving Franz time to sit down, “itseems you have nothing better to do than to make the acquaintance of this newLord Ruthven, and you are already the best friends in the world.”“Without being so far advanced as that, my dear countess,” returnedFranz, “I cannot deny that we have abused his good nature all day.”“All day?”“Yes; this morning we breakfasted with him; we rode in his carriage allday, and now we have taken possession of his box.”“You know him, then?”“Yes, and no.”“How so?”“It is a long story.”“Tell it to me.”“It would frighten you too much.”“So much the more reason.”“At least wait until the story has a conclusion.”“Very well; I prefer complete histories; but tell me how you made hisacquaintance? Did anyone introduce you to him?”“No; it was he who introduced himself to us.”“When?”“Last night, after we left you.”“Through what medium?”“The very prosaic one of our landlord.”“He is staying, then, at the Hôtel de Londres with you?”“Not only in the same hotel, but on the same floor.”“What is his name; for, of course, you know?”“The Count of Monte Cristo.”“That is not a family name?”“No, it is the name of the island he has purchased.”“And he is a count?”“A Tuscan count.”“Well, we must put up with that,” said the countess, who washerself from one of the oldest Venetian families. “What sort of a man ishe?”“Ask the Vicomte de Morcerf.”“You hear, M. de Morcerf, I am referred to you,” said the countess.“We should be very hard to please, madam,” returned Albert,“did we not think him delightful. A friend of ten years’ standingcould not have done more for us, or with a more perfect courtesy.”“Come,” observed the countess, smiling, “I see my vampire isonly some millionaire, who has taken the appearance of Lara in order to avoidbeing confounded with M. de Rothschild; and you have seen her?”“Her?”“The beautiful Greek of yesterday.”“No; we heard, I think, the sound of her guzla, but she remainedperfectly invisible.”“When you say invisible,” interrupted Albert, “it is only tokeep up the mystery; for whom do you take the blue domino at the window withthe white curtains?”“Where was this window with white hangings?” asked the countess.“At the Rospoli Palace.”“The count had three windows at the Rospoli Palace?”“Yes. Did you pass through the Corso?”“Yes.”“Well, did you notice two windows hung with yellow damask, and one withwhite damask with a red cross? Those were the count’s windows.”“Why, he must be a nabob. Do you know what those three windows wereworth?”“Two or three hundred Roman crowns?”“Two or three thousand.”“The deuce!”“Does his island produce him such a revenue?”“It does not bring him a bajocco.”“Then why did he purchase it?”“For a whim.”“He is an original, then?”“In reality,” observed Albert, “he seemed to me somewhateccentric; were he at Paris, and a frequenter of the theatres, I should say hewas a poor devil literally mad. This morning he made two or three exits worthyof Didier or Anthony.”At this moment a fresh visitor entered, and, according to custom, Franz gave uphis seat to him. This circumstance had, moreover, the effect of changing theconversation; an hour afterwards the two friends returned to their hotel.Signor Pastrini had already set about procuring their disguises for the morrow;and he assured them that they would be perfectly satisfied. The next morning,at nine o’clock, he entered Franz’s room, followed by a tailor, whohad eight or ten Roman peasant costumes on his arm; they selected two exactlyalike, and charged the tailor to sew on each of their hats about twenty yardsof ribbon, and to procure them two of the long silk sashes of different colorswith which the lower orders decorate themselves on fête days.Albert was impatient to see how he looked in his new dress—a jacket andbreeches of blue velvet, silk stockings with clocks, shoes with buckles, and asilk waistcoat. This picturesque attire set him off to great advantage; andwhen he had bound the scarf around his waist, and when his hat, placedcoquettishly on one side, let fall on his shoulder a stream of ribbons, Franzwas forced to confess that costume has much to do with the physical superioritywe accord to certain nations. The Turks used to be so picturesque with theirlong and flowing robes, but are they not now hideous with their blue frocksbuttoned up to the chin, and their red caps, which make them look like a bottleof wine with a red seal? Franz complimented Albert, who looked at himself inthe glass with an unequivocal smile of satisfaction. They were thus engagedwhen the Count of Monte Cristo entered.“Gentlemen,” said he, “although a companion is agreeable,perfect freedom is sometimes still more agreeable. I come to say that today,and for the remainder of the Carnival, I leave the carriage entirely at yourdisposal. The host will tell you I have three or four more, so that you willnot inconvenience me in any way. Make use of it, I pray you, for your pleasureor your business.”The young men wished to decline, but they could find no good reason forrefusing an offer which was so agreeable to them. The Count of Monte Cristoremained a quarter of an hour with them, conversing on all subjects with thegreatest ease. He was, as we have already said, perfectly well acquainted withthe literature of all countries. A glance at the walls of his salon proved toFranz and Albert that he was a connoisseur of pictures. A few words he let fallshowed them that he was no stranger to the sciences, and he seemed muchoccupied with chemistry. The two friends did not venture to return the countthe breakfast he had given them; it would have been too absurd to offer him inexchange for his excellent table the very inferior one of Signor Pastrini. Theytold him so frankly, and he received their excuses with the air of a man whoappreciated their delicacy. Albert was charmed with the count’s manners,and he was only prevented from recognizing him for a perfect gentleman byreason of his varied knowledge.The permission to do what he liked with the carriage pleased him above all, forthe fair peasants had appeared in a most elegant carriage the precedingevening, and Albert was not sorry to be upon an equal footing with them. Athalf-past one they descended, the coachman and footman had put on their liveryover their disguises, which gave them a more ridiculous appearance than ever,and which gained them the applause of Franz and Albert. Albert had fastened thefaded bunch of violets to his button-hole. At the first sound of the bell theyhastened into the Corso by the Via Vittoria.At the second turn, a bunch of fresh violets, thrown from a carriage filledwith harlequins, indicated to Albert that, like himself and his friend, thepeasants had changed their costume also; and whether it was the result ofchance, or whether a similar feeling had possessed them both, while he haddonned their costume, they had assumed his.Albert placed the fresh bouquet in his button-hole, but he kept the faded onein his hand; and when he again met the calash, he raised it to his lips, anaction which seemed greatly to amuse not only the fair lady who had thrown it,but her joyous companions also. The day was as gay as the preceding one,perhaps even more animated and noisy; the count appeared for an instant at hiswindow, but when they again passed he had disappeared. It is almost needless tosay that the flirtation between Albert and the fair peasant continued all day.In the evening, on his return, Franz found a letter from the embassy, informinghim that he would have the honor of being received by his holiness the nextday. At each previous visit he had made to Rome, he had solicited and obtainedthe same favor; and incited as much by a religious feeling as by gratitude, hewas unwilling to quit the capital of the Christian world without laying hisrespectful homage at the feet of one of St. Peter’s successors who hasset the rare example of all the virtues. He did not then think of the Carnival,for in spite of his condescension and touching kindness, one cannot inclineone’s self without awe before the venerable and noble old man calledGregory XVI.On his return from the Vatican, Franz carefully avoided the Corso; he broughtaway with him a treasure of pious thoughts, to which the mad gayety of themaskers would have been profanation.At ten minutes past five Albert entered overjoyed. The harlequin had reassumedher peasant’s costume, and as she passed she raised her mask. She wascharming. Franz congratulated Albert, who received his congratulations with theair of a man conscious that they are merited. He had recognized by certainunmistakable signs, that his fair incognita belonged to the aristocracy.He had made up his mind to write to her the next day.Franz remarked, while he gave these details, that Albert seemed to havesomething to ask of him, but that he was unwilling to ask it. He insisted uponit, declaring beforehand that he was willing to make any sacrifice the otherwished.Albert let himself be pressed just as long as friendship required, and thenavowed to Franz that he would do him a great favor by allowing him to occupythe carriage alone the next day. Albert attributed to Franz’s absence theextreme kindness of the fair peasant in raising her mask. Franz was notsufficiently egotistical to stop Albert in the middle of an adventure thatpromised to prove so agreeable to his curiosity and so flattering to hisvanity. He felt assured that the perfect indiscretion of his friend would dulyinform him of all that happened; and as, during three years that he hadtravelled all over Italy, a similar piece of good fortune had never fallen tohis share, Franz was by no means sorry to learn how to act on such an occasion.He therefore promised Albert that he would content himself the morrow withwitnessing the Carnival from the windows of the Rospoli Palace.The next morning he saw Albert pass and repass, holding an enormous bouquet,which he doubtless meant to make the bearer of his amorous epistle. This beliefwas changed into certainty when Franz saw the bouquet (conspicuous by a circleof white camellias) in the hand of a charming harlequin dressed in rose-coloredsatin.The evening was no longer joy, but delirium. Albert nothing doubted but thatthe fair unknown would reply in the same manner. Franz anticipated his wishesby saying that the noise fatigued him, and that he should pass the next day inwriting and looking over his journal. Albert was not deceived, for the nextevening Franz saw him enter triumphantly shaking a folded paper which he heldby one corner.“Well,” said he, “was I mistaken?”“She has answered you!” cried Franz.“Read.”This word was pronounced in a manner impossible to describe. Franz took theletter, and read:“Tuesday evening, at seven o’clock, descend from your carriageopposite the Via dei Pontefici, and follow the Roman peasant who snatches yourtorch from you. When you arrive at the first step of the church of San Giacomo,be sure to fasten a knot of rose-colored ribbons to the shoulder of yourharlequin costume, in order that you may be recognized. Until then you will notsee me. —Constancy and Discretion.”“Well,” asked he, when Franz had finished, “what do you thinkof that?”“I think that the adventure is assuming a very agreeableappearance.”“I think so, also,” replied Albert; “and I very much fear youwill go alone to the Duke of Bracciano’s ball.”Franz and Albert had received that morning an invitation from the celebratedRoman banker.“Take care, Albert,” said Franz. “All the nobility of Romewill be present, and if your fair incognita belong to the higher classof society, she must go there.”“Whether she goes there or not, my opinion is still the same,”returned Albert. “You have read the letter?”“Yes.”“You know how imperfectly the women of the mezzo cito are educatedin Italy?” (This is the name of the lower class.)“Yes.”“Well, read the letter again. Look at the writing, and find if you can,any blemish in the language or orthography.” The writing was, in reality,charming, and the orthography irreproachable.“You are born to good fortune,” said Franz, as he returned theletter.“Laugh as much as you will,” replied Albert, “I am inlove.”“You alarm me,” cried Franz. “I see that I shall not only goalone to the Duke of Bracciano’s, but also return to Florencealone.”“If my unknown be as amiable as she is beautiful,” said Albert,“I shall fix myself at Rome for six weeks, at least. I adore Rome, and Ihave always had a great taste for archæology.”“Come, two or three more such adventures, and I do not despair of seeingyou a member of the Academy.”Doubtless Albert was about to discuss seriously his right to the academic chairwhen they were informed that dinner was ready. Albert’s love had nottaken away his appetite. He hastened with Franz to seat himself, free torecommence the discussion after dinner. After dinner, the Count of Monte Cristowas announced. They had not seen him for two days. Signor Pastrini informedthem that business had called him to Civita Vecchia. He had started theprevious evening, and had only returned an hour since. He was charming. Whetherhe kept a watch over himself, or whether by accident he did not sound theacrimonious chords that in other circumstances had been touched, he was tonightlike everybody else.The man was an enigma to Franz. The count must feel sure that Franz recognizedhim; and yet he had not let fall a single word indicating any previousacquaintance between them. On his side, however great Franz’s desire wasto allude to their former interview, the fear of being disagreeable to the manwho had loaded him and his friend with kindness prevented him from mentioningit.The count had learned that the two friends had sent to secure a box at theArgentina Theatre, and were told they were all let. In consequence, he broughtthem the key of his own—at least such was the apparent motive of hisvisit. Franz and Albert made some difficulty, alleging their fear of deprivinghim of it; but the count replied that, as he was going to the Palli Theatre,the box at the Argentina Theatre would be lost if they did not profit by it.This assurance determined the two friends to accept it.Franz had by degrees become accustomed to the count’s pallor, which hadso forcibly struck him at their first meeting. He could not refrain fromadmiring the severe beauty of his features, the only defect, or rather theprincipal quality of which was the pallor. Truly, a Byronic hero! Franz couldnot, we will not say see him, but even think of him without imagining his sternhead upon Manfred’s shoulders, or beneath Lara’s helmet. Hisforehead was marked with the line that indicates the constant presence ofbitter thoughts; he had the fiery eyes that seem to penetrate to the very soul,and the haughty and disdainful upper lip that gives to the words it utters apeculiar character that impresses them on the minds of those to whom they areaddressed.The count was no longer young. He was at least forty; and yet it was easy tounderstand that he was formed to rule the young men with whom he associated atpresent. And, to complete his resemblance with the fantastic heroes of theEnglish poet, the count seemed to have the power of fascination. Albert wasconstantly expatiating on their good fortune in meeting such a man. Franz wasless enthusiastic; but the count exercised over him also the ascendency astrong mind always acquires over a mind less domineering. He thought severaltimes of the project the count had of visiting Paris; and he had no doubt butthat, with his eccentric character, his characteristic face, and his colossalfortune, he would produce a great effect there. And yet he did not wish to beat Paris when the count was there.The evening passed as evenings mostly pass at Italian theatres; that is, not inlistening to the music, but in paying visits and conversing. The CountessG—— wished to revive the subject of the count, but Franz announcedhe had something far newer to tell her, and, in spite of Albert’sdemonstrations of false modesty, he informed the countess of the great eventwhich had preoccupied them for the last three days. As similar intrigues arenot uncommon in Italy, if we may credit travellers, the comtess did notmanifest the least incredulity, but congratulated Albert on his success. Theypromised, upon separating, to meet at the Duke of Bracciano’s ball, towhich all Rome was invited.The heroine of the bouquet kept her word; she gave Albert no sign of herexistence the morrow or the day after.At length Tuesday came, the last and most tumultuous day of the Carnival. OnTuesday, the theatres open at ten o’clock in the morning, as Lent beginsafter eight at night. On Tuesday, all those who through want of money, time, orenthusiasm, have not been to see the Carnival before, mingle in the gayety, andcontribute to the noise and excitement. From two o’clock till five Franzand Albert followed in the fête, exchanging handfuls of confettiwith the other carriages and the pedestrians, who crowded amongst thehorses’ feet and the carriage wheels without a single accident, a singledispute, or a single fight.The fêtes are veritable pleasure days to the Italians. The author ofthis history, who has resided five or six years in Italy, does not recollect tohave ever seen a ceremony interrupted by one of those events so common in othercountries. Albert was triumphant in his harlequin costume. A knot ofrose-colored ribbons fell from his shoulder almost to the ground. In order thatthere might be no confusion, Franz wore his peasant’s costume.As the day advanced, the tumult became greater. There was not on the pavement,in the carriages, at the windows, a single tongue that was silent, a single armthat did not move. It was a human storm, made up of a thunder of cries, and ahail of sweetmeats, flowers, eggs, oranges, and nosegays.At three o’clock the sound of fireworks, let off on the Piazza del Popoloand the Piazza di Venezia (heard with difficulty amid the din and confusion)announced that the races were about to begin.The races, like the moccoli, are one of the episodes peculiar to thelast days of the Carnival. At the sound of the fireworks the carriagesinstantly broke ranks, and retired by the adjacent streets. All theseevolutions are executed with an inconceivable address and marvellous rapidity,without the police interfering in the matter. The pedestrians ranged themselvesagainst the walls; then the trampling of horses and the clashing of steel wereheard. A detachment of carbineers, fifteen abreast, galloped up the Corso inorder to clear it for the barberi. When the detachment arrived at thePiazza di Venezia, a second volley of fireworks was discharged, to announcethat the street was clear.Almost instantly, in the midst of a tremendous and general outcry, seven oreight horses, excited by the shouts of three hundred thousand spectators,passed by like lightning. Then the Castle of Saint Angelo fired three cannon toindicate that number three had won.Immediately, without any other signal, the carriages moved on, flowing ontowards the Corso, down all the streets, like torrents pent up for a while,which again flow into the parent river; and the immense stream again continuedits course between its two granite banks.A new source of noise and movement was added to the crowd. The sellers ofmoccoletti entered on the scene. The moccoli, ormoccoletti, are candles which vary in size from the pascal taper to therushlight, and which give to each actor in the great final scene of theCarnival two very serious problems to grapple with,—first, how to keephis own moccoletto alight; and secondly, how to extinguish themoccoletti of others. The moccoletto is like life: man has foundbut one means of transmitting it, and that one comes from God. But he hasdiscovered a thousand means of taking it away, and the devil has somewhat aidedhim. The moccoletto is kindled by approaching it to a light. But who candescribe the thousand means of extinguishing the moccoletto?—thegigantic bellows, the monstrous extinguishers, the superhuman fans. Everyonehastened to purchase moccoletti—Franz and Albert among the rest.The night was rapidly approaching; and already, at the cry of“Moccoletti!” repeated by the shrill voices of a thousandvendors, two or three stars began to burn among the crowd. It was a signal. Atthe end of ten minutes fifty thousand lights glittered, descending from thePalazzo di Venezia to the Piazza del Popolo, and mounting from the Piazza delPopolo to the Palazzo di Venezia. It seemed like the fête ofJack-o’-lanterns.It is impossible to form any idea of it without having seen it. Suppose thatall the stars had descended from the sky and mingled in a wild dance on theface of the earth; the whole accompanied by cries that were never heard in anyother part of the world. The facchino follows the prince, theTransteverin the citizen, everyone blowing, extinguishing, relighting. Had oldÆolus appeared at this moment, he would have been proclaimed king of themoccoli, and Aquilo the heir-presumptive to the throne.This battle of folly and flame continued for two hours; the Corso was light asday; the features of the spectators on the third and fourth stories werevisible.Every five minutes Albert took out his watch; at length it pointed to seven.The two friends were in the Via dei Pontefici. Albert sprang out, bearing hismoccoletto in his hand. Two or three masks strove to knock hismoccoletto out of his hand; but Albert, a first-rate pugilist, sent themrolling in the street, one after the other, and continued his course towardsthe church of San Giacomo.The steps were crowded with masks, who strove to snatch each other’storches. Franz followed Albert with his eyes, and saw him mount the first step.Instantly a mask, wearing the well-known costume of a peasant woman, snatchedhis moccoletto from him without his offering any resistance. Franz wastoo far off to hear what they said; but, without doubt, nothing hostile passed,for he saw Albert disappear arm-in-arm with the peasant girl. He watched thempass through the crowd for some time, but at length he lost sight of them inthe Via Macello.Suddenly the bell that gives the signal for the end of the Carnival sounded,and at the same instant all the moccoletti were extinguished as if byenchantment. It seemed as though one immense blast of the wind had extinguishedeveryone.Franz found himself in utter darkness. No sound was audible save that of thecarriages that were carrying the maskers home; nothing was visible save a fewlights that burnt behind the windows.The Carnival was over. Chapter 37. The Catacombsof Saint SebastianIn his whole life,perhaps, Franz had never before experienced so sudden an impression, so rapid atransition from gayety to sadness, as in this moment. It seemed as though Rome,under the magic breath of some demon of the night, had suddenly changed into avast tomb. By a chance, which added yet more to the intensity of the darkness,the moon, which was on the wane, did not rise until eleven o’clock, andthe streets which the young man traversed were plunged in the deepestobscurity.The distance was short, and at the end of ten minutes his carriage, or ratherthe count’s, stopped before the Hôtel de Londres.Dinner was waiting, but as Albert had told him that he should not return sosoon, Franz sat down without him. Signor Pastrini, who had been accustomed tosee them dine together, inquired into the cause of his absence, but Franzmerely replied that Albert had received on the previous evening an invitationwhich he had accepted.The sudden extinction of the moccoletti, the darkness which had replacedthe light, and the silence which had succeeded the turmoil, had left inFranz’s mind a certain depression which was not free from uneasiness. Hetherefore dined very silently, in spite of the officious attention of his host,who presented himself two or three times to inquire if he wanted anything.Franz resolved to wait for Albert as late as possible. He ordered the carriage,therefore, for eleven o’clock, desiring Signor Pastrini to inform him themoment that Albert returned to the hotel.At eleven o’clock Albert had not come back. Franz dressed himself, andwent out, telling his host that he was going to pass the night at the Duke ofBracciano’s. The house of the Duke of Bracciano is one of the mostdelightful in Rome, the duchess, one of the last heiresses of the Colonnas,does its honors with the most consummate grace, and thus their fêteshave a European celebrity.Franz and Albert had brought to Rome letters of introduction to them, and theirfirst question on his arrival was to inquire the whereabouts of his travellingcompanion. Franz replied that he had left him at the moment they were about toextinguish the moccoli, and that he had lost sight of him in the ViaMacello.“Then he has not returned?” said the duke.“I waited for him until this hour,” replied Franz.“And do you know whither he went?”“No, not precisely; however, I think it was something very like arendezvous.”“Diavolo!” said the duke, “this is a bad day, orrather a bad night, to be out late; is it not, countess?”These words were addressed to the Countess G——, who had justarrived, and was leaning on the arm of Signor Torlonia, the duke’sbrother.“I think, on the contrary, that it is a charming night,” repliedthe countess, “and those who are here will complain of but one thing,that of its too rapid flight.”“I am not speaking,” said the duke with a smile, “of thepersons who are here; the men run no other danger than that of falling in lovewith you, and the women of falling ill of jealousy at seeing you so lovely; Imeant persons who were out in the streets of Rome.”“Ah,” asked the countess, “who is out in the streets of Romeat this hour, unless it be to go to a ball?”“Our friend, Albert de Morcerf, countess, whom I left in pursuit of hisunknown about seven o’clock this evening,” said Franz, “andwhom I have not seen since.”“And don’t you know where he is?”“Not at all.”“Is he armed?”“He is in masquerade.”“You should not have allowed him to go,” said the duke to Franz;“you, who know Rome better than he does.”“You might as well have tried to stop number three of the barberi,who gained the prize in the race today,” replied Franz; “and thenmoreover, what could happen to him?”“Who can tell? The night is gloomy, and the Tiber is very near the ViaMacello.” Franz felt a shudder run through his veins at observing thatthe feeling of the duke and the countess was so much in unison with his ownpersonal disquietude.“I informed them at the hotel that I had the honor of passing the nighthere, duke,” said Franz, “and desired them to come and inform me ofhis return.”“Ah,” replied the duke, “here I think, is one of my servantswho is seeking you.”The duke was not mistaken; when he saw Franz, the servant came up to him.“Your excellency,” he said, “the master of the Hôtel deLondres has sent to let you know that a man is waiting for you with a letterfrom the Viscount of Morcerf.”“A letter from the viscount!” exclaimed Franz.“Yes.”“And who is the man?”“I do not know.”“Why did he not bring it to me here?”“The messenger did not say.”“And where is the messenger?”“He went away directly he saw me enter the ball-room to find you.”“Oh,” said the countess to Franz, “go with allspeed—poor young man! Perhaps some accident has happened to him.”“I will hasten,” replied Franz.“Shall we see you again to give us any information?” inquired thecountess.“Yes, if it is not any serious affair, otherwise I cannot answer as towhat I may do myself.”“Be prudent, in any event,” said the countess.“Oh! pray be assured of that.”Franz took his hat and went away in haste. He had sent away his carriage withorders for it to fetch him at two o’clock; fortunately the PalazzoBracciano, which is on one side in the Corso, and on the other in the Square ofthe Holy Apostles, is hardly ten minutes’ walk from the Hôtel de Londres.As he came near the hotel, Franz saw a man in the middle of the street. He hadno doubt that it was the messenger from Albert. The man was wrapped up in alarge cloak. He went up to him, but, to his extreme astonishment, the strangerfirst addressed him.“What wants your excellency of me?” inquired the man, retreating astep or two, as if to keep on his guard.“Are not you the person who brought me a letter,” inquired Franz,“from the Viscount of Morcerf?”“Your excellency lodges at Pastrini’s hotel?”“I do.”“Your excellency is the travelling companion of the viscount?”“I am.”“Your excellency’s name——”“Is the Baron Franz d’Épinay.”“Then it is to your excellency that this letter is addressed.”“Is there any answer?” inquired Franz, taking the letter from him.“Yes—your friend at least hopes so.”“Come upstairs with me, and I will give it to you.”“I prefer waiting here,” said the messenger, with a smile.“And why?”“Your excellency will know when you have read the letter.”“Shall I find you here, then?”“Certainly.”Franz entered the hotel. On the staircase he met Signor Pastrini.“Well?” said the landlord.“Well—what?” responded Franz.“You have seen the man who desired to speak with you from yourfriend?” he asked of Franz.“Yes, I have seen him,” he replied, “and he has handed thisletter to me. Light the candles in my apartment, if you please.”The innkeeper gave orders to a servant to go before Franz with a light. Theyoung man had found Signor Pastrini looking very much alarmed, and this hadonly made him the more anxious to read Albert’s letter; and so he wentinstantly towards the waxlight, and unfolded it. It was written and signed byAlbert. Franz read it twice before he could comprehend what it contained. Itwas thus worded:“My dear Fellow,“The moment you have received this, have the kindness to take the letterof credit from my pocket-book, which you will find in the square drawer of thesecrétaire; add your own to it, if it be not sufficient. Run toTorlonia, draw from him instantly four thousand piastres, and give them to thebearer. It is urgent that I should have this money without delay. I do not saymore, relying on you as you may rely on me.“Your friend,“Albert de Morcerf.“P.S.—I now believe in Italian banditti.”Below these lines were written, in a strange hand, the following in Italian:“Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sono nelle miemani, alla sette il Conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere.“Luigi Vampa.”“If by six in the morning the four thousand piastres are not in myhands, by seven o’clock the Count Albert will have ceased tolive.”This second signature explained everything to Franz, who now understood theobjection of the messenger to coming up into the apartment; the street wassafer for him. Albert, then, had fallen into the hands of the famous banditchief, in whose existence he had for so long a time refused to believe.There was no time to lose. He hastened to open the secrétaire, and foundthe pocket-book in the drawer, and in it the letter of credit. There were inall six thousand piastres, but of these six thousand Albert had alreadyexpended three thousand.As to Franz, he had no letter of credit, as he lived at Florence, and had onlycome to Rome to pass seven or eight days; he had brought but a hundred louis,and of these he had not more than fifty left. Thus seven or eight hundredpiastres were wanting to them both to make up the sum that Albert required.True, he might in such a case rely on the kindness of Signor Torlonia. He was,therefore, about to return to the Palazzo Bracciano without loss of time, whensuddenly a luminous idea crossed his mind.He remembered the Count of Monte Cristo. Franz was about to ring for SignorPastrini, when that worthy presented himself.“My dear sir,” he said, hastily, “do you know if the count iswithin?”“Yes, your excellency; he has this moment returned.”“Is he in bed?”“I should say no.”“Then ring at his door, if you please, and request him to be so kind asto give me an audience.”Signor Pastrini did as he was desired, and returning five minutes after, hesaid:“The count awaits your excellency.”Franz went along the corridor, and a servant introduced him to the count. Hewas in a small room which Franz had not yet seen, and which was surrounded withdivans. The count came towards him.“Well, what good wind blows you hither at this hour?” said he;“have you come to sup with me? It would be very kind of you.”“No; I have come to speak to you of a very serious matter.”“A serious matter,” said the count, looking at Franz with theearnestness usual to him; “and what may it be?”“Are we alone?”“Yes,” replied the count, going to the door, and returning. Franzgave him Albert’s letter.“Read that,” he said.The count read it.“Well, well!” said he.“Did you see the postscript?”“I did, indeed.“‘Se alle sei della mattina le quattro mille piastre non sononelle mie mani, alla sette il conte Alberto avrà cessato di vivere. “‘Luigi Vampa.’”“What think you of that?” inquired Franz.“Have you the money he demands?”“Yes, all but eight hundred piastres.”The count went to his secrétaire, opened it, and pulling out a drawerfilled with gold, said to Franz, “I hope you will not offend me byapplying to anyone but myself.”“You see, on the contrary, I come to you first and instantly,”replied Franz.“And I thank you; have what you will;” and he made a sign to Franzto take what he pleased.“Is it absolutely necessary, then, to send the money to LuigiVampa?” asked the young man, looking fixedly in his turn at the count.“Judge for yourself,” replied he. “The postscript isexplicit.”“I think that if you would take the trouble of reflecting, you could finda way of simplifying the negotiation,” said Franz.“How so?” returned the count, with surprise.“If we were to go together to Luigi Vampa, I am sure he would not refuseyou Albert’s freedom.”“What influence can I possibly have over a bandit?”“Have you not just rendered him a service that can never beforgotten?”“What is that?”“Have you not saved Peppino’s life?”“Well, well,” said the count, “who told you that?”“No matter; I know it.” The count knit his brows, and remainedsilent an instant.“And if I went to seek Vampa, would you accompany me?”“If my society would not be disagreeable.”“Be it so. It is a lovely night, and a walk without Rome will do us bothgood.”“Shall I take any arms?”“For what purpose?”“Any money?”“It is useless. Where is the man who brought the letter?”“In the street.”“He awaits the answer?”“Yes.”“I must learn where we are going. I will summon him hither.”“It is useless; he would not come up.”“To your apartments, perhaps; but he will not make any difficulty atentering mine.”The count went to the window of the apartment that looked on to the street, andwhistled in a peculiar manner. The man in the mantle quitted the wall, andadvanced into the middle of the street. “Salite!” said thecount, in the same tone in which he would have given an order to his servant.The messenger obeyed without the least hesitation, but rather with alacrity,and, mounting the steps at a bound, entered the hotel; five seconds afterwardshe was at the door of the room.“Ah, it is you, Peppino,” said the count. But Peppino, instead ofanswering, threw himself on his knees, seized the count’s hand, andcovered it with kisses. “Ah,” said the count, “you have,then, not forgotten that I saved your life; that is strange, for it is a weekago.”“No, excellency; and never shall I forget it,” returned Peppino,with an accent of profound gratitude.“Never? That is a long time; but it is something that you believe so.Rise and answer.”Peppino glanced anxiously at Franz.“Oh, you may speak before his excellency,” said he; “he isone of my friends. You allow me to give you this title?” continued thecount in French, “it is necessary to excite this man’sconfidence.”“You can speak before me,” said Franz; “I am a friend of thecount’s.”“Good!” returned Peppino. “I am ready to answer any questionsyour excellency may address to me.”“How did the Viscount Albert fall into Luigi’s hands?”“Excellency, the Frenchman’s carriage passed several times the onein which was Teresa.”“The chief’s mistress?”“Yes. The Frenchman threw her a bouquet; Teresa returned it—allthis with the consent of the chief, who was in the carriage.”“What?” cried Franz, “was Luigi Vampa in the carriage withthe Roman peasants?”“It was he who drove, disguised as the coachman,” replied Peppino.“Well?” said the count.“Well, then, the Frenchman took off his mask; Teresa, with thechief’s consent, did the same. The Frenchman asked for a rendezvous;Teresa gave him one—only, instead of Teresa, it was Beppo who was on thesteps of the church of San Giacomo.”“What!” exclaimed Franz, “the peasant girl who snatched hismocoletto from him——”“Was a lad of fifteen,” replied Peppino. “But it was nodisgrace to your friend to have been deceived; Beppo has taken in plenty ofothers.”“And Beppo led him outside the walls?” said the count.“Exactly so; a carriage was waiting at the end of the Via Macello. Beppogot in, inviting the Frenchman to follow him, and he did not wait to be askedtwice. He gallantly offered the right-hand seat to Beppo, and sat by him. Beppotold him he was going to take him to a villa a league from Rome; the Frenchmanassured him he would follow him to the end of the world. The coachman went upthe Via di Ripetta and the Porta San Paolo; and when they were two hundredyards outside, as the Frenchman became somewhat too forward, Beppo put a braceof pistols to his head, the coachman pulled up and did the same. At the sametime, four of the band, who were concealed on the banks of the Almo, surroundedthe carriage. The Frenchman made some resistance, and nearly strangled Beppo;but he could not resist five armed men, and was forced to yield. They made himget out, walk along the banks of the river, and then brought him to Teresa andLuigi, who were waiting for him in the catacombs of St. Sebastian.”“Well,” said the count, turning towards Franz, “it seems tome that this is a very likely story. What do you say to it?”“Why, that I should think it very amusing,” replied Franz,“if it had happened to anyone but poor Albert.”“And, in truth, if you had not found me here,” said the count,“it might have proved a gallant adventure which would have cost yourfriend dear; but now, be assured, his alarm will be the only seriousconsequence.”“And shall we go and find him?” inquired Franz.“Oh, decidedly, sir. He is in a very picturesque place—do you knowthe catacombs of St. Sebastian?”“I was never in them; but I have often resolved to visit them.”“Well, here is an opportunity made to your hand, and it would bedifficult to contrive a better. Have you a carriage?”“No.”“That is of no consequence; I always have one ready, day andnight.”“Always ready?”“Yes. I am a very capricious being, and I should tell you that sometimeswhen I rise, or after my dinner, or in the middle of the night, I resolve onstarting for some particular point, and away I go.”The count rang, and a footman appeared.“Order out the carriage,” he said, “and remove the pistolswhich are in the holsters. You need not awaken the coachman; Ali willdrive.”In a very short time the noise of wheels was heard, and the carriage stopped atthe door. The count took out his watch.“Half-past twelve,” he said. “We might start at fiveo’clock and be in time, but the delay may cause your friend to pass anuneasy night, and therefore we had better go with all speed to extricate himfrom the hands of the infidels. Are you still resolved to accompany me?”“More determined than ever.”“Well, then, come along.”Franz and the count went downstairs, accompanied by Peppino. At the door theyfound the carriage. Ali was on the box, in whom Franz recognized the dumb slaveof the grotto of Monte Cristo. Franz and the count got into the carriage.Peppino placed himself beside Ali, and they set off at a rapid pace. Ali hadreceived his instructions, and went down the Corso, crossed the Campo Vaccino,went up the Strada San Gregorio, and reached the gates of St. Sebastian. Thenthe porter raised some difficulties, but the Count of Monte Cristo produced apermit from the governor of Rome, allowing him to leave or enter the city atany hour of the day or night; the portcullis was therefore raised, the porterhad a louis for his trouble, and they went on their way.The road which the carriage now traversed was the ancient Appian Way, andbordered with tombs. From time to time, by the light of the moon, which beganto rise, Franz imagined that he saw something like a sentinel appear at variouspoints among the ruins, and suddenly retreat into the darkness on a signal fromPeppino.A short time before they reached the Baths of Caracalla the carriage stopped,Peppino opened the door, and the count and Franz alighted.“In ten minutes,” said the count to his companion, “we shallbe there.”He then took Peppino aside, gave him an order in a low voice, and Peppino wentaway, taking with him a torch, brought with them in the carriage. Five minuteselapsed, during which Franz saw the shepherd going along a narrow path that ledover the irregular and broken surface of the Campagna; and finally hedisappeared in the midst of the tall red herbage, which seemed like thebristling mane of an enormous lion.“Now,” said the count, “let us follow him.”Franz and the count in their turn then advanced along the same path, which, atthe distance of a hundred paces, led them over a declivity to the bottom of asmall valley. They then perceived two men conversing in the obscurity.“Ought we to go on?” asked Franz of the count; “or should wepause?”“Let us go on; Peppino will have warned the sentry of our coming.”One of the two men was Peppino, and the other a bandit on the lookout. Franzand the count advanced, and the bandit saluted them.“Your excellency,” said Peppino, addressing the count, “ifyou will follow me, the opening of the catacombs is close at hand.”“Go on, then,” replied the count. They came to an opening behind aclump of bushes and in the midst of a pile of rocks, by which a man couldscarcely pass. Peppino glided first into this crevice; after they got along afew paces the passage widened. Peppino passed, lighted his torch, and turned tosee if they came after him. The count first reached an open space and Franzfollowed him closely. The passageway sloped in a gentle descent, enlarging asthey proceeded; still Franz and the count were compelled to advance in astooping posture, and were scarcely able to proceed abreast of one another.They went on a hundred and fifty paces in this way, and then were stopped by,“Who comes there?” At the same time they saw the reflection of atorch on a carbine barrel.“A friend!” responded Peppino; and, advancing alone towards thesentry, he said a few words to him in a low tone; and then he, like the first,saluted the nocturnal visitors, making a sign that they might proceed.Behind the sentinel was a staircase with twenty steps. Franz and the countdescended these, and found themselves in a mortuary chamber. Five corridorsdiverged like the rays of a star, and the walls, dug into niches, which werearranged one above the other in the shape of coffins, showed that they were atlast in the catacombs. Down one of the corridors, whose extent it wasimpossible to determine, rays of light were visible. The count laid his hand onFranz’s shoulder.“Would you like to see a camp of bandits in repose?” he inquired.“Exceedingly,” replied Franz.“Come with me, then. Peppino, put out the torch.” Peppino obeyed,and Franz and the count were in utter darkness, except that fifty paces inadvance of them a reddish glare, more evident since Peppino had put out historch, was visible along the wall.They advanced silently, the count guiding Franz as if he had the singularfaculty of seeing in the dark. Franz himself, however, saw his way more plainlyin proportion as he went on towards the light, which served in some manner as aguide. Three arcades were before them, and the middle one was used as a door.These arcades opened on one side into the corridor where the count and Franzwere, and on the other into a large square chamber, entirely surrounded byniches similar to those of which we have spoken.In the midst of this chamber were four stones, which had formerly served as analtar, as was evident from the cross which still surmounted them. A lamp,placed at the base of a pillar, lighted up with its pale and flickering flamethe singular scene which presented itself to the eyes of the two visitorsconcealed in the shadow.A man was seated with his elbow leaning on the column, and was reading with hisback turned to the arcades, through the openings of which the new-comerscontemplated him. This was the chief of the band, Luigi Vampa. Around him, andin groups, according to their fancy, lying in their mantles, or with theirbacks against a sort of stone bench, which went all round the columbarium, wereto be seen twenty brigands or more, each having his carbine within reach. Atthe other end, silent, scarcely visible, and like a shadow, was a sentinel, whowas walking up and down before a grotto, which was only distinguishable becausein that spot the darkness seemed more dense than elsewhere.When the count thought Franz had gazed sufficiently on this picturesquetableau, he raised his finger to his lips, to warn him to be silent, and,ascending the three steps which led to the corridor of the columbarium, enteredthe chamber by the middle arcade, and advanced towards Vampa, who was so intenton the book before him that he did not hear the noise of his footsteps.“Who comes there?” cried the sentinel, who was less abstracted, andwho saw by the lamp-light a shadow approaching his chief. At this challenge,Vampa rose quickly, drawing at the same moment a pistol from his girdle. In amoment all the bandits were on their feet, and twenty carbines were levelled atthe count.“Well,” said he in a voice perfectly calm, and no muscle of hiscountenance disturbed, “well, my dear Vampa, it appears to me that youreceive a friend with a great deal of ceremony.”“Ground arms,” exclaimed the chief, with an imperative sign of thehand, while with the other he took off his hat respectfully; then, turning tothe singular personage who had caused this scene, he said, “Your pardon,your excellency, but I was so far from expecting the honor of a visit, that Idid not really recognize you.”“It seems that your memory is equally short in everything, Vampa,”said the count, “and that not only do you forget people’s faces,but also the conditions you make with them.”“What conditions have I forgotten, your excellency?” inquired thebandit, with the air of a man who, having committed an error, is anxious torepair it.“Was it not agreed,” asked the count, “that not only myperson, but also that of my friends, should be respected by you?”“And how have I broken that treaty, your excellency?”“You have this evening carried off and conveyed hither the ViscountAlbert de Morcerf. Well,” continued the count, in a tone that made Franzshudder, “this young gentleman is one of my friends—thisyoung gentleman lodges in the same hotel as myself—this young gentlemanhas been up and down the Corso for eight hours in my private carriage, and yet,I repeat to you, you have carried him off, and conveyed him hither, and,”added the count, taking the letter from his pocket, “you have set aransom on him, as if he were an utter stranger.”“Why did you not tell me all this—you?” inquired the brigandchief, turning towards his men, who all retreated before his look. “Whyhave you caused me thus to fail in my word towards a gentleman like the count,who has all our lives in his hands? By heavens! if I thought one of you knewthat the young gentleman was the friend of his excellency, I would blow hisbrains out with my own hand!”“Well,” said the count, turning towards Franz, “I told youthere was some mistake in this.”“Are you not alone?” asked Vampa with uneasiness.“I am with the person to whom this letter was addressed, and to whom Idesired to prove that Luigi Vampa was a man of his word. Come, yourexcellency,” the count added, turning to Franz, “here is LuigiVampa, who will himself express to you his deep regret at the mistake he hascommitted.”Franz approached, the chief advancing several steps to meet him.“Welcome among us, your excellency,” he said to him; “youheard what the count just said, and also my reply; let me add that I would notfor the four thousand piastres at which I had fixed your friend’s ransom,that this had happened.”“But,” said Franz, looking round him uneasily, “where is theviscount?—I do not see him.”“Nothing has happened to him, I hope,” said the count frowningly.“The prisoner is there,” replied Vampa, pointing to the hollowspace in front of which the bandit was on guard, “and I will go myselfand tell him he is free.”The chief went towards the place he had pointed out as Albert’s prison,and Franz and the count followed him.“What is the prisoner doing?” inquired Vampa of the sentinel.“Ma foi, captain,” replied the sentry, “I do not know;for the last hour I have not heard him stir.”“Come in, your excellency,” said Vampa. The count and Franzascended seven or eight steps after the chief, who drew back a bolt and openeda door. Then, by the gleam of a lamp, similar to that which lighted thecolumbarium, Albert was to be seen wrapped up in a cloak which one of thebandits had lent him, lying in a corner in profound slumber.“Come,” said the count, smiling with his own peculiar smile,“not so bad for a man who is to be shot at seven o’clock tomorrowmorning.”Vampa looked at Albert with a kind of admiration; he was not insensible to sucha proof of courage.“You are right, your excellency,” he said; “this must be oneof your friends.”Then going to Albert, he touched him on the shoulder, saying, “Will yourexcellency please to awaken?”Albert stretched out his arms, rubbed his eyelids, and opened his eyes.“Oh,” said he, “is it you, captain? You should have allowedme to sleep. I had such a delightful dream. I was dancing the galop atTorlonia’s with the Countess G——.” Then he drew hiswatch from his pocket, that he might see how time sped.“Half-past one only?” said he. “Why the devil do you rouse meat this hour?”“To tell you that you are free, your excellency.”“My dear fellow,” replied Albert, with perfect ease of mind,“remember, for the future, Napoleon’s maxim, ‘Never awaken mebut for bad news;’ if you had let me sleep on, I should have finished mygalop, and have been grateful to you all my life. So, then, they have paid myransom?”“No, your excellency.”“Well, then, how am I free?”“A person to whom I can refuse nothing has come to demand you.”“Come hither?”“Yes, hither.”“Really? Then that person is a most amiable person.”Albert looked around and perceived Franz. “What,” said he,“is it you, my dear Franz, whose devotion and friendship are thusdisplayed?”“No, not I,” replied Franz, “but our neighbor, the Count ofMonte Cristo.”“Oh, my dear count,” said Albert gayly, arranging his cravat andwristbands, “you are really most kind, and I hope you will consider me asunder eternal obligations to you, in the first place for the carriage, and inthe next for this visit,” and he put out his hand to the count, whoshuddered as he gave his own, but who nevertheless did give it.The bandit gazed on this scene with amazement; he was evidently accustomed tosee his prisoners tremble before him, and yet here was one whose gaytemperament was not for a moment altered; as for Franz, he was enchanted at theway in which Albert had sustained the national honor in the presence of thebandit.“My dear Albert,” he said, “if you will make haste, we shallyet have time to finish the night at Torlonia’s. You may conclude yourinterrupted galop, so that you will owe no ill-will to Signor Luigi, who has,indeed, throughout this whole affair acted like a gentleman.”“You are decidedly right, and we may reach the Palazzo by twoo’clock. Signor Luigi,” continued Albert, “is there anyformality to fulfil before I take leave of your excellency?”“None, sir,” replied the bandit, “you are as free asair.”“Well, then, a happy and merry life to you. Come, gentlemen, come.”And Albert, followed by Franz and the count, descended the staircase, crossedthe square chamber, where stood all the bandits, hat in hand.“Peppino,” said the brigand chief, “give me the torch.”“What are you going to do?” inquired the count.“I will show you the way back myself,” said the captain;“that is the least honor that I can render to your excellency.”And taking the lighted torch from the hands of the herdsman, he preceded hisguests, not as a servant who performs an act of civility, but like a king whoprecedes ambassadors. On reaching the door, he bowed.“And now, your excellency,” added he, “allow me to repeat myapologies, and I hope you will not entertain any resentment at what hasoccurred.”“No, my dear Vampa,” replied the count; “besides, youcompensate for your mistakes in so gentlemanly a way, that one almost feelsobliged to you for having committed them.”“Gentlemen,” added the chief, turning towards the young men,“perhaps the offer may not appear very tempting to you; but if you shouldever feel inclined to pay me a second visit, wherever I may be, you shall bewelcome.”Franz and Albert bowed. The count went out first, then Albert. Franz paused fora moment.“Has your excellency anything to ask me?” said Vampa with a smile.“Yes, I have,” replied Franz; “I am curious to know what workyou were perusing with so much attention as we entered.”“Cæsar’s Commentaries,” said the bandit, “it ismy favorite work.”“Well, are you coming?” asked Albert.“Yes,” replied Franz, “here I am,” and he, in his turn,left the caves. They advanced to the plain.“Ah, your pardon,” said Albert, turning round; “will youallow me, captain?”And he lighted his cigar at Vampa’s torch.“Now, my dear count,” he said, “let us on with all the speedwe may. I am enormously anxious to finish my night at the Duke ofBracciano’s.”They found the carriage where they had left it. The count said a word in Arabicto Ali, and the horses went on at great speed.It was just two o’clock by Albert’s watch when the two friendsentered into the dancing-room. Their return was quite an event, but as theyentered together, all uneasiness on Albert’s account ceased instantly.“Madame,” said the Viscount of Morcerf, advancing towards thecountess, “yesterday you were so condescending as to promise me a galop;I am rather late in claiming this gracious promise, but here is my friend,whose character for veracity you well know, and he will assure you the delayarose from no fault of mine.”And as at this moment the orchestra gave the signal for the waltz, Albert puthis arm round the waist of the countess, and disappeared with her in the whirlof dancers.In the meanwhile Franz was considering the singular shudder that had passedover the Count of Monte Cristo at the moment when he had been, in some sort,forced to give his hand to Albert. Chapter 38. TheRendezvousThe first words thatAlbert uttered to his friend, on the following morning, contained a requestthat Franz would accompany him on a visit to the count; true, the young man hadwarmly and energetically thanked the count on the previous evening; butservices such as he had rendered could never be too often acknowledged. Franz,who seemed attracted by some invisible influence towards the count, in whichterror was strangely mingled, felt an extreme reluctance to permit his friendto be exposed alone to the singular fascination that this mysterious personageseemed to exercise over him, and therefore made no objection to Albert’srequest, but at once accompanied him to the desired spot, and, after a shortdelay, the count joined them in the salon.“My dear count,” said Albert, advancing to meet him, “permitme to repeat the poor thanks I offered last night, and to assure you that theremembrance of all I owe to you will never be effaced from my memory; believeme, as long as I live, I shall never cease to dwell with grateful recollectionon the prompt and important service you rendered me; and also to remember thatto you I am indebted even for my life.”“My very good friend and excellent neighbor,” replied the count,with a smile, “you really exaggerate my trifling exertions. You owe menothing but some trifle of 20,000 francs, which you have been saved out of yourtravelling expenses, so that there is not much of a score between us;—butyou must really permit me to congratulate you on the ease and unconcern withwhich you resigned yourself to your fate, and the perfect indifference youmanifested as to the turn events might take.”“Upon my word,” said Albert, “I deserve no credit for what Icould not help, namely, a determination to take everything as I found it, andto let those bandits see, that although men get into troublesome scrapes allover the world, there is no nation but the French that can smile even in theface of grim Death himself. All that, however, has nothing to do with myobligations to you, and I now come to ask you whether, in my own person, myfamily, or connections, I can in any way serve you? My father, the Comte deMorcerf, although of Spanish origin, possesses considerable influence, both atthe court of France and Madrid, and I unhesitatingly place the best services ofmyself, and all to whom my life is dear, at your disposal.”“Monsieur de Morcerf,” replied the count, “your offer, farfrom surprising me, is precisely what I expected from you, and I accept it inthe same spirit of hearty sincerity with which it is made;—nay, I will gostill further, and say that I had previously made up my mind to ask a greatfavor at your hands.”“Oh, pray name it.”“I am wholly a stranger to Paris—it is a city I have never yetseen.”“Is it possible,” exclaimed Albert, “that you have reachedyour present age without visiting the finest capital in the world? I canscarcely credit it.”“Nevertheless, it is quite true; still, I agree with you in thinking thatmy present ignorance of the first city in Europe is a reproach to me in everyway, and calls for immediate correction; but, in all probability, I should haveperformed so important, so necessary a duty, as that of making myselfacquainted with the wonders and beauties of your justly celebrated capital, hadI known any person who would have introduced me into the fashionable world, butunfortunately I possessed no acquaintance there, and, of necessity, wascompelled to abandon the idea.”“So distinguished an individual as yourself,” cried Albert,“could scarcely have required an introduction.”“You are most kind; but as regards myself, I can find no merit I possess,save that, as a millionaire, I might have become a partner in the speculationsof M. Aguado and M. Rothschild; but as my motive in travelling to your capitalwould not have been for the pleasure of dabbling in stocks, I stayed away tillsome favorable chance should present itself of carrying my wish into execution.Your offer, however, smooths all difficulties, and I have only to ask you, mydear M. de Morcerf” (these words were accompanied by a most peculiarsmile), “whether you undertake, upon my arrival in France, to open to methe doors of that fashionable world of which I know no more than a Huron or anative of Cochin-China?”“Oh, that I do, and with infinite pleasure,” answered Albert;“and so much the more readily as a letter received this morning from myfather summons me to Paris, in consequence of a treaty of marriage (my dearFranz, do not smile, I beg of you) with a family of high standing, andconnected with the very cream of Parisian society.”“Connected by marriage, you mean,” said Franz, laughingly.“Well, never mind how it is,” answered Albert, “it comes tothe same thing in the end. Perhaps by the time you return to Paris, I shall bequite a sober, staid father of a family! A most edifying representative I shallmake of all the domestic virtues—don’t you think so? But as regardsyour wish to visit our fine city, my dear count, I can only say that you maycommand me and mine to any extent you please.”“Then it is settled,” said the count, “and I give you mysolemn assurance that I only waited an opportunity like the present to realizeplans that I have long meditated.”Franz did not doubt that these plans were the same concerning which the counthad dropped a few words in the grotto of Monte Cristo, and while the count wasspeaking the young man watched him closely, hoping to read something of hispurpose in his face, but his countenance was inscrutable especially when, as inthe present case, it was veiled in a sphinx-like smile.“But tell me now, count,” exclaimed Albert, delighted at the ideaof having to chaperon so distinguished a person as Monte Cristo; “tell metruly whether you are in earnest, or if this project of visiting Paris ismerely one of the chimerical and uncertain air castles of which we make so manyin the course of our lives, but which, like a house built on the sand, isliable to be blown over by the first puff of wind?”“I pledge you my honor,” returned the count, “that I mean todo as I have said; both inclination and positive necessity compel me to visitParis.”“When do you propose going thither?”“Have you made up your mind when you shall be there yourself?”“Certainly I have; in a fortnight or three weeks’ time, that is tosay, as fast as I can get there!”“Nay,” said the Count; “I will give you three months ere Ijoin you; you see I make an ample allowance for all delays and difficulties.“And in three months’ time,” said Albert, “you will beat my house?”“Shall we make a positive appointment for a particular day andhour?” inquired the count; “only let me warn you that I amproverbial for my punctilious exactitude in keeping my engagements.”“Day for day, hour for hour,” said Albert; “that will suit meto a dot.”“So be it, then,” replied the count, and extending his hand towardsa calendar, suspended near the chimney-piece, he said, “today is the 21stof February;” and drawing out his watch, added, “it is exactlyhalf-past ten o’clock. Now promise me to remember this, and expect me the21st of May at the same hour in the forenoon.”“Capital!” exclaimed Albert; “your breakfast shall bewaiting.”“Where do you live?”“No. 27, Rue du Helder.”“Have you bachelor’s apartments there? I hope my coming will notput you to any inconvenience.”“I reside in my father’s house, but occupy a pavilion at thefarther side of the courtyard, entirely separated from the mainbuilding.”“Quite sufficient,” replied the count, as, taking out his tablets,he wrote down “No. 27, Rue du Helder, 21st May, half-past ten in themorning.”“Now then,” said the count, returning his tablets to his pocket,“make yourself perfectly easy; the hand of your time-piece will not bemore accurate in marking the time than myself.”“Shall I see you again ere my departure?” asked Albert.“That depends; when do you leave?”“Tomorrow evening, at five o’clock.”“In that case I must say adieu to you, as I am compelled to go to Naples,and shall not return hither before Saturday evening or Sunday morning. And you,baron,” pursued the count, addressing Franz, “do you also departtomorrow?”“Yes.”“For France?”“No, for Venice; I shall remain in Italy for another year or two.”“Then we shall not meet in Paris?”“I fear I shall not have that honor.”“Well, since we must part,” said the count, holding out a hand toeach of the young men, “allow me to wish you both a safe and pleasantjourney.”It was the first time the hand of Franz had come in contact with that of themysterious individual before him, and unconsciously he shuddered at its touch,for it felt cold and icy as that of a corpse.“Let us understand each other,” said Albert; “it isagreed—is it not?—that you are to be at No. 27, in the Rue duHelder, on the 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, and your word ofhonor passed for your punctuality?”“The 21st of May, at half-past ten in the morning, Rue du Helder, No.27,” replied the count.The young men then rose, and bowing to the count, quitted the room.“What is the matter?” asked Albert of Franz, when they had returnedto their own apartments; “you seem more than commonly thoughtful.”“I will confess to you, Albert,” replied Franz, “the count isa very singular person, and the appointment you have made to meet him in Parisfills me with a thousand apprehensions.”“My dear fellow,” exclaimed Albert, “what can there possiblybe in that to excite uneasiness? Why, you must have lost your senses.”“Whether I am in my senses or not,” answered Franz, “that isthe way I feel.”“Listen to me, Franz,” said Albert; “I am glad that theoccasion has presented itself for saying this to you, for I have noticed howcold you are in your bearing towards the count, while he, on the other hand,has always been courtesy itself to us. Have you anything particular againsthim?”“Possibly.”“Did you ever meet him previously to coming hither?”“I have.”“And where?”“Will you promise me not to repeat a single word of what I am about totell you?”“I promise.”“Upon your honor?”“Upon my honor.”“Then listen to me.”Franz then related to his friend the history of his excursion to the Island ofMonte Cristo and of his finding a party of smugglers there, and the twoCorsican bandits with them. He dwelt with considerable force and energy on thealmost magical hospitality he had received from the count, and the magnificenceof his entertainment in the grotto of the Thousand and One Nights.He recounted, with circumstantial exactitude, all the particulars of thesupper, the hashish, the statues, the dream, and how, at his awakening, thereremained no proof or trace of all these events, save the small yacht, seen inthe distant horizon driving under full sail toward Porto-Vecchio.Then he detailed the conversation overheard by him at the Colosseum, betweenthe count and Vampa, in which the count had promised to obtain the release ofthe bandit Peppino,—an engagement which, as our readers are aware, hemost faithfully fulfilled.At last he arrived at the adventure of the preceding night, and theembarrassment in which he found himself placed by not having sufficient cash bysix or seven hundred piastres to make up the sum required, and finally of hisapplication to the count and the picturesque and satisfactory result thatfollowed. Albert listened with the most profound attention.“Well,” said he, when Franz had concluded, “what do you findto object to in all you have related? The count is fond of travelling, and,being rich, possesses a vessel of his own. Go but to Portsmouth or Southampton,and you will find the harbors crowded with the yachts belonging to such of theEnglish as can afford the expense, and have the same liking for this amusement.Now, by way of having a resting-place during his excursions, avoiding thewretched cookery—which has been trying its best to poison me during thelast four months, while you have manfully resisted its effects for as manyyears,—and obtaining a bed on which it is possible to slumber, MonteCristo has furnished for himself a temporary abode where you first found him;but, to prevent the possibility of the Tuscan government taking a fancy to hisenchanted palace, and thereby depriving him of the advantages naturallyexpected from so large an outlay of capital, he has wisely enough purchased theisland, and taken its name. Just ask yourself, my good fellow, whether thereare not many persons of our acquaintance who assume the names of lands andproperties they never in their lives were masters of?”“But,” said Franz, “the Corsican bandits that were among thecrew of his vessel?”“Why, really the thing seems to me simple enough. Nobody knows betterthan yourself that the bandits of Corsica are not rogues or thieves, but purelyand simply fugitives, driven by some sinister motive from their native town orvillage, and that their fellowship involves no disgrace or stigma; for my ownpart, I protest that, should I ever go to Corsica, my first visit, ere even Ipresented myself to the mayor or prefect, should be to the bandits of Colomba,if I could only manage to find them; for, on my conscience, they are a race ofmen I admire greatly.”“Still,” persisted Franz, “I suppose you will allow that suchmen as Vampa and his band are regular villains, who have no other motive thanplunder when they seize your person. How do you explain the influence the countevidently possessed over those ruffians?”“My good friend, as in all probability I own my present safety to thatinfluence, it would ill become me to search too closely into its source;therefore, instead of condemning him for his intimacy with outlaws, you mustgive me leave to excuse any little irregularity there may be in such aconnection; not altogether for preserving my life, for my own idea was that itnever was in much danger, but certainly for saving me 4,000 piastres, which,being translated, means neither more nor less than 24,000 livres of ourmoney—a sum at which, most assuredly, I should never have been estimatedin France, proving most indisputably,” added Albert with a laugh,“that no prophet is honored in his own country.”“Talking of countries,” replied Franz, “of what country isthe count, what is his native tongue, whence does he derive his immensefortune, and what were those events of his early life—a life asmarvellous as unknown—that have tinctured his succeeding years with sodark and gloomy a misanthropy? Certainly these are questions that, in yourplace, I should like to have answered.”“My dear Franz,” replied Albert, “when, upon receipt of myletter, you found the necessity of asking the count’s assistance, youpromptly went to him, saying, ‘My friend Albert de Morcerf is in danger;help me to deliver him.’ Was not that nearly what you said?”“It was.”“Well, then, did he ask you, ‘Who is M. Albert de Morcerf? how doeshe come by his name—his fortune? what are his means of existence? what ishis birthplace? of what country is he a native?’ Tell me, did he put allthese questions to you?”“I confess he asked me none.”“No; he merely came and freed me from the hands of Signor Vampa, where, Ican assure you, in spite of all my outward appearance of ease and unconcern, Idid not very particularly care to remain. Now, then, Franz, when, for servicesso promptly and unhesitatingly rendered, he but asks me in return to do for himwhat is done daily for any Russian prince or Italian nobleman who may passthrough Paris—merely to introduce him into society—would you haveme refuse? My good fellow, you must have lost your senses to think it possibleI could act with such cold-blooded policy.”And this time it must be confessed that, contrary to the usual state of affairsin discussions between the young men, the effective arguments were all onAlbert’s side.“Well,” said Franz with a sigh, “do as you please my dearviscount, for your arguments are beyond my powers of refutation. Still, inspite of all, you must admit that this Count of Monte Cristo is a most singularpersonage.”“He is a philanthropist,” answered the other; “and no doubthis motive in visiting Paris is to compete for the Monthyon prize, given, asyou are aware, to whoever shall be proved to have most materially advanced theinterests of virtue and humanity. If my vote and interest can obtain it forhim, I will readily give him the one and promise the other. And now, my dearFranz, let us talk of something else. Come, shall we take our luncheon, andthen pay a last visit to St. Peter’s?”Franz silently assented; and the following afternoon, at half-past fiveo’clock, the young men parted. Albert de Morcerf to return to Paris, andFranz d’Épinay to pass a fortnight at Venice.But, ere he entered his travelling carriage, Albert, fearing that his expectedguest might forget the engagement he had entered into, placed in the care of awaiter at the hotel a card to be delivered to the Count of Monte Cristo, onwhich, beneath the name of Viscount Albert de Morcerf, he had written inpencil:“27, Rue du Helder, on the 21st May, half-past tenA.M.” Chapter 39. The GuestsIn the house in the Ruedu Helder, where Albert had invited the Count of Monte Cristo, everything wasbeing prepared on the morning of the 21st of May to do honor to the occasion.Albert de Morcerf inhabited a pavilion situated at the corner of a large court,and directly opposite another building, in which were the servants’apartments. Two windows only of the pavilion faced the street; three otherwindows looked into the court, and two at the back into the garden.Between the court and the garden, built in the heavy style of the imperialarchitecture, was the large and fashionable dwelling of the Count and Countessof Morcerf.A high wall surrounded the whole of the property, surmounted at intervals byvases filled with flowers, and broken in the centre by a large gate of gildediron, which served as the carriage entrance. A small door, close to the lodgeof the concierge, gave ingress and egress to the servants and masterswhen they were on foot.It was easy to discover that the delicate care of a mother, unwilling to partfrom her son, and yet aware that a young man of the viscount’s agerequired the full exercise of his liberty, had chosen this habitation forAlbert. There were not lacking, however, evidences of what we may call theintelligent egoism of a youth who is charmed with the indolent, careless lifeof an only son, and who lives as it were in a gilded cage. By means of the twowindows looking into the street, Albert could see all that passed; the sight ofwhat is going on is necessary to young men, who always want to see the worldtraverse their horizon, even if that horizon is only a public thoroughfare.Then, should anything appear to merit a more minute examination, Albert deMorcerf could follow up his researches by means of a small gate, similar tothat close to the concierge’s door, and which merits a particulardescription.It was a little entrance that seemed never to have been opened since the housewas built, so entirely was it covered with dust and dirt; but the well-oiledhinges and locks told quite another story. This door was a mockery to theconcierge, from whose vigilance and jurisdiction it was free, and, likethat famous portal in the Arabian Nights, opening at the“Sesame” of Ali Baba, it was wont to swing backward at acabalistic word or a concerted tap from without from the sweetest voices orwhitest fingers in the world.At the end of a long corridor, with which the door communicated, and whichformed the antechamber, was, on the right, Albert’s breakfast-room,looking into the court, and on the left the salon, looking into the garden.Shrubs and creeping plants covered the windows, and hid from the garden andcourt these two apartments, the only rooms into which, as they were on theground floor, the prying eyes of the curious could penetrate.On the floor above were similar rooms, with the addition of a third, formed outof the antechamber; these three rooms were a salon, a boudoir, and a bedroom.The salon downstairs was only an Algerian divan, for the use of smokers. Theboudoir upstairs communicated with the bedchamber by an invisible door on thestaircase; it was evident that every precaution had been taken. Above thisfloor was a large atelier, which had been increased in size by pullingdown the partitions—a pandemonium, in which the artist and the dandystrove for pre-eminence.There were collected and piled up all Albert’s successive caprices,hunting-horns, bass-viols, flutes—a whole orchestra, for Albert had hadnot a taste but a fancy for music; easels, palettes, brushes, pencils—formusic had been succeeded by painting; foils, boxing-gloves, broadswords, andsingle-sticks—for, following the example of the fashionable young men ofthe time, Albert de Morcerf cultivated, with far more perseverance than musicand drawing, the three arts that complete a dandy’s education, i.e.,fencing, boxing, and single-stick; and it was here that he received Grisier,Cooks, and Charles Leboucher.The rest of the furniture of this privileged apartment consisted of oldcabinets, filled with Chinese porcelain and Japanese vases, Lucca della Robbiafaïences, and Palissy platters; of old armchairs, in which perhaps hadsat Henry IV. or Sully, Louis XIII. or Richelieu—for two of thesearmchairs, adorned with a carved shield, on which were engraved thefleur-de-lis of France on an azure field, evidently came from the Louvre, or,at least, some royal residence.Over these dark and sombre chairs were thrown splendid stuffs, dyed beneathPersia’s sun, or woven by the fingers of the women of Calcutta or ofChandernagor. What these stuffs did there, it was impossible to say; theyawaited, while gratifying the eyes, a destination unknown to their ownerhimself; in the meantime they filled the place with their golden and silkyreflections.In the centre of the room was a Roller and Blanchet “baby grand”piano in rosewood, but holding the potentialities of an orchestra in its narrowand sonorous cavity, and groaning beneath the weight of thechefs-d’œuvre of Beethoven, Weber, Mozart, Haydn, Grétry, andPorpora.On the walls, over the doors, on the ceiling, were swords, daggers, Malaycreeses, maces, battle-axes; gilded, damasked, and inlaid suits of armor; driedplants, minerals, and stuffed birds, their flame-colored wings outspread inmotionless flight, and their beaks forever open. This was Albert’sfavorite lounging place.However, the morning of the appointment, the young man had established himselfin the small salon downstairs. There, on a table, surrounded at some distanceby a large and luxurious divan, every species of tobacco known,—from theyellow tobacco of Petersburg to the black of Sinai, and so on along the scalefrom Maryland and Porto Rico, to Latakia,—was exposed in pots of crackledearthenware of which the Dutch are so fond; beside them, in boxes of fragrantwood, were ranged, according to their size and quality, puros, regalias,havanas, and manillas; and, in an open cabinet, a collection of German pipes,of chibouques, with their amber mouth-pieces ornamented with coral, and ofnarghiles, with their long tubes of morocco, awaiting the caprice or thesympathy of the smokers.Albert had himself presided at the arrangement, or, rather, the symmetricalderangement, which, after coffee, the guests at a breakfast of modern days loveto contemplate through the vapor that escapes from their mouths, and ascends inlong and fanciful wreaths to the ceiling.At a quarter to ten, a valet entered; he composed, with a little groom namedJohn, and who only spoke English, all Albert’s establishment, althoughthe cook of the hotel was always at his service, and on great occasions thecount’s chasseur also. This valet, whose name was Germain, and whoenjoyed the entire confidence of his young master, held in one hand a number ofpapers, and in the other a packet of letters, which he gave to Albert. Albertglanced carelessly at the different missives, selected two written in a smalland delicate hand, and enclosed in scented envelopes, opened them and perusedtheir contents with some attention.“How did these letters come?” said he.“One by the post, Madame Danglars’ footman left the other.”“Let Madame Danglars know that I accept the place she offers me in herbox. Wait; then, during the day, tell Rosa that when I leave the Opera I willsup with her as she wishes. Take her six bottles of differentwine—Cyprus, sherry, and Malaga, and a barrel of Ostend oysters; get themat Borel’s, and be sure you say they are for me.”“At what o’clock, sir, do you breakfast?”“What time is it now?”“A quarter to ten.”“Very well, at half past ten. Debray will, perhaps, be obliged to go tothe minister—and besides” (Albert looked at his tablets), “itis the hour I told the count, 21st May, at half past ten; and though I do notmuch rely upon his promise, I wish to be punctual. Is the countess upyet?”“If you wish, I will inquire.”“Yes, ask her for one of her liqueur cellarets, mine isincomplete; and tell her I shall have the honor of seeing her about threeo’clock, and that I request permission to introduce someone toher.”The valet left the room. Albert threw himself on the divan, tore off the coverof two or three of the papers, looked at the theatre announcements, made a faceseeing they gave an opera, and not a ballet; hunted vainly amongst theadvertisements for a new tooth-powder of which he had heard, and threw down,one after the other, the three leading papers of Paris, muttering,“These papers become more and more stupid every day.”A moment after, a carriage stopped before the door, and the servant announcedM. Lucien Debray. A tall young man, with light hair, clear gray eyes, and thinand compressed lips, dressed in a blue coat with beautifully carved goldbuttons, a white neckcloth, and a tortoiseshell eye-glass suspended by a silkenthread, and which, by an effort of the superciliary and zygomatic muscles, hefixed in his eye, entered, with a half-official air, without smiling orspeaking.“Good-morning, Lucien, good-morning,” said Albert; “yourpunctuality really alarms me. What do I say? punctuality! You, whom I expectedlast, you arrive at five minutes to ten, when the time fixed was half-past! Hasthe ministry resigned?”“No, my dear fellow,” returned the young man, seating himself onthe divan; “reassure yourself; we are tottering always, but we neverfall, and I begin to believe that we shall pass into a state of immobility, andthen the affairs of the Peninsula will completely consolidate us.”“Ah, true; you drive Don Carlos out of Spain.”“No, no, my dear fellow, do not confound our plans. We take him to theother side of the French frontier, and offer him hospitality at Bourges.”“At Bourges?”“Yes, he has not much to complain of; Bourges is the capital of CharlesVII. Do you not know that all Paris knew it yesterday, and the day before ithad already transpired on the Bourse, and M. Danglars (I do not know by whatmeans that man contrives to obtain intelligence as soon as we do) made amillion!”“And you another order, for I see you have a blue ribbon at yourbutton-hole.”“Yes; they sent me the order of Charles III.,” returned Debraycarelessly.“Come, do not affect indifference, but confess you were pleased to haveit.”“Oh, it is very well as a finish to the toilet. It looks very neat on ablack coat buttoned up.”“And makes you resemble the Prince of Wales or the Duke ofReichstadt.”“It is for that reason you see me so early.”“Because you have the order of Charles III., and you wish to announce thegood news to me?”“No, because I passed the night writing letters,—five-and-twentydespatches. I returned home at daybreak, and strove to sleep; but my head achedand I got up to have a ride for an hour. At the Bois de Boulogne, ennuiand hunger attacked me at once,—two enemies who rarely accompany eachother, and who are yet leagued against me, a sort of Carlo-republican alliance.I then recollected you gave a breakfast this morning, and here I am. I amhungry, feed me; I am bored, amuse me.”“It is my duty as your host,” returned Albert, ringing the bell,while Lucien turned over, with his gold-mounted cane, the papers that lay onthe table. “Germain, a glass of sherry and a biscuit. In the meantime, mydear Lucien, here are cigars—contraband, of course—try them, andpersuade the minister to sell us such instead of poisoning us with cabbageleaves.”“Peste! I will do nothing of the kind; the moment they come fromgovernment you would find them execrable. Besides, that does not concern thehome but the financial department. Address yourself to M. Humann, section ofthe indirect contributions, corridor A., No. 26.”“On my word,” said Albert, “you astonish me by the extent ofyour knowledge. Take a cigar.”“Really, my dear Albert,” replied Lucien, lighting a manilla at arose-colored taper that burnt in a beautifully enamelled stand—“howhappy you are to have nothing to do. You do not know your own goodfortune!”“And what would you do, my dear diplomatist,” replied Morcerf, witha slight degree of irony in his voice, “if you did nothing? What? privatesecretary to a minister, plunged at once into European cabals and Parisianintrigues; having kings, and, better still, queens, to protect, parties tounite, elections to direct; making more use of your cabinet with your pen andyour telegraph than Napoleon did of his battle-fields with his sword and hisvictories; possessing five-and-twenty thousand francs a year, besides yourplace; a horse, for which Château-Renaud offered you four hundred louis, andwhich you would not part with; a tailor who never disappoints you; with theopera, the jockey-club, and other diversions, can you not amuse yourself? Well,I will amuse you.”“How?”“By introducing to you a new acquaintance.”“A man or a woman?”“A man.”“I know so many men already.”“But you do not know this man.”“Where does he come from—the end of the world?”“Farther still, perhaps.”“The deuce! I hope he does not bring our breakfast with him.”“Oh, no; our breakfast comes from my father’s kitchen. Are youhungry?”“Humiliating as such a confession is, I am. But I dined at M. deVillefort’s, and lawyers always give you very bad dinners. You wouldthink they felt some remorse; did you ever remark that?”“Ah, depreciate other persons’ dinners; you ministers give suchsplendid ones.”“Yes; but we do not invite people of fashion. If we were not forced toentertain a parcel of country boobies because they think and vote with us, weshould never dream of dining at home, I assure you.”“Well, take another glass of sherry and another biscuit.”“Willingly. Your Spanish wine is excellent. You see we were quite rightto pacify that country.”“Yes; but Don Carlos?”“Well, Don Carlos will drink Bordeaux, and in ten years we will marry hisson to the little queen.”“You will then obtain the Golden Fleece, if you are still in theministry.”“I think, Albert, you have adopted the system of feeding me on smoke thismorning.”“Well, you must allow it is the best thing for the stomach; but I hearBeauchamp in the next room; you can dispute together, and that will pass awaythe time.”“About what?”“About the papers.”“My dear friend,” said Lucien with an air of sovereign contempt,“do I ever read the papers?”“Then you will dispute the more.”“M. Beauchamp,” announced the servant. “Come in, comein,” said Albert, rising and advancing to meet the young man. “Hereis Debray, who detests you without reading you, so he says.”“He is quite right,” returned Beauchamp; “for I criticise himwithout knowing what he does. Good-day, commander!”“Ah, you know that already,” said the private secretary, smilingand shaking hands with him.“Pardieu!”“And what do they say of it in the world?”“In which world? we have so many worlds in the year of grace 1838.”“In the entire political world, of which you are one of theleaders.”“They say that it is quite fair, and that sowing so much red, you oughtto reap a little blue.”“Come, come, that is not bad!” said Lucien. “Why do you notjoin our party, my dear Beauchamp? With your talents you would make yourfortune in three or four years.”“I only await one thing before following your advice; that is, a ministerwho will hold office for six months. My dear Albert, one word, for I must givepoor Lucien a respite. Do we breakfast or dine? I must go to the Chamber, forour life is not an idle one.”“You only breakfast; I await two persons, and the instant they arrive weshall sit down to table.” Chapter 40. TheBreakfastAnd what sort of personsdo you expect to breakfast?” said Beauchamp.“A gentleman, and a diplomatist.”“Then we shall have to wait two hours for the gentleman, and three forthe diplomatist. I shall come back to dessert; keep me some strawberries,coffee, and cigars. I shall take a cutlet on my way to the Chamber.”“Do not do anything of the sort; for were the gentleman a Montmorency,and the diplomatist a Metternich, we will breakfast at eleven; in the meantime,follow Debray’s example, and take a glass of sherry and a biscuit.”“Be it so; I will stay; I must do something to distract mythoughts.”“You are like Debray, and yet it seems to me that when the minister isout of spirits, the opposition ought to be joyous.”“Ah, you do not know with what I am threatened. I shall hear this morningthat M. Danglars make a speech at the Chamber of Deputies, and at hiswife’s this evening I shall hear the tragedy of a peer of France. Thedevil take the constitutional government, and since we had our choice, as theysay, at least, how could we choose that?”“I understand; you must lay in a stock of hilarity.”“Do not run down M. Danglars’ speeches,” said Debray;“he votes for you, for he belongs to the opposition.”“Pardieu, that is exactly the worst of all. I am waiting until yousend him to speak at the Luxembourg, to laugh at my ease.”“My dear friend,” said Albert to Beauchamp, “it is plain thatthe affairs of Spain are settled, for you are most desperately out of humorthis morning. Recollect that Parisian gossip has spoken of a marriage betweenmyself and Mlle. Eugénie Danglars; I cannot in conscience, therefore, let yourun down the speeches of a man who will one day say to me, ‘Vicomte, youknow I give my daughter two millions.’”“Ah, this marriage will never take place,” said Beauchamp.“The king has made him a baron, and can make him a peer, but he cannotmake him a gentleman, and the Count of Morcerf is too aristocratic to consent,for the paltry sum of two million francs, to a mésalliance. The Viscountof Morcerf can only wed a marchioness.”“But two million francs make a nice little sum,” replied Morcerf.“It is the social capital of a theatre on the boulevard, or a railroadfrom the Jardin des Plantes to La Râpée.”“Never mind what he says, Morcerf,” said Debray, “do youmarry her. You marry a money-bag label, it is true; well, but what does thatmatter? It is better to have a blazon less and a figure more on it. You haveseven martlets on your arms; give three to your wife, and you will still havefour; that is one more than M. de Guise had, who so nearly became King ofFrance, and whose cousin was Emperor of Germany.”“On my word, I think you are right, Lucien,” said Albert absently.“To be sure; besides, every millionaire is as noble as abastard—that is, he can be.”“Do not say that, Debray,” returned Beauchamp, laughing, “forhere is Château-Renaud, who, to cure you of your mania for paradoxes, will passthe sword of Renaud de Montauban, his ancestor, through your body.”“He will sully it then,” returned Lucien; “for I amlow—very low.”“Oh, heavens,” cried Beauchamp, “the minister quotesBéranger, what shall we come to next?”“M. de Château-Renaud—M. Maximilian Morrel,” said theservant, announcing two fresh guests.“Now, then, to breakfast,” said Beauchamp; “for, if Iremember, you told me you only expected two persons, Albert.”“Morrel,” muttered Albert—“Morrel—who ishe?”But before he had finished, M. de Château-Renaud, a handsome young man ofthirty, gentleman all over,—that is, with the figure of a Guiche and thewit of a Mortemart,—took Albert’s hand.“My dear Albert,” said he, “let me introduce to you M.Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, my friend; and what is more—howeverthe man speaks for himself—my preserver. Salute my hero, viscount.”And he stepped on one side to give place to a young man of refined anddignified bearing, with large and open brow, piercing eyes, and blackmoustache, whom our readers have already seen at Marseilles, undercircumstances sufficiently dramatic not to be forgotten. A rich uniform, halfFrench, half Oriental, set off his graceful and stalwart figure, and his broadchest was decorated with the order of the Legion of Honor. The young officerbowed with easy and elegant politeness.“Monsieur,” said Albert with affectionate courtesy, “thecount of Château-Renaud knew how much pleasure this introduction would give me;you are his friend, be ours also.”“Well said,” interrupted Château-Renaud; “and pray that, ifyou should ever be in a similar predicament, he may do as much for you as hedid for me.”“What has he done?” asked Albert.“Oh, nothing worth speaking of,” said Morrel; “M. deChâteau-Renaud exaggerates.”“Not worth speaking of?” cried Château-Renaud; “life is notworth speaking of!—that is rather too philosophical, on my word, Morrel.It is very well for you, who risk your life every day, but for me, who only didso once——”“We gather from all this, baron, that Captain Morrel saved yourlife.”“Exactly so.”“On what occasion?” asked Beauchamp.“Beauchamp, my good fellow, you know I am starving,” said Debray:“do not set him off on some long story.”“Well, I do not prevent your sitting down to table,” repliedBeauchamp, “Château-Renaud can tell us while we eat our breakfast.”“Gentlemen,” said Morcerf, “it is only a quarter past ten,and I expect someone else.”“Ah, true, a diplomatist!” observed Debray.“Diplomat or not, I don’t know; I only know that he charged himselfon my account with a mission, which he terminated so entirely to mysatisfaction, that had I been king, I should have instantly created him knightof all my orders, even had I been able to offer him the Golden Fleece and theGarter.”“Well, since we are not to sit down to table,” said Debray,“take a glass of sherry, and tell us all about it.”“You all know that I had the fancy of going to Africa.”“It is a road your ancestors have traced for you,” said Albertgallantly.“Yes? but I doubt that your object was like theirs—to rescue theHoly Sepulchre.”“You are quite right, Beauchamp,” observed the young aristocrat.“It was only to fight as an amateur. I cannot bear duelling ever sincetwo seconds, whom I had chosen to arrange an affair, forced me to break the armof one of my best friends, one whom you all know—poor Franzd’Épinay.”“Ah, true,” said Debray, “you did fight some time ago; aboutwhat?”“The devil take me, if I remember,” returned Château-Renaud.“But I recollect perfectly one thing, that, being unwilling to let suchtalents as mine sleep, I wished to try upon the Arabs the new pistols that hadbeen given to me. In consequence I embarked for Oran, and went from thence toConstantine, where I arrived just in time to witness the raising of the siege.I retreated with the rest, for eight-and-forty hours. I endured the rain duringthe day, and the cold during the night tolerably well, but the third morning myhorse died of cold. Poor brute—accustomed to be covered up and to have astove in the stable, the Arabian finds himself unable to bear ten degrees ofcold in Arabia.”“That’s why you want to purchase my English horse,” saidDebray, “you think he will bear the cold better.”“You are mistaken, for I have made a vow never to return toAfrica.”“You were very much frightened, then?” asked Beauchamp.“Well, yes, and I had good reason to be so,” repliedChâteau-Renaud. “I was retreating on foot, for my horse was dead. SixArabs came up, full gallop, to cut off my head. I shot two with mydouble-barrelled gun, and two more with my pistols, but I was then disarmed,and two were still left; one seized me by the hair (that is why I now wear itso short, for no one knows what may happen), the other swung a yataghan, and Ialready felt the cold steel on my neck, when this gentleman whom you see herecharged them, shot the one who held me by the hair, and cleft the skull of theother with his sabre. He had assigned himself the task of saving a man’slife that day; chance caused that man to be myself. When I am rich I will ordera statue of Chance from Klagmann or Marochetti.”“Yes,” said Morrel, smiling, “it was the 5th of September,the anniversary of the day on which my father was miraculously preserved;therefore, as far as it lies in my power, I endeavor to celebrate it bysome——”“Heroic action,” interrupted Château-Renaud. “I was chosen.But that is not all—after rescuing me from the sword, he rescued me fromthe cold, not by sharing his cloak with me, like St. Martin, but by giving methe whole; then from hunger by sharing with me—guess what?”“A Strasbourg pie?” asked Beauchamp.“No, his horse; of which we each of us ate a slice with a heartyappetite. It was very hard.”“The horse?” said Morcerf, laughing.“No, the sacrifice,” returned Château-Renaud; “ask Debray ifhe would sacrifice his English steed for a stranger?”“Not for a stranger,” said Debray, “but for a friend I might,perhaps.”“I divined that you would become mine, count,” replied Morrel;“besides, as I had the honor to tell you, heroism or not, sacrifice ornot, that day I owed an offering to bad fortune in recompense for the favorsgood fortune had on other days granted to us.”“The history to which M. Morrel alludes,” continued Château-Renaud,“is an admirable one, which he will tell you some day when you are betteracquainted with him; today let us fill our stomachs, and not our memories. Whattime do you breakfast, Albert?”“At half-past ten.”“Precisely?” asked Debray, taking out his watch.“Oh, you will give me five minutes’ grace,” replied Morcerf,“for I also expect a preserver.”“Of whom?”“Of myself,” cried Morcerf; “parbleu! do you think Icannot be saved as well as anyone else, and that there are only Arabs who cutoff heads? Our breakfast is a philanthropic one, and we shall have attable—at least, I hope so—two benefactors of humanity.”“What shall we do?” said Debray; “we have only one Monthyonprize.”“Well, it will be given to someone who has done nothing to deserveit,” said Beauchamp; “that is the way the Academy mostly escapesfrom the dilemma.”“And where does he come from?” asked Debray. “You havealready answered the question once, but so vaguely that I venture to put it asecond time.”“Really,” said Albert, “I do not know; when I invited himthree months ago, he was then at Rome, but since that time who knows where hemay have gone?”“And you think him capable of being exact?” demanded Debray.“I think him capable of everything.”“Well, with the five minutes’ grace, we have only ten left.”“I will profit by them to tell you something about my guest.”“I beg pardon,” interrupted Beauchamp; “are there anymaterials for an article in what you are going to tell us?”“Yes, and for a most curious one.”“Go on, then, for I see I shall not get to the Chamber this morning, andI must make up for it.”“I was at Rome during the last Carnival.”“We know that,” said Beauchamp.“Yes, but what you do not know is that I was carried off bybandits.”“There are no bandits,” cried Debray.“Yes there are, and most hideous, or rather most admirable ones, for Ifound them ugly enough to frighten me.”“Come, my dear Albert,” said Debray, “confess that your cookis behindhand, that the oysters have not arrived from Ostend or Marennes, andthat, like Madame de Maintenon, you are going to replace the dish by a story.Say so at once; we are sufficiently well-bred to excuse you, and to listen toyour history, fabulous as it promises to be.”“And I say to you, fabulous as it may seem, I tell it as a true one frombeginning to end. The brigands had carried me off, and conducted me to a gloomyspot, called the Catacombs of Saint Sebastian.”“I know it,” said Château-Renaud; “I narrowly escapedcatching a fever there.”“And I did more than that,” replied Morcerf, “for I caughtone. I was informed that I was prisoner until I paid the sum of 4,000 Romancrowns—about 24,000 francs. Unfortunately, I had not above 1,500. I wasat the end of my journey and of my credit. I wrote to Franz—and were hehere he would confirm every word—I wrote then to Franz that if he did notcome with the four thousand crowns before six, at ten minutes past I shouldhave gone to join the blessed saints and glorious martyrs in whose company Ihad the honor of being; and Signor Luigi Vampa, such was the name of the chiefof these bandits, would have scrupulously kept his word.”“But Franz did come with the four thousand crowns,” saidChâteau-Renaud. “A man whose name is Franz d’Épinay or Albert deMorcerf has not much difficulty in procuring them.”“No, he arrived accompanied simply by the guest I am going to present toyou.”“Ah, this gentleman is a Hercules killing Cacus, a Perseus freeingAndromeda.”“No, he is a man about my own size.”“Armed to the teeth?”“He had not even a knitting-needle.”“But he paid your ransom?”“He said two words to the chief and I was free.”“And they apologized to him for having carried you off?” saidBeauchamp.“Just so.”“Why, he is a second Ariosto.”“No, his name is the Count of Monte Cristo.”“There is no Count of Monte Cristo” said Debray.“I do not think so,” added Château-Renaud, with the air of a manwho knows the whole of the European nobility perfectly.“Does anyone know anything of a Count of Monte Cristo?”“He comes possibly from the Holy Land, and one of his ancestors possessedCalvary, as the Mortemarts did the Dead Sea.”“I think I can assist your researches,” said Maximilian.“Monte Cristo is a little island I have often heard spoken of by the oldsailors my father employed—a grain of sand in the centre of theMediterranean, an atom in the infinite.”“Precisely!” cried Albert. “Well, he of whom I speak is thelord and master of this grain of sand, of this atom; he has purchased the titleof count somewhere in Tuscany.”“He is rich, then?”“I believe so.”“But that ought to be visible.”“That is what deceives you, Debray.”“I do not understand you.”“Have you read the Arabian Nights?”“What a question!”“Well, do you know if the persons you see there are rich or poor, iftheir sacks of wheat are not rubies or diamonds? They seem like poor fishermen,and suddenly they open some mysterious cavern filled with the wealth of theIndies.”“Which means?”“Which means that my Count of Monte Cristo is one of those fishermen. Hehas even a name taken from the book, since he calls himself Sinbad the Sailor,and has a cave filled with gold.”“And you have seen this cavern, Morcerf?” asked Beauchamp.“No, but Franz has; for heaven’s sake, not a word of this beforehim. Franz went in with his eyes blindfolded, and was waited on by mutes and bywomen to whom Cleopatra was a painted strumpet. Only he is not quite sure aboutthe women, for they did not come in until after he had taken hashish, so thatwhat he took for women might have been simply a row of statues.”The two young men looked at Morcerf as if to say,—“Are you mad, orare you laughing at us?”“And I also,” said Morrel thoughtfully, “have heard somethinglike this from an old sailor named Penelon.”“Ah,” cried Albert, “it is very lucky that M. Morrel comes toaid me; you are vexed, are you not, that he thus gives a clew to thelabyrinth?”“My dear Albert,” said Debray, “what you tell us is soextraordinary.”“Ah, because your ambassadors and your consuls do not tell you ofthem—they have no time. They are too much taken up with interfering inthe affairs of their countrymen who travel.”“Now you get angry, and attack our poor agents. How will you have themprotect you? The Chamber cuts down their salaries every day, so that now theyhave scarcely any. Will you be ambassador, Albert? I will send you toConstantinople.”“No, lest on the first demonstration I make in favor of Mehemet Ali, theSultan send me the bowstring, and make my secretaries strangle me.”“You say very true,” responded Debray.“Yes,” said Albert, “but this has nothing to do with theexistence of the Count of Monte Cristo.”“Pardieu! everyone exists.”“Doubtless, but not in the same way; everyone has not black slaves, aprincely retinue, an arsenal of weapons that would do credit to an Arabianfortress, horses that cost six thousand francs apiece, and Greekmistresses.”“Have you seen the Greek mistress?”“I have both seen and heard her. I saw her at the theatre, and heard herone morning when I breakfasted with the count.”“He eats, then?”“Yes; but so little, it can hardly be called eating.”“He must be a vampire.”“Laugh, if you will; the Countess G——, who knew Lord Ruthven,declared that the count was a vampire.”“Ah, capital,” said Beauchamp. “For a man not connected withnewspapers, here is the pendant to the famous sea-serpent of theConstitutionnel.”“Wild eyes, the iris of which contracts or dilates at pleasure,”said Debray; “facial angle strongly developed, magnificent forehead,livid complexion, black beard, sharp and white teeth, politenessunexceptionable.”“Just so, Lucien,” returned Morcerf; “you have described himfeature for feature. Yes, keen and cutting politeness. This man has often mademe shudder; and one day when we were viewing an execution, I thought I shouldfaint, more from hearing the cold and calm manner in which he spoke of everydescription of torture, than from the sight of the executioner and theculprit.”“Did he not conduct you to the ruins of the Colosseum and suck yourblood?” asked Beauchamp.“Or, having delivered you, make you sign a flaming parchment,surrendering your soul to him as Esau did his birth-right?”“Rail on, rail on at your ease, gentlemen,” said Morcerf, somewhatpiqued. “When I look at you Parisians, idlers on the Boulevard de Gand orthe Bois de Boulogne, and think of this man, it seems to me we are not of thesame race.”“I am highly flattered,” returned Beauchamp.“At the same time,” added Château-Renaud, “your Count ofMonte Cristo is a very fine fellow, always excepting his little arrangementswith the Italian banditti.”“There are no Italian banditti,” said Debray.“No vampire,” cried Beauchamp.“No Count of Monte Cristo” added Debray. “There is half-pastten striking, Albert.”“Confess you have dreamed this, and let us sit down to breakfast,”continued Beauchamp.But the sound of the clock had not died away when Germain announced, “Hisexcellency the Count of Monte Cristo.” The involuntary start everyonegave proved how much Morcerf’s narrative had impressed them, and Alberthimself could not wholly refrain from manifesting sudden emotion. He had notheard a carriage stop in the street, or steps in the antechamber; the door haditself opened noiselessly. The count appeared, dressed with the greatestsimplicity, but the most fastidious dandy could have found nothing to cavil atin his toilet. Every article of dress—hat, coat, gloves, andboots—was from the first makers. He seemed scarcely five-and-thirty. Butwhat struck everybody was his extreme resemblance to the portrait Debray haddrawn. The count advanced, smiling, into the centre of the room, and approachedAlbert, who hastened towards him holding out his hand in a ceremonial manner.“Punctuality,” said Monte Cristo, “is the politeness ofkings, according to one of your sovereigns, I think; but it is not the samewith travellers. However, I hope you will excuse the two or three seconds I ambehindhand; five hundred leagues are not to be accomplished without sometrouble, and especially in France, where, it seems, it is forbidden to beat thepostilions.”“My dear count,” replied Albert, “I was announcing your visitto some of my friends, whom I had invited in consequence of the promise you didme the honor to make, and whom I now present to you. They are the Count ofChâteau-Renaud, whose nobility goes back to the twelve peers, and whoseancestors had a place at the Round Table; M. Lucien Debray, private secretaryto the minister of the interior; M. Beauchamp, an editor of a paper, and theterror of the French government, but of whom, in spite of his nationalcelebrity, you perhaps have not heard in Italy, since his paper is prohibitedthere; and M. Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis.”At this name the count, who had hitherto saluted everyone with courtesy, but atthe same time with coldness and formality, stepped a pace forward, and a slighttinge of red colored his pale cheeks.“You wear the uniform of the new French conquerors, monsieur,” saidhe; “it is a handsome uniform.”No one could have said what caused the count’s voice to vibrate sodeeply, and what made his eye flash, which was in general so clear, lustrous,and limpid when he pleased.“You have never seen our Africans, count?” said Albert.“Never,” replied the count, who was by this time perfectly masterof himself again.“Well, beneath this uniform beats one of the bravest and noblest heartsin the whole army.”“Oh, M. de Morcerf,” interrupted Morrel.“Let me go on, captain. And we have just heard,” continued Albert,“of a new deed of his, and so heroic a one, that, although I have seenhim today for the first time, I request you to allow me to introduce him as myfriend.”At these words it was still possible to observe in Monte Cristo theconcentrated look, changing color, and slight trembling of the eyelid that showemotion.“Ah, you have a noble heart,” said the count; “so much thebetter.”This exclamation, which corresponded to the count’s own thought ratherthan to what Albert was saying, surprised everybody, and especially Morrel, wholooked at Monte Cristo with wonder. But, at the same time, the intonation wasso soft that, however strange the speech might seem, it was impossible to beoffended at it.“Why should he doubt it?” said Beauchamp to Château-Renaud.“In reality,” replied the latter, who, with his aristocratic glanceand his knowledge of the world, had penetrated at once all that was penetrablein Monte Cristo, “Albert has not deceived us, for the count is a mostsingular being. What say you, Morrel!”“Ma foi, he has an open look about him that pleases me, in spiteof the singular remark he has made about me.”“Gentlemen,” said Albert, “Germain informs me that breakfastis ready. My dear count, allow me to show you the way.” They passedsilently into the breakfast-room, and everyone took his place.“Gentlemen,” said the count, seating himself, “permit me tomake a confession which must form my excuse for any improprieties I may commit.I am a stranger, and a stranger to such a degree, that this is the first time Ihave ever been at Paris. The French way of living is utterly unknown to me, andup to the present time I have followed the Eastern customs, which are entirelyin contrast to the Parisian. I beg you, therefore, to excuse if you findanything in me too Turkish, too Italian, or too Arabian. Now, then, let usbreakfast.”“With what an air he says all this,” muttered Beauchamp;“decidedly he is a great man.”“A great man in his own country,” added Debray.“A great man in every country, M. Debray,” said Château-Renaud.The count was, it may be remembered, a most temperate guest. Albert remarkedthis, expressing his fears lest, at the outset, the Parisian mode of lifeshould displease the traveller in the most essential point.“My dear count,” said he, “I fear one thing, and that is,that the fare of the Rue du Helder is not so much to your taste as that of thePiazza di Spagna. I ought to have consulted you on the point, and have had somedishes prepared expressly.”“Did you know me better,” returned the count, smiling, “youwould not give one thought of such a thing for a traveller like myself, who hassuccessively lived on macaroni at Naples, polenta at Milan, olla podrida atValencia, pilau at Constantinople, curry in India, and swallows’ nests inChina. I eat everywhere, and of everything, only I eat but little; and today,that you reproach me with my want of appetite, is my day of appetite, for Ihave not eaten since yesterday morning.”“What,” cried all the guests, “you have not eaten forfour-and-twenty hours?”“No,” replied the count; “I was forced to go out of my roadto obtain some information near Nîmes, so that I was somewhat late, andtherefore I did not choose to stop.”“And you ate in your carriage?” asked Morcerf.“No, I slept, as I generally do when I am weary without having thecourage to amuse myself, or when I am hungry without feeling inclined toeat.”“But you can sleep when you please, monsieur?” said Morrel.“Yes.”“You have a recipe for it?”“An infallible one.”“That would be invaluable to us in Africa, who have not always any foodto eat, and rarely anything to drink.”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “but, unfortunately, a recipeexcellent for a man like myself would be very dangerous applied to an army,which might not awake when it was needed.”“May we inquire what is this recipe?” asked Debray.“Oh, yes,” returned Monte Cristo; “I make no secret of it. Itis a mixture of excellent opium, which I fetched myself from Canton in order tohave it pure, and the best hashish which grows in the East—that is,between the Tigris and the Euphrates. These two ingredients are mixed in equalproportions, and formed into pills. Ten minutes after one is taken, the effectis produced. Ask Baron Franz d’Épinay; I think he tasted them oneday.”“Yes,” replied Morcerf, “he said something about it tome.”“But,” said Beauchamp, who, as became a journalist, was veryincredulous, “you always carry this drug about you?”“Always.”“Would it be an indiscretion to ask to see those precious pills?”continued Beauchamp, hoping to take him at a disadvantage.“No, monsieur,” returned the count; and he drew from his pocket amarvellous casket, formed out of a single emerald and closed by a golden lidwhich unscrewed and gave passage to a small greenish colored pellet about thesize of a pea. This ball had an acrid and penetrating odor. There were four orfive more in the emerald, which would contain about a dozen. The casket passedaround the table, but it was more to examine the admirable emerald than to seethe pills that it passed from hand to hand.“And is it your cook who prepares these pills?” asked Beauchamp.“Oh, no, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I do not thusbetray my enjoyments to the vulgar. I am a tolerable chemist, and prepare mypills myself.”“This is a magnificent emerald, and the largest I have ever seen,”said Château-Renaud, “although my mother has some remarkable familyjewels.”“I had three similar ones,” returned Monte Cristo. “I gaveone to the Sultan, who mounted it in his sabre; another to our holy father thePope, who had it set in his tiara, opposite to one nearly as large, though notso fine, given by the Emperor Napoleon to his predecessor, Pius VII. I kept thethird for myself, and I had it hollowed out, which reduced its value, butrendered it more commodious for the purpose I intended.”Everyone looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment; he spoke with so muchsimplicity that it was evident he spoke the truth, or that he was mad. However,the sight of the emerald made them naturally incline to the former belief.“And what did these two sovereigns give you in exchange for thesemagnificent presents?” asked Debray.“The Sultan, the liberty of a woman,” replied the Count; “thePope, the life of a man; so that once in my life I have been as powerful as ifheaven had brought me into the world on the steps of a throne.”“And it was Peppino you saved, was it not?” cried Morcerf;“it was for him that you obtained pardon?”“Perhaps,” returned the count, smiling.“My dear count, you have no idea what pleasure it gives me to hear youspeak thus,” said Morcerf. “I had announced you beforehand to myfriends as an enchanter of the Arabian Nights, a wizard of the MiddleAges; but the Parisians are so subtle in paradoxes that they mistake forcaprices of the imagination the most incontestable truths, when these truths donot form a part of their daily existence. For example, here is Debray whoreads, and Beauchamp who prints, every day, ‘A member of the Jockey Clubhas been stopped and robbed on the Boulevard;’ ‘four persons havebeen assassinated in the Rue St. Denis’ or ‘the Faubourg St.Germain;’ ‘ten, fifteen, or twenty thieves, have been arrested in acafé on the Boulevard du Temple, or in the Thermes deJulien,’—and yet these same men deny the existence of the banditsin the Maremma, the Campagna di Romana, or the Pontine Marshes. Tell themyourself that I was taken by bandits, and that without your generousintercession I should now have been sleeping in the Catacombs of St. Sebastian,instead of receiving them in my humble abode in the Rue du Helder.”“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “you promised me never to mentionthat circumstance.”“It was not I who made that promise,” cried Morcerf; “it musthave been someone else whom you have rescued in the same manner, and whom youhave forgotten. Pray speak of it, for I shall not only, I trust, relate thelittle I do know, but also a great deal I do not know.”“It seems to me,” returned the count, smiling, “that youplayed a sufficiently important part to know as well as myself whathappened.”“Well, you promise me, if I tell all I know, to relate, in your turn, allthat I do not know?”“That is but fair,” replied Monte Cristo.“Well,” said Morcerf, “for three days I believed myself theobject of the attentions of a masque, whom I took for a descendant of Tullia orPoppæa, while I was simply the object of the attentions of a contadina,and I say contadina to avoid saying peasant girl. What I know is, that,like a fool, a greater fool than he of whom I spoke just now, I mistook forthis peasant girl a young bandit of fifteen or sixteen, with a beardless chinand slim waist, and who, just as I was about to imprint a chaste salute on hislips, placed a pistol to my head, and, aided by seven or eight others, led, orrather dragged me, to the Catacombs of St. Sebastian, where I found a highlyeducated brigand chief perusing Cæsar’s Commentaries, and whodeigned to leave off reading to inform me, that unless the next morning, beforesix o’clock, four thousand piastres were paid into his account at hisbanker’s, at a quarter past six I should have ceased to exist. The letteris still to be seen, for it is in Franz d’Épinay’s possession,signed by me, and with a postscript of M. Luigi Vampa. This is all I know, butI know not, count, how you contrived to inspire so much respect in the banditsof Rome who ordinarily have so little respect for anything. I assure you, Franzand I were lost in admiration.”“Nothing more simple,” returned the count. “I had known thefamous Vampa for more than ten years. When he was quite a child, and only ashepherd, I gave him a few gold pieces for showing me my way, and he, in orderto repay me, gave me a poniard, the hilt of which he had carved with his ownhand, and which you may have seen in my collection of arms. In after years,whether he had forgotten this interchange of presents, which ought to havecemented our friendship, or whether he did not recollect me, he sought to takeme, but, on the contrary, it was I who captured him and a dozen of his band. Imight have handed him over to Roman justice, which is somewhat expeditious, andwhich would have been particularly so with him; but I did nothing of thesort—I suffered him and his band to depart.”“With the condition that they should sin no more,” said Beauchamp,laughing. “I see they kept their promise.”“No, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo “upon the simplecondition that they should respect myself and my friends. Perhaps what I amabout to say may seem strange to you, who are socialists, and vaunt humanityand your duty to your neighbor, but I never seek to protect a society whichdoes not protect me, and which I will even say, generally occupies itself aboutme only to injure me; and thus by giving them a low place in my esteem, andpreserving a neutrality towards them, it is society and my neighbor who areindebted to me.”“Bravo,” cried Château-Renaud; “you are the first man I evermet sufficiently courageous to preach egotism. Bravo, count, bravo!”“It is frank, at least,” said Morrel. “But I am sure that thecount does not regret having once deviated from the principles he has so boldlyavowed.”“How have I deviated from those principles, monsieur?” asked MonteCristo, who could not help looking at Morrel with so much intensity, that twoor three times the young man had been unable to sustain that clear and piercingglance.“Why, it seems to me,” replied Morrel, “that in delivering M.de Morcerf, whom you did not know, you did good to your neighbor and tosociety.”“Of which he is the brightest ornament,” said Beauchamp, drinkingoff a glass of champagne.“My dear count,” cried Morcerf, “you are at fault—you,one of the most formidable logicians I know—and you must see it clearlyproved that instead of being an egotist, you are a philanthropist. Ah, you callyourself Oriental, a Levantine, Maltese, Indian, Chinese; your family name isMonte Cristo; Sinbad the Sailor is your baptismal appellation, and yet thefirst day you set foot in Paris you instinctively display the greatest virtue,or rather the chief defect, of us eccentric Parisians,—that is, youassume the vices you have not, and conceal the virtues you possess.”“My dear vicomte,” returned Monte Cristo, “I do not see, inall I have done, anything that merits, either from you or these gentlemen, thepretended eulogies I have received. You were no stranger to me, for I knew youfrom the time I gave up two rooms to you, invited you to breakfast with me,lent you one of my carriages, witnessed the Carnival in your company, and sawwith you from a window in the Piazza del Popolo the execution that affected youso much that you nearly fainted. I will appeal to any of these gentlemen, couldI leave my guest in the hands of a hideous bandit, as you term him? Besides,you know, I had the idea that you could introduce me into some of the Parissalons when I came to France. You might some time ago have looked upon thisresolution as a vague project, but today you see it was a reality, and you mustsubmit to it under penalty of breaking your word.”“I will keep it,” returned Morcerf; “but I fear that you willbe much disappointed, accustomed as you are to picturesque events and fantastichorizons. Amongst us you will not meet with any of those episodes with whichyour adventurous existence has so familiarized you; our Chimborazo isMortmartre, our Himalaya is Mount Valérien, our Great Desert is the plain ofGrenelle, where they are now boring an artesian well to water the caravans. Wehave plenty of thieves, though not so many as is said; but these thieves standin far more dread of a policeman than a lord. France is so prosaic, and Parisso civilized a city, that you will not find in its eighty-fivedepartments—I say eighty-five, because I do not include Corsica—youwill not find, then, in these eighty-five departments a single hill on whichthere is not a telegraph, or a grotto in which the commissary of police has notput up a gaslamp. There is but one service I can render you, and for that Iplace myself entirely at your orders, that is, to present, or make my friendspresent, you everywhere; besides, you have no need of anyone to introduceyou—with your name, and your fortune, and your talent” (MonteCristo bowed with a somewhat ironical smile) “you can present yourselfeverywhere, and be well received. I can be useful in one way only—ifknowledge of Parisian habits, of the means of rendering yourself comfortable,or of the bazaars, can assist, you may depend upon me to find you a fittingdwelling here. I do not dare offer to share my apartments with you, as I sharedyours at Rome—I, who do not profess egotism, but am yet egotist parexcellence; for, except myself, these rooms would not hold a shadow more,unless that shadow were feminine.”“Ah,” said the count, “that is a most conjugal reservation; Irecollect that at Rome you said something of a projected marriage. May Icongratulate you?”“The affair is still in projection.”“And he who says in ‘projection,’ means alreadydecided,” said Debray.“No,” replied Morcerf, “my father is most anxious about it;and I hope, ere long, to introduce you, if not to my wife, at least to mybetrothed—Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars.”“Eugénie Danglars,” said Monte Cristo; “tell me, is not herfather Baron Danglars?”“Yes,” returned Morcerf, “a baron of a new creation.”“What matter,” said Monte Cristo “if he has rendered theState services which merit this distinction?”“Enormous ones,” answered Beauchamp. “Although in reality aLiberal, he negotiated a loan of six millions for Charles X., in 1829, who madehim a baron and chevalier of the Legion of Honor; so that he wears the ribbon,not, as you would think, in his waistcoat-pocket, but at hisbutton-hole.”“Ah,” interrupted Morcerf, laughing, “Beauchamp, Beauchamp,keep that for the Corsaire or the Charivari, but spare my futurefather-in-law before me.” Then, turning to Monte Cristo, “You justnow spoke his name as if you knew the baron?”“I do not know him,” returned Monte Cristo; “but I shallprobably soon make his acquaintance, for I have a credit opened with him by thehouse of Richard & Blount, of London, Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna, andThomson & French at Rome.” As he pronounced the two last names, thecount glanced at Maximilian Morrel. If the stranger expected to produce aneffect on Morrel, he was not mistaken—Maximilian started as if he hadbeen electrified.“Thomson & French,” said he; “do you know this house,monsieur?”“They are my bankers in the capital of the Christian world,”returned the count quietly. “Can my influence with them be of any serviceto you?”“Oh, count, you could assist me perhaps in researches which have been, upto the present, fruitless. This house, in past years, did ours a great service,and has, I know not for what reason, always denied having rendered us thisservice.”“I shall be at your orders,” said Monte Cristo bowing.“But,” continued Morcerf, “à propos ofDanglars,—we have strangely wandered from the subject. We were speakingof a suitable habitation for the Count of Monte Cristo. Come, gentlemen, let usall propose some place. Where shall we lodge this new guest in our greatcapital?”“Faubourg Saint-Germain,” said Château-Renaud. “The countwill find there a charming hotel, with a court and garden.”“Bah! Château-Renaud,” returned Debray, “you only know yourdull and gloomy Faubourg Saint-Germain; do not pay any attention to him,count—live in the Chaussée d’Antin, that’s the real centre ofParis.”“Boulevard de l’Opéra,” said Beauchamp; “the secondfloor—a house with a balcony. The count will have his cushions of silvercloth brought there, and as he smokes his chibouque, see all Paris pass beforehim.”“You have no idea, then, Morrel?” asked Château-Renaud; “youdo not propose anything.”“Oh, yes,” returned the young man, smiling; “on the contrary,I have one, but I expected the count would be tempted by one of the brilliantproposals made him, yet as he has not replied to any of them, I will venture tooffer him a suite of apartments in a charming hotel, in the Pompadour style,that my sister has inhabited for a year, in the Rue Meslay.”“You have a sister?” asked the count.“Yes, monsieur, a most excellent sister.”“Married?”“Nearly nine years.”“Happy?” asked the count again.“As happy as it is permitted to a human creature to be,” repliedMaximilian. “She married the man she loved, who remained faithful to usin our fallen fortunes—Emmanuel Herbaut.”Monte Cristo smiled imperceptibly.“I live there during my leave of absence,” continued Maximilian;“and I shall be, together with my brother-in-law Emmanuel, at thedisposition of the Count, whenever he thinks fit to honor us.”“One minute,” cried Albert, without giving Monte Cristo the time toreply. “Take care, you are going to immure a traveller, Sinbad theSailor, a man who comes to see Paris; you are going to make a patriarch ofhim.”“Oh, no,” said Morrel; “my sister is five-and-twenty, mybrother-in-law is thirty, they are gay, young, and happy. Besides, the countwill be in his own house, and only see them when he thinks fit to do so.”“Thanks, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo; “I shall contentmyself with being presented to your sister and her husband, if you will do methe honor to introduce me; but I cannot accept the offer of anyone of thesegentlemen, since my habitation is already prepared.”“What,” cried Morcerf; “you are, then, going to ahotel—that will be very dull for you.”“Was I so badly lodged at Rome?” said Monte Cristo smiling.“Parbleu! at Rome you spent fifty thousand piastres in furnishingyour apartments, but I presume that you are not disposed to spend a similar sumevery day.”“It is not that which deterred me,” replied Monte Cristo;“but as I determined to have a house to myself, I sent on my valet dechambre, and he ought by this time to have bought the house and furnishedit.”“But you have, then, a valet de chambre who knows Paris?” saidBeauchamp.“It is the first time he has ever been in Paris. He is black, and cannotspeak,” returned Monte Cristo.“It is Ali!” cried Albert, in the midst of the general surprise.“Yes, Ali himself, my Nubian mute, whom you saw, I think, at Rome.”“Certainly,” said Morcerf; “I recollect him perfectly. Buthow could you charge a Nubian to purchase a house, and a mute to furnishit?—he will do everything wrong.”“Undeceive yourself, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo; “I amquite sure, that, on the contrary, he will choose everything as I wish. Heknows my tastes, my caprices, my wants. He has been here a week, with theinstinct of a hound, hunting by himself. He will arrange everything for me. Heknew, that I should arrive today at ten o’clock; he was waiting for me atnine at the Barrière de Fontainebleau. He gave me this paper; it contains thenumber of my new abode; read it yourself,” and Monte Cristo passed apaper to Albert.“Ah, that is really original,” said Beauchamp.“And very princely,” added Château-Renaud.“What, do you not know your house?” asked Debray.“No,” said Monte Cristo; “I told you I did not wish to bebehind my time; I dressed myself in the carriage, and descended at theviscount’s door.” The young men looked at each other; they did notknow if it was a comedy Monte Cristo was playing, but every word he uttered hadsuch an air of simplicity, that it was impossible to suppose what he said wasfalse—besides, why should he tell a falsehood?“We must content ourselves, then,” said Beauchamp, “withrendering the count all the little services in our power. I, in my quality ofjournalist, open all the theatres to him.”“Thanks, monsieur,” returned Monte Cristo, “my steward hasorders to take a box at each theatre.”“Is your steward also a Nubian?” asked Debray.“No, he is a countryman of yours, if a Corsican is a countryman ofanyone’s. But you know him, M. de Morcerf.”“Is it that excellent M. Bertuccio, who understands hiring windows sowell?”“Yes, you saw him the day I had the honor of receiving you; he has been asoldier, a smuggler—in fact, everything. I would not be quite sure thathe has not been mixed up with the police for some trifle—a stab with aknife, for instance.”“And you have chosen this honest citizen for your steward,” saidDebray. “Of how much does he rob you every year?”“On my word,” replied the count, “not more than another. I amsure he answers my purpose, knows no impossibility, and so I keep him.”“Then,” continued Château-Renaud, “since you have anestablishment, a steward, and a hotel in the Champs-Élysées, you only want amistress.” Albert smiled. He thought of the fair Greek he had seen in thecount’s box at the Argentina and Valle theatres.“I have something better than that,” said Monte Cristo; “Ihave a slave. You procure your mistresses from the opera, the Vaudeville, orthe Variétés; I purchased mine at Constantinople; it cost me more, but I havenothing to fear.”“But you forget,” replied Debray, laughing, “that we areFranks by name and franks by nature, as King Charles said, and that the momentshe puts her foot in France your slave becomes free.”“Who will tell her?”“The first person who sees her.”“She only speaks Romaic.”“That is different.”“But at least we shall see her,” said Beauchamp, “or do youkeep eunuchs as well as mutes?”“Oh, no,” replied Monte Cristo; “I do not carry brutalism sofar. Everyone who surrounds me is free to quit me, and when they leave me willno longer have any need of me or anyone else; it is for that reason, perhaps,that they do not quit me.”They had long since passed to dessert and cigars.“My dear Albert,” said Debray, rising, “it is half-past two.Your guest is charming, but you leave the best company to go into the worstsometimes. I must return to the minister’s. I will tell him of the count,and we shall soon know who he is.”“Take care,” returned Albert; “no one has been able toaccomplish that.”“Oh, we have three millions for our police; it is true they are almostalways spent beforehand, but, no matter, we shall still have fifty thousandfrancs to spend for this purpose.”“And when you know, will you tell me?”“I promise you. Au revoir, Albert. Gentlemen, good morning.”As he left the room, Debray called out loudly, “My carriage.”“Bravo,” said Beauchamp to Albert; “I shall not go to theChamber, but I have something better to offer my readers than a speech of M.Danglars.”“For heaven’s sake, Beauchamp,” returned Morcerf, “donot deprive me of the merit of introducing him everywhere. Is he notpeculiar?”“He is more than that,” replied Château-Renaud; “he is one ofthe most extraordinary men I ever saw in my life. Are you coming,Morrel?”“Directly I have given my card to the count, who has promised to pay us avisit at Rue Meslay, No. 14.”“Be sure I shall not fail to do so,” returned the count, bowing.And Maximilian Morrel left the room with the Baron de Château-Renaud, leavingMonte Cristo alone with Morcerf. Chapter 41. ThePresentationWhen Albert foundhimself alone with Monte Cristo, “My dear count,” said he,“allow me to commence my services as cicerone by showing you aspecimen of a bachelor’s apartment. You, who are accustomed to thepalaces of Italy, can amuse yourself by calculating in how many square feet ayoung man who is not the worst lodged in Paris can live. As we pass from oneroom to another, I will open the windows to let you breathe.”Monte Cristo had already seen the breakfast-room and the salon on the groundfloor. Albert led him first to his atelier, which was, as we have said,his favorite apartment. Monte Cristo quickly appreciated all that Albert hadcollected here—old cabinets, Japanese porcelain, Oriental stuffs,Venetian glass, arms from all parts of the world—everything was familiarto him; and at the first glance he recognized their date, their country, andtheir origin.Morcerf had expected he should be the guide; on the contrary, it was he who,under the count’s guidance, followed a course of archæology, mineralogy,and natural history.They descended to the first floor; Albert led his guest into the salon. Thesalon was filled with the works of modern artists; there were landscapes byDupré, with their long reeds and tall trees, their lowing oxen and marvellousskies; Delacroix’s Arabian cavaliers, with their long white burnouses,their shining belts, their damasked arms, their horses, who tore each otherwith their teeth while their riders contended fiercely with their maces;aquarelles of Boulanger, representing Notre Dame de Paris with thatvigor that makes the artist the rival of the poet; there were paintings byDiaz, who makes his flowers more beautiful than flowers, his suns morebrilliant than the sun; designs by Decamp, as vividly colored as those ofSalvator Rosa, but more poetic; pastels by Giraud and Müller,representing children like angels and women with the features of a virgin;sketches torn from the album of Dauzats’ “Travels in theEast,” that had been made in a few seconds on the saddle of a camel, orbeneath the dome of a mosque—in a word, all that modern art can give inexchange and as recompense for the art lost and gone with ages long since past.Albert expected to have something new this time to show to the traveller, but,to his great surprise, the latter, without seeking for the signatures, many ofwhich, indeed, were only initials, named instantly the author of every picturein such a manner that it was easy to see that each name was not only known tohim, but that each style associated with it had been appreciated and studied byhim. From the salon they passed into the bedchamber; it was a model of tasteand simple elegance. A single portrait, signed by Léopold Robert, shone in itscarved and gilded frame. This portrait attracted the Count of MonteCristo’s attention, for he made three rapid steps in the chamber, andstopped suddenly before it.It was the portrait of a young woman of five or six-and-twenty, with a darkcomplexion, and light and lustrous eyes, veiled beneath long lashes. She worethe picturesque costume of the Catalan fisherwomen, a red and black bodice, andgolden pins in her hair. She was looking at the sea, and her form was outlinedon the blue ocean and sky. The light was so faint in the room that Albert didnot perceive the pallor that spread itself over the count’s visage, orthe nervous heaving of his chest and shoulders. Silence prevailed for aninstant, during which Monte Cristo gazed intently on the picture.“You have there a most charming mistress, viscount,” said the countin a perfectly calm tone; “and this costume—a ball costume,doubtless—becomes her admirably.”“Ah, monsieur,” returned Albert, “I would never forgive youthis mistake if you had seen another picture beside this. You do not know mymother; she it is whom you see here. She had her portrait painted thus six oreight years ago. This costume is a fancy one, it appears, and the resemblanceis so great that I think I still see my mother the same as she was in 1830. Thecountess had this portrait painted during the count’s absence. Shedoubtless intended giving him an agreeable surprise; but, strange to say, thisportrait seemed to displease my father, and the value of the picture, which is,as you see, one of the best works of Léopold Robert, could not overcome hisdislike to it. It is true, between ourselves, that M. de Morcerf is one of themost assiduous peers at the Luxembourg, a general renowned for theory, but amost mediocre amateur of art. It is different with my mother, who paintsexceedingly well, and who, unwilling to part with so valuable a picture, gaveit to me to put here, where it would be less likely to displease M. de Morcerf,whose portrait, by Gros, I will also show you. Excuse my talking of familymatters, but as I shall have the honor of introducing you to the count, I tellyou this to prevent you making any allusions to this picture. The picture seemsto have a malign influence, for my mother rarely comes here without looking atit, and still more rarely does she look at it without weeping. Thisdisagreement is the only one that has ever taken place between the count andcountess, who are still as much united, although married more than twentyyears, as on the first day of their wedding.”Monte Cristo glanced rapidly at Albert, as if to seek a hidden meaning in hiswords, but it was evident the young man uttered them in the simplicity of hisheart.“Now,” said Albert, “that you have seen all my treasures,allow me to offer them to you, unworthy as they are. Consider yourself as inyour own house, and to put yourself still more at your ease, pray accompany meto the apartments of M. de Morcerf, he whom I wrote from Rome an account of theservices you rendered me, and to whom I announced your promised visit, and Imay say that both the count and countess anxiously desire to thank you inperson. You are somewhat blasé I know, and family scenes have not mucheffect on Sinbad the Sailor, who has seen so many others. However, accept whatI propose to you as an initiation into Parisian life—a life ofpoliteness, visiting, and introductions.”Monte Cristo bowed without making any answer; he accepted the offer withoutenthusiasm and without regret, as one of those conventions of society whichevery gentleman looks upon as a duty. Albert summoned his servant, and orderedhim to acquaint M. and Madame de Morcerf of the arrival of the Count of MonteCristo. Albert followed him with the count. When they arrived at theantechamber, above the door was visible a shield, which, by its rich ornamentsand its harmony with the rest of the furniture, indicated the importance theowner attached to this blazon. Monte Cristo stopped and examined itattentively.“Azure seven merlets, or, placed bender,” said he. “Theseare, doubtless, your family arms? Except the knowledge of blazons, that enablesme to decipher them, I am very ignorant of heraldry—I, a count of a freshcreation, fabricated in Tuscany by the aid of a commandery of St. Stephen, andwho would not have taken the trouble had I not been told that when you travelmuch it is necessary. Besides, you must have something on the panels of yourcarriage, to escape being searched by the custom-house officers. Excuse myputting such a question to you.”“It is not indiscreet,” returned Morcerf, with the simplicity ofconviction. “You have guessed rightly. These are our arms, that is, thoseof my father, but they are, as you see, joined to another shield, which hasgules, a silver tower, which are my mother’s. By her side I am Spanish,but the family of Morcerf is French, and, I have heard, one of the oldest ofthe south of France.”“Yes,” replied Monte Cristo “these blazons prove that. Almostall the armed pilgrims that went to the Holy Land took for their arms either across, in honor of their mission, or birds of passage, in sign of the longvoyage they were about to undertake, and which they hoped to accomplish on thewings of faith. One of your ancestors had joined the Crusades, and supposing itto be only that of St. Louis, that makes you mount to the thirteenth century,which is tolerably ancient.”“It is possible,” said Morcerf; “my father has in his study agenealogical tree which will tell you all that, and on which I madecommentaries that would have greatly edified d’Hozier and Jaucourt. Atpresent I no longer think of it, and yet I must tell you that we are beginningto occupy ourselves greatly with these things under our populargovernment.”“Well, then, your government would do well to choose from the pastsomething better than the things that I have noticed on your monuments, andwhich have no heraldic meaning whatever. As for you, viscount,” continuedMonte Cristo to Morcerf, “you are more fortunate than the government, foryour arms are really beautiful, and speak to the imagination. Yes, you are atonce from Provence and Spain; that explains, if the portrait you showed me belike, the dark hue I so much admired on the visage of the noble Catalan.”It would have required the penetration of Œdipus or the Sphinx to have divinedthe irony the count concealed beneath these words, apparently uttered with thegreatest politeness. Morcerf thanked him with a smile, and pushed open the doorabove which were his arms, and which, as we have said, opened into the salon.In the most conspicuous part of the salon was another portrait. It was that ofa man, from five to eight-and-thirty, in the uniform of a general officer,wearing the double epaulet of heavy bullion, that indicates superior rank, theribbon of the Legion of Honor around his neck, which showed he was a commander,and on the right breast, the star of a grand officer of the order of theSaviour, and on the left that of the grand cross of Charles III., which provedthat the person represented by the picture had served in the wars of Greece andSpain, or, what was just the same thing as regarded decorations, had fulfilledsome diplomatic mission in the two countries.Monte Cristo was engaged in examining this portrait with no less care than hehad bestowed upon the other, when another door opened, and he found himselfopposite to the Count of Morcerf in person.He was a man of forty to forty-five years, but he seemed at least fifty, andhis black moustache and eyebrows contrasted strangely with his almost whitehair, which was cut short, in the military fashion. He was dressed in plainclothes, and wore at his button-hole the ribbons of the different orders towhich he belonged.He entered with a tolerably dignified step, and some little haste. Monte Cristosaw him advance towards him without making a single step. It seemed as if hisfeet were rooted to the ground, and his eyes on the Count of Morcerf.“Father,” said the young man, “I have the honor of presentingto you the Count of Monte Cristo, the generous friend whom I had the goodfortune to meet in the critical situation of which I have told you.”“You are most welcome, monsieur,” said the Count of Morcerf,saluting Monte Cristo with a smile, “and monsieur has rendered our house,in preserving its only heir, a service which insures him our eternalgratitude.”As he said these words, the count of Morcerf pointed to a chair, while heseated himself in another opposite the window.Monte Cristo, in taking the seat Morcerf offered him, placed himself in such amanner as to remain concealed in the shadow of the large velvet curtains, andread on the careworn and livid features of the count a whole history of secretgriefs written in each wrinkle time had planted there.“The countess,” said Morcerf, “was at her toilet when she wasinformed of the visit she was about to receive. She will, however, be in thesalon in ten minutes.”“It is a great honor to me,” returned Monte Cristo, “to bethus, on the first day of my arrival in Paris, brought in contact with a manwhose merit equals his reputation, and to whom fortune has for once beenequitable, but has she not still on the plains of Mitidja, or in the mountainsof Atlas, a marshal’s staff to offer you?”“Oh,” replied Morcerf, reddening slightly, “I have left theservice, monsieur. Made a peer at the Restoration, I served through the firstcampaign under the orders of Marshal Bourmont. I could, therefore, expect ahigher rank, and who knows what might have happened had the elder branchremained on the throne? But the Revolution of July was, it seems, sufficientlyglorious to allow itself to be ungrateful, and it was so for all services thatdid not date from the imperial period. I tendered my resignation, for when youhave gained your epaulets on the battle-field, you do not know how to manœuvreon the slippery grounds of the salons. I have hung up my sword, and cast myselfinto politics. I have devoted myself to industry; I study the useful arts.During the twenty years I served, I often wished to do so, but I had not thetime.”“These are the ideas that render your nation superior to anyother,” returned Monte Cristo. “A gentleman of high birth,possessor of an ample fortune, you have consented to gain your promotion as anobscure soldier, step by step—this is uncommon; then become general, peerof France, commander of the Legion of Honor, you consent to again commence asecond apprenticeship, without any other hope or any other desire than that ofone day becoming useful to your fellow-creatures; this, indeed, ispraiseworthy,—nay, more, it is sublime.”Albert looked on and listened with astonishment; he was not used to see MonteCristo give vent to such bursts of enthusiasm.“Alas,” continued the stranger, doubtless to dispel the slightcloud that covered Morcerf’s brow, “we do not act thus in Italy; wegrow according to our race and our species, and we pursue the same lines, andoften the same uselessness, all our lives.”“But, monsieur,” said the Count of Morcerf, “for a man ofyour merit, Italy is not a country, and France opens her arms to receive you;respond to her call. France will not, perhaps, be always ungrateful. She treatsher children ill, but she always welcomes strangers.”“Ah, father,” said Albert with a smile, “it is evident you donot know the Count of Monte Cristo; he despises all honors, and contentshimself with those written on his passport.”“That is the most just remark,” replied the stranger, “I everheard made concerning myself.”“You have been free to choose your career,” observed the Count ofMorcerf, with a sigh; “and you have chosen the path strewed withflowers.”“Precisely, monsieur,” replied Monte Cristo with one of thosesmiles that a painter could never represent or a physiologist analyze.“If I did not fear to fatigue you,” said the general, evidentlycharmed with the count’s manners, “I would have taken you to theChamber; there is a debate very curious to those who are strangers to ourmodern senators.”“I shall be most grateful, monsieur, if you will, at some future time,renew your offer, but I have been flattered with the hope of being introducedto the countess, and I will therefore wait.”“Ah, here is my mother,” cried the viscount.Monte Cristo, turned round hastily, and saw Madame de Morcerf at the entranceof the salon, at the door opposite to that by which her husband had entered,pale and motionless; when Monte Cristo turned round, she let fall her arm,which for some unknown reason had been resting on the gilded door-post. She hadbeen there some moments, and had heard the last words of the visitor. Thelatter rose and bowed to the countess, who inclined herself without speaking.“Ah! good heavens, madame,” said the count, “are you ill, oris it the heat of the room that affects you?”“Are you ill, mother?” cried the viscount, springing towards her.She thanked them both with a smile.“No,” returned she, “but I feel some emotion on seeing, forthe first time, the man without whose intervention we should have been in tearsand desolation. Monsieur,” continued the countess, advancing with themajesty of a queen, “I owe to you the life of my son, and for this Ibless you. Now, I thank you for the pleasure you give me in thus affording methe opportunity of thanking you as I have blessed you, from the bottom of myheart.”The count bowed again, but lower than before; he was even paler than Mercédès.“Madame,” said he, “the count and yourself recompense toogenerously a simple action. To save a man, to spare a father’s feelings,or a mother’s sensibility, is not to do a good action, but a simple deedof humanity.”At these words, uttered with the most exquisite sweetness and politeness,Madame de Morcerf replied:“It is very fortunate for my son, monsieur, that he found such a friend,and I thank God that things are thus.”And Mercédès raised her fine eyes to heaven with so fervent an expression ofgratitude, that the count fancied he saw tears in them. M. de Morcerfapproached her.“Madame,” said he. “I have already made my excuses to thecount for quitting him, and I pray you to do so also. The sitting commences attwo; it is now three, and I am to speak.”“Go, then, and monsieur and I will strive our best to forget yourabsence,” replied the countess, with the same tone of deep feeling.“Monsieur,” continued she, turning to Monte Cristo, “will youdo us the honor of passing the rest of the day with us?”“Believe me, madame, I feel most grateful for your kindness, but I gotout of my travelling carriage at your door this morning, and I am ignorant howI am installed in Paris, which I scarcely know; this is but a triflinginquietude, I know, but one that may be appreciated.”“We shall have the pleasure another time,” said the countess;“you promise that?”Monte Cristo inclined himself without answering, but the gesture might pass forassent.“I will not detain you, monsieur,” continued the countess; “Iwould not have our gratitude become indiscreet or importunate.”“My dear Count,” said Albert, “I will endeavor to return yourpoliteness at Rome, and place my coupé at your disposal until your own beready.”“A thousand thanks for your kindness, viscount,” returned the Countof Monte Cristo “but I suppose that M. Bertuccio has suitably employedthe four hours and a half I have given him, and that I shall find a carriage ofsome sort ready at the door.”Albert was used to the count’s manner of proceeding; he knew that, likeNero, he was in search of the impossible, and nothing astonished him, butwishing to judge with his own eyes how far the count’s orders had beenexecuted, he accompanied him to the door of the house. Monte Cristo was notdeceived. As soon as he appeared in the Count of Morcerf’s antechamber, afootman, the same who at Rome had brought the count’s card to the twoyoung men, and announced his visit, sprang into the vestibule, and when hearrived at the door the illustrious traveller found his carriage awaiting him.It was a coupé of Koller’s building, and with horses and harnessfor which Drake had, to the knowledge of all the lions of Paris, refused on theprevious day seven hundred guineas.“Monsieur,” said the count to Albert, “I do not ask you toaccompany me to my house, as I can only show you a habitation fitted up in ahurry, and I have, as you know, a reputation to keep up as regards not beingtaken by surprise. Give me, therefore, one more day before I invite you; Ishall then be certain not to fail in my hospitality.”“If you ask me for a day, count, I know what to anticipate; it will notbe a house I shall see, but a palace. You have decidedly some genius at yourcontrol.”“Ma foi, spread that idea,” replied the Count of MonteCristo, putting his foot on the velvet-lined steps of his splendid carriage,“and that will be worth something to me among the ladies.”As he spoke, he sprang into the vehicle, the door was closed, but not sorapidly that Monte Cristo failed to perceive the almost imperceptible movementwhich stirred the curtains of the apartment in which he had left Madame deMorcerf.When Albert returned to his mother, he found her in the boudoir reclining in alarge velvet armchair, the whole room so obscure that only the shining spangle,fastened here and there to the drapery, and the angles of the gilded frames ofthe pictures, showed with some degree of brightness in the gloom. Albert couldnot see the face of the countess, as it was covered with a thin veil she hadput on her head, and which fell over her features in misty folds, but it seemedto him as though her voice had altered. He could distinguish amid the perfumesof the roses and heliotropes in the flower-stands, the sharp and fragrant odorof volatile salts, and he noticed in one of the chased cups on the mantle-piecethe countess’s smelling-bottle, taken from its shagreen case, andexclaimed in a tone of uneasiness, as he entered:“My dear mother, have you been ill during my absence?”“No, no, Albert, but you know these roses, tuberoses, and orange-flowersthrow out at first, before one is used to them, such violent perfumes.”“Then, my dear mother,” said Albert, putting his hand to the bell,“they must be taken into the antechamber. You are really ill, and justnow were so pale as you came into the room——”“Was I pale, Albert?”“Yes; a pallor that suits you admirably, mother, but which did not theless alarm my father and myself.”“Did your father speak of it?” inquired Mercédès eagerly.“No, madame; but do you not remember that he spoke of the fact toyou?”“Yes, I do remember,” replied the countess.A servant entered, summoned by Albert’s ring of the bell.“Take these flowers into the anteroom or dressing-room,” said theviscount; “they make the countess ill.”The footman obeyed his orders. A long pause ensued, which lasted until all theflowers were removed.“What is this name of Monte Cristo?” inquired the countess, whenthe servant had taken away the last vase of flowers, “is it a familyname, or the name of the estate, or a simple title?”“I believe, mother, it is merely a title. The count purchased an islandin the Tuscan archipelago, and, as he told you today, has founded a commandery.You know the same thing was done for Saint Stephen of Florence, Saint GeorgeConstantinian of Parma, and even for the Order of Malta. Except this, he has nopretension to nobility, and calls himself a chance count, although the generalopinion at Rome is that the count is a man of very high distinction.”“His manners are admirable,” said the countess, “at least, asfar as I could judge in the few minutes he remained here.”“They are perfect mother, so perfect, that they surpass by far all I haveknown in the leading aristocracy of the three proudest nobilities ofEurope—the English, the Spanish, and the German.”The countess paused a moment; then, after a slight hesitation, she resumed.“You have seen, my dear Albert—I ask the question as amother—you have seen M. de Monte Cristo in his house, you arequicksighted, have much knowledge of the world, more tact than is usual at yourage, do you think the count is really what he appears to be?”“What does he appear to be?”“Why, you have just said,—a man of high distinction.”“I told you, my dear mother, he was esteemed such.”“But what is your own opinion, Albert?”“I must tell you that I have not come to any decided opinion respectinghim, but I think him a Maltese.”“I do not ask you of his origin but what he is.”“Ah! what he is; that is quite another thing. I have seen so manyremarkable things in him, that if you would have me really say what I think, Ishall reply that I really do look upon him as one of Byron’s heroes, whommisery has marked with a fatal brand; some Manfred, some Lara, some Werner, oneof those wrecks, as it were, of some ancient family, who, disinherited of theirpatrimony, have achieved one by the force of their adventurous genius, whichhas placed them above the laws of society.”“You say——”“I say that Monte Cristo is an island in the midst of the Mediterranean,without inhabitants or garrison, the resort of smugglers of all nations, andpirates of every flag. Who knows whether or not these industrious worthies donot pay to their feudal lord some dues for his protection?”“That is possible,” said the countess, reflecting.“Never mind,” continued the young man, “smuggler or not, youmust agree, mother dear, as you have seen him, that the Count of Monte Cristois a remarkable man, who will have the greatest success in the salons of Paris.Why, this very morning, in my rooms, he made his entrée amongst us bystriking every man of us with amazement, not even exceptingChâteau-Renaud.”“And what do you suppose is the count’s age?” inquiredMercédès, evidently attaching great importance to this question.“Thirty-five or thirty-six, mother.”“So young,—it is impossible,” said Mercédès, replying at thesame time to what Albert said as well as to her own private reflection.“It is the truth, however. Three or four times he has said to me, andcertainly without the slightest premeditation, ‘at such a period I wasfive years old, at another ten years old, at another twelve,’ and I,induced by curiosity, which kept me alive to these details, have compared thedates, and never found him inaccurate. The age of this singular man, who is ofno age, is then, I am certain, thirty-five. Besides, mother, remark how vividhis eye, how raven-black his hair, and his brow, though so pale, is free fromwrinkles,—he is not only vigorous, but also young.”The countess bent her head, as if beneath a heavy wave of bitter thoughts.“And has this man displayed a friendship for you, Albert?” sheasked with a nervous shudder.“I am inclined to think so.”“And—do—you—like—him?”“Why, he pleases me in spite of Franz d’Épinay, who tries toconvince me that he is a being returned from the other world.”The countess shuddered.“Albert,” she said, in a voice which was altered by emotion,“I have always put you on your guard against new acquaintances. Now youare a man, and are able to give me advice; yet I repeat to you, Albert, beprudent.”“Why, my dear mother, it is necessary, in order to make your advice turnto account, that I should know beforehand what I have to distrust. The countnever plays, he only drinks pure water tinged with a little sherry, and is sorich that he cannot, without intending to laugh at me, try to borrow money.What, then, have I to fear from him?”“You are right,” said the countess, “and my fears areweakness, especially when directed against a man who has saved your life. Howdid your father receive him, Albert? It is necessary that we should be morethan complaisant to the count. M. de Morcerf is sometimes occupied, hisbusiness makes him reflective, and he might, without intendingit——”“Nothing could be in better taste than my father’s demeanor,madame,” said Albert; “nay, more, he seemed greatly flattered attwo or three compliments which the count very skilfully and agreeably paid himwith as much ease as if he had known him these thirty years. Each of theselittle tickling arrows must have pleased my father,” added Albert with alaugh. “And thus they parted the best possible friends, and M. de Morcerfeven wished to take him to the Chamber to hear the speakers.”The countess made no reply. She fell into so deep a reverie that her eyesgradually closed. The young man, standing up before her, gazed upon her withthat filial affection which is so tender and endearing with children whosemothers are still young and handsome. Then, after seeing her eyes closed, andhearing her breathe gently, he believed she had dropped asleep, and left theapartment on tiptoe, closing the door after him with the utmost precaution.“This devil of a fellow,” he muttered, shaking his head; “Isaid at the time he would create a sensation here, and I measure his effect byan infallible thermometer. My mother has noticed him, and he must therefore,perforce, be remarkable.”He went down to the stables, not without some slight annoyance, when heremembered that the Count of Monte Cristo had laid his hands on a“turnout” which sent his bays down to second place in the opinionof connoisseurs.“Most decidedly,” said he, “men are not equal, and I must begmy father to develop this theorem in the Chamber of Peers.” Chapter 42. MonsieurBertuccioMeanwhile the count hadarrived at his house; it had taken him six minutes to perform the distance, butthese six minutes were sufficient to induce twenty young men who knew the priceof the equipage they had been unable to purchase themselves, to put theirhorses in a gallop in order to see the rich foreigner who could afford to give20,000 francs apiece for his horses.The house Ali had chosen, and which was to serve as a town residence to MonteCristo, was situated on the right hand as you ascend the Champs-Élysées. Athick clump of trees and shrubs rose in the centre, and masked a portion of thefront; around this shrubbery two alleys, like two arms, extended right andleft, and formed a carriage-drive from the iron gates to a double portico, onevery step of which stood a porcelain vase, filled with flowers. This house,isolated from the rest, had, besides the main entrance, another in the Rue dePonthieu. Even before the coachman had hailed the concierge, the massygates rolled on their hinges—they had seen the Count coming, and atParis, as everywhere else, he was served with the rapidity of lightning. Thecoachman entered and traversed the half-circle without slackening his speed,and the gates were closed ere the wheels had ceased to sound on the gravel. Thecarriage stopped at the left side of the portico, two men presented themselvesat the carriage-window; the one was Ali, who, smiling with an expression of themost sincere joy, seemed amply repaid by a mere look from Monte Cristo. Theother bowed respectfully, and offered his arm to assist the count indescending.“Thanks, M. Bertuccio,” said the count, springing lightly up thethree steps of the portico; “and the notary?”“He is in the small salon, excellency,” returned Bertuccio.“And the cards I ordered to be engraved as soon as you knew the number ofthe house?”“Your excellency, it is done already. I have been myself to the bestengraver of the Palais Royal, who did the plate in my presence. The first cardstruck off was taken, according to your orders, to the Baron Danglars, Rue dela Chaussée d’Antin, No. 7; the others are on the mantle-piece of yourexcellency’s bedroom.”“Good; what o’clock is it?”“Four o’clock.”Monte Cristo gave his hat, cane, and gloves to the same French footman who hadcalled his carriage at the Count of Morcerf’s, and then he passed intothe small salon, preceded by Bertuccio, who showed him the way.“These are but indifferent marbles in this antechamber,” said MonteCristo. “I trust all this will soon be taken away.”Bertuccio bowed. As the steward had said, the notary awaited him in the smallsalon. He was a simple-looking lawyer’s clerk, elevated to theextraordinary dignity of a provincial scrivener.“You are the notary empowered to sell the country house that I wish topurchase, monsieur?” asked Monte Cristo.“Yes, count,” returned the notary.“Is the deed of sale ready?”“Yes, count.”“Have you brought it?”“Here it is.”“Very well; and where is this house that I purchase?” asked thecount carelessly, addressing himself half to Bertuccio, half to the notary. Thesteward made a gesture that signified, “I do not know.” The notarylooked at the count with astonishment.“What!” said he, “does not the count know where the house hepurchases is situated?”“No,” returned the count.“The count does not know?”“How should I know? I have arrived from Cadiz this morning. I have neverbefore been at Paris, and it is the first time I have ever even set my foot inFrance.”“Ah, that is different; the house you purchase is at Auteuil.”At these words Bertuccio turned pale.“And where is Auteuil?” asked the count.“Close by here, monsieur,” replied the notary—“a littlebeyond Passy; a charming situation, in the heart of the Bois deBoulogne.”“So near as that?” said the Count; “but that is not in thecountry. What made you choose a house at the gates of Paris, M.Bertuccio?”“I,” cried the steward with a strange expression. “Hisexcellency did not charge me to purchase this house. If his excellency willrecollect—if he will think——”“Ah, true,” observed Monte Cristo; “I recollect now. I readthe advertisement in one of the papers, and was tempted by the false title,‘a country house.’”“It is not yet too late,” cried Bertuccio, eagerly; “and ifyour excellency will intrust me with the commission, I will find you a betterat Enghien, at Fontenay-aux-Roses, or at Bellevue.”“Oh, no,” returned Monte Cristo negligently; “since I havethis, I will keep it.”“And you are quite right,” said the notary, who feared to lose hisfee. “It is a charming place, well supplied with spring-water and finetrees; a comfortable habitation, although abandoned for a long time, withoutreckoning the furniture, which, although old, is yet valuable, now that oldthings are so much sought after. I suppose the count has the tastes of theday?”“To be sure,” returned Monte Cristo; “it is very convenient,then?”“It is more—it is magnificent.”“Peste! let us not lose such an opportunity,” returned MonteCristo. “The deed, if you please, Mr. Notary.”And he signed it rapidly, after having first run his eye over that part of thedeed in which were specified the situation of the house and the names of theproprietors.“Bertuccio,” said he, “give fifty-five thousand francs tomonsieur.”The steward left the room with a faltering step, and returned with a bundle ofbank-notes, which the notary counted like a man who never gives a receipt formoney until after he is sure it is all there.“And now,” demanded the count, “are all the forms compliedwith?”“All, sir.”“Have you the keys?”“They are in the hands of the concierge, who takes care of the house, buthere is the order I have given him to install the count in his newpossessions.”“Very well;” and Monte Cristo made a sign with his hand to thenotary, which said, “I have no further need of you; you may go.”“But,” observed the honest notary, “the count is, I think,mistaken; it is only fifty thousand francs, everything included.”“And your fee?”“Is included in this sum.”“But have you not come from Auteuil here?”“Yes, certainly.”“Well, then, it is but fair that you should be paid for your loss of timeand trouble,” said the count; and he made a gesture of polite dismissal.The notary left the room backwards, and bowing down to the ground; it was thefirst time he had ever met a similar client.“See this gentleman out,” said the count to Bertuccio. And thesteward followed the notary out of the room.Scarcely was the count alone, when he drew from his pocket a book closed with alock, and opened it with a key which he wore round his neck, and which neverleft him. After having sought for a few minutes, he stopped at a leaf which hadseveral notes, and compared them with the deed of sale, which lay on the table,and recalling his souvenirs—“‘Auteuil, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28;’ it is indeed thesame,” said he; “and now, am I to rely upon an avowal extorted byreligious or physical terror? However, in an hour I shall know all.Bertuccio!” cried he, striking a light hammer with a pliant handle on asmall gong. “Bertuccio!”The steward appeared at the door.“Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count, “did you never tell methat you had travelled in France?”“In some parts of France—yes, excellency.”“You know the environs of Paris, then?”“No, excellency, no,” returned the steward, with a sort of nervoustrembling, which Monte Cristo, a connoisseur in all emotions, rightlyattributed to great disquietude.“It is unfortunate,” returned he, “that you have nevervisited the environs, for I wish to see my new property this evening, and hadyou gone with me, you could have given me some useful information.”“To Auteuil!” cried Bertuccio, whose copper complexion becamelivid—“I go to Auteuil?”“Well, what is there surprising in that? When I live at Auteuil, you mustcome there, as you belong to my service.”Bertuccio hung down his head before the imperious look of his master, andremained motionless, without making any answer.“Why, what has happened to you?—are you going to make me ring asecond time for the carriage?” asked Monte Cristo, in the same tone thatLouis XIV. pronounced the famous, “I have been almost obliged towait.” Bertuccio made but one bound to the antechamber, and cried in ahoarse voice:“His excellency’s horses!”Monte Cristo wrote two or three notes, and, as he sealed the last, the stewardappeared.“Your excellency’s carriage is at the door,” said he.“Well, take your hat and gloves,” returned Monte Cristo.“Am I to accompany you, your excellency?” cried Bertuccio.“Certainly, you must give the orders, for I intend residing at thehouse.”It was unexampled for a servant of the count’s to dare to dispute anorder of his, so the steward, without saying a word, followed his master, whogot into the carriage, and signed to him to follow, which he did, taking hisplace respectfully on the front seat. Chapter 43. The House atAuteuilMonte Cristo noticed, asthey descended the staircase, that Bertuccio signed himself in the Corsicanmanner; that is, had formed the sign of the cross in the air with his thumb,and as he seated himself in the carriage, muttered a short prayer. Anyone but aman of exhaustless thirst for knowledge would have had pity on seeing thesteward’s extraordinary repugnance for the count’s projected drivewithout the walls; but the count was too curious to let Bertuccio off from thislittle journey. In twenty minutes they were at Auteuil; the steward’semotion had continued to augment as they entered the village. Bertuccio,crouched in the corner of the carriage, began to examine with a feverishanxiety every house they passed.“Tell them to stop at Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28,” said the count,fixing his eyes on the steward, to whom he gave this order.Bertuccio’s forehead was covered with perspiration; however, he obeyed,and, leaning out of the window, he cried to the coachman,—“Rue dela Fontaine, No. 28.” No. 28 was situated at the extremity of thevillage; during the drive night had set in, and darkness gave the surroundingsthe artificial appearance of a scene on the stage. The carriage stopped, thefootman sprang off the box and opened the door.“Well,” said the count, “you do not get out, M.Bertuccio—you are going to stay in the carriage, then? What are youthinking of this evening?”Bertuccio sprang out, and offered his shoulder to the count, who, this time,leaned upon it as he descended the three steps of the carriage.“Knock,” said the count, “and announce me.”Bertuccio knocked, the door opened, and the concierge appeared.“What is it?” asked he.“It is your new master, my good fellow,” said the footman. And heheld out to the concierge the notary’s order.“The house is sold, then?” demanded the concierge; “and thisgentleman is coming to live here?”“Yes, my friend,” returned the count; “and I will endeavor togive you no cause to regret your old master.”“Oh, monsieur,” said the concierge, “I shall not have muchcause to regret him, for he came here but seldom; it is five years since he washere last, and he did well to sell the house, for it did not bring him inanything at all.”“What was the name of your old master?” said Monte Cristo.“The Marquis of Saint-Méran. Ah, I am sure he has not sold the house forwhat he gave for it.”“The Marquis of Saint-Méran!” returned the count. “The nameis not unknown to me; the Marquis of Saint-Méran!” and he appeared tomeditate.“An old gentleman,” continued the concierge, “a staunchfollower of the Bourbons; he had an only daughter, who married M. de Villefort,who had been the king’s attorney at Nîmes, and afterwards atVersailles.”Monte Cristo glanced at Bertuccio, who became whiter than the wall againstwhich he leaned to prevent himself from falling.“And is not this daughter dead?” demanded Monte Cristo; “Ifancy I have heard so.”“Yes, monsieur, one-and-twenty years ago; and since then we have not seenthe poor marquis three times.”“Thanks, thanks,” said Monte Cristo, judging from thesteward’s utter prostration that he could not stretch the cord furtherwithout danger of breaking it. “Give me a light.”“Shall I accompany you, monsieur?”“No, it is unnecessary; Bertuccio will show me a light.”And Monte Cristo accompanied these words by the gift of two gold pieces, whichproduced a torrent of thanks and blessings from the concierge.“Ah, monsieur,” said he, after having vainly searched on themantle-piece and the shelves, “I have not got any candles.”“Take one of the carriage-lamps, Bertuccio,” said the count,“and show me the apartments.”The steward obeyed in silence, but it was easy to see, from the manner in whichthe hand that held the light trembled, how much it cost him to obey. They wentover a tolerably large ground floor; a first floor consisted of a salon, abathroom, and two bedrooms; near one of the bedrooms they came to a windingstaircase that led down to the garden.“Ah, here is a private staircase,” said the count; “that isconvenient. Light me, M. Bertuccio, and go first; we will see where it leadsto.”“Monsieur,” replied Bertuccio, “it leads to thegarden.”“And, pray, how do you know that?”“It ought to do so, at least.”“Well, let us be sure of that.”Bertuccio sighed, and went on first; the stairs did, indeed, lead to thegarden. At the outer door the steward paused.“Go on, Monsieur Bertuccio,” said the count.But he who was addressed stood there, stupefied, bewildered, stunned; hishaggard eyes glanced around, as if in search of the traces of some terribleevent, and with his clenched hands he seemed striving to shut out horriblerecollections.“Well!” insisted the Count.“No, no,” cried Bertuccio, setting down the lantern at the angle ofthe interior wall. “No, monsieur, it is impossible; I can go nofarther.”“What does this mean?” demanded the irresistible voice of MonteCristo.“Why, you must see, your excellency,” cried the steward,“that this is not natural; that, having a house to purchase, you purchaseit exactly at Auteuil, and that, purchasing it at Auteuil, this house should beNo. 28, Rue de la Fontaine. Oh, why did I not tell you all? I am sure you wouldnot have forced me to come. I hoped your house would have been some other onethan this; as if there was not another house at Auteuil than that of theassassination!”“What, what!” cried Monte Cristo, stopping suddenly, “whatwords do you utter? Devil of a man, Corsican that you are—alwaysmysteries or superstitions. Come, take the lantern, and let us visit thegarden; you are not afraid of ghosts with me, I hope?”Bertuccio raised the lantern, and obeyed. The door, as it opened, disclosed agloomy sky, in which the moon strove vainly to struggle through a sea of cloudsthat covered her with billows of vapor which she illumined for an instant, onlyto sink into obscurity. The steward wished to turn to the left.“No, no, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo. “What is the use offollowing the alleys? Here is a beautiful lawn; let us go on straightforwards.”Bertuccio wiped the perspiration from his brow, but obeyed; however, hecontinued to take the left hand. Monte Cristo, on the contrary, took the righthand; arrived near a clump of trees, he stopped. The steward could not restrainhimself.“Move, monsieur—move away, I entreat you; you are exactly in thespot!”“What spot?”“Where he fell.”“My dear Monsieur Bertuccio,” said Monte Cristo, laughing,“control yourself; we are not at Sartène or at Corte. This is not aCorsican maquis but an English garden; badly kept, I own, but still youmust not calumniate it for that.”“Monsieur, I implore you do not stay there!”“I think you are going mad, Bertuccio,” said the count coldly.“If that is the case, I warn you, I shall have you put in a lunaticasylum.”“Alas! excellency,” returned Bertuccio, joining his hands, andshaking his head in a manner that would have excited the count’slaughter, had not thoughts of a superior interest occupied him, and renderedhim attentive to the least revelation of this timorous conscience. “Alas!excellency, the evil has arrived!”“M. Bertuccio,” said the count, “I am very glad to tell you,that while you gesticulate, you wring your hands and roll your eyes like a manpossessed by a devil who will not leave him; and I have always observed, thatthe devil most obstinate to be expelled is a secret. I knew you were aCorsican. I knew you were gloomy, and always brooding over some old history ofthe vendetta; and I overlooked that in Italy, because in Italy those things arethought nothing of. But in France they are considered in very bad taste; thereare gendarmes who occupy themselves with such affairs, judges who condemn, andscaffolds which avenge.”Bertuccio clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he did not letfall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered countenance. MonteCristo examined him with the same look that, at Rome, he had bent upon theexecution of Andrea, and then, in a tone that made a shudder pass through theveins of the poor steward—“The Abbé Busoni, then told me an untruth,” said he, “when,after his journey in France, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter ofrecommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuable qualities. Well, Ishall write to the abbé; I shall hold him responsible for hisprotégé’s misconduct, and I shall soon know all about thisassassination. Only I warn you, that when I reside in a country, I conform toall its code, and I have no wish to put myself within the compass of the Frenchlaws for your sake.”“Oh, do not do that, excellency; I have always served youfaithfully,” cried Bertuccio, in despair. “I have always been anhonest man, and, as far as lay in my power, I have done good.”“I do not deny it,” returned the count; “but why are you thusagitated. It is a bad sign; a quiet conscience does not occasion such palenessin the cheeks, and such fever in the hands of a man.”“But, your excellency,” replied Bertuccio hesitatingly, “didnot the Abbé Busoni, who heard my confession in the prison at Nîmes, tell youthat I had a heavy burden upon my conscience?”“Yes; but as he said you would make an excellent steward, I concluded youhad stolen—that was all.”“Oh, your excellency!” returned Bertuccio in deep contempt.“Or, as you are a Corsican, that you had been unable to resist the desireof making a ‘stiff,’ as you call it.”“Yes, my good master,” cried Bertuccio, casting himself at thecount’s feet, “it was simply vengeance—nothing else.”“I understand that, but I do not understand what it is that galvanizesyou in this manner.”“But, monsieur, it is very natural,” returned Bertuccio,“since it was in this house that my vengeance was accomplished.”“What! my house?”“Oh, your excellency, it was not yours, then.”“Whose, then? The Marquis de Saint-Méran, I think, the concierge said.What had you to revenge on the Marquis de Saint-Méran?”“Oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another.”“This is strange,” returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yield to hisreflections, “that you should find yourself without any preparation in ahouse where the event happened that causes you so much remorse.”“Monsieur,” said the steward, “it is fatality, I am sure.First, you purchase a house at Auteuil—this house is the one where I havecommitted an assassination; you descend to the garden by the same staircase bywhich he descended; you stop at the spot where he received the blow; and twopaces farther is the grave in which he had just buried his child. This is notchance, for chance, in this case, is too much like Providence.”“Well, amiable Corsican, let us suppose it is Providence. I alwayssuppose anything people please, and, besides, you must concede something todiseased minds. Come, collect yourself, and tell me all.”“I have related it but once, and that was to the Abbé Busoni. Suchthings,” continued Bertuccio, shaking his head, “are only relatedunder the seal of confession.”“Then,” said the count, “I refer you to your confessor. TurnChartreux or Trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as for me, I do not likeanyone who is alarmed by such phantasms, and I do not choose that my servantsshould be afraid to walk in the garden of an evening. I confess I am not verydesirous of a visit from the commissary of police, for, in Italy, justice isonly paid when silent—in France she is paid only when she speaks.Peste! I thought you somewhat Corsican, a great deal smuggler, and anexcellent steward; but I see you have other strings to your bow. You are nolonger in my service, Monsieur Bertuccio.”“Oh, your excellency, your excellency!” cried the steward, struckwith terror at this threat, “if that is the only reason I cannot remainin your service, I will tell all, for if I quit you, it will only be to go tothe scaffold.”“That is different,” replied Monte Cristo; “but if you intendto tell an untruth, reflect it were better not to speak at all.”“No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, I will tell youall, for the Abbé Busoni himself only knew a part of my secret; but, I prayyou, go away from that plane-tree. The moon is just bursting through theclouds, and there, standing where you do, and wrapped in that cloak thatconceals your figure, you remind me of M. de Villefort.”“What!” cried Monte Cristo, “it was M. de Villefort?”“Your excellency knows him?”“The former royal attorney at Nîmes?”“Yes.”“Who married the Marquis of Saint-Méran’s daughter?”“Yes.”“Who enjoyed the reputation of being the most severe, the most upright,the most rigid magistrate on the bench?”“Well, monsieur,” said Bertuccio, “this man with thisspotless reputation——”“Well?”“Was a villain.”“Bah,” replied Monte Cristo, “impossible!”“It is as I tell you.”“Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo. “Have you proof ofthis?”“I had it.”“And you have lost it; how stupid!”“Yes; but by careful search it might be recovered.”“Really,” returned the count, “relate it to me, for it beginsto interest me.”And the count, humming an air from Lucia, went to sit down on a bench,while Bertuccio followed him, collecting his thoughts. Bertuccio remainedstanding before him. Chapter 44. TheVendettaAt what point shall Ibegin my story, your excellency?” asked Bertuccio.“Where you please,” returned Monte Cristo, “since I knownothing at all of it.”“I thought the Abbé Busoni had told your excellency.”“Some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eight years ago, and Ihave forgotten them.”“Then I can speak without fear of tiring your excellency.”“Go on, M. Bertuccio; you will supply the want of the eveningpapers.”“The story begins in 1815.”“Ah,” said Monte Cristo, “1815 is not yesterday.”“No, monsieur, and yet I recollect all things as clearly as if they hadhappened but then. I had a brother, an elder brother, who was in the service ofthe emperor; he had become lieutenant in a regiment composed entirely ofCorsicans. This brother was my only friend; we became orphans—I at five,he at eighteen. He brought me up as if I had been his son, and in 1814 hemarried. When the emperor returned from the Island of Elba, my brotherinstantly joined the army, was slightly wounded at Waterloo, and retired withthe army beyond the Loire.”“But that is the history of the Hundred Days, M. Bertuccio,” saidthe count; “unless I am mistaken, it has been already written.”“Excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, and you promisedto be patient.”“Go on; I will keep my word.”“One day we received a letter. I should tell you that we lived in thelittle village of Rogliano, at the extremity of Cap Corse. This letter was frommy brother. He told us that the army was disbanded, and that he should returnby Châteauroux, Clermont-Ferrand, Le Puy, and Nîmes; and, if I had any money,he prayed me to leave it for him at Nîmes, with an innkeeper with whom I haddealings.”“In the smuggling line?” said Monte Cristo.“Eh, your excellency? Everyone must live.”“Certainly; go on.”“I loved my brother tenderly, as I told your excellency, and I resolvednot to send the money, but to take it to him myself. I possessed a thousandfrancs. I left five hundred with Assunta, my sister-in-law, and with the otherfive hundred I set off for Nîmes. It was easy to do so, and as I had my boatand a lading to take in at sea, everything favored my project. But, after wehad taken in our cargo, the wind became contrary, so that we were four or fivedays without being able to enter the Rhône. At last, however, we succeeded, andworked up to Arles. I left the boat between Bellegarde and Beaucaire, and tookthe road to Nîmes.”“We are getting to the story now?”“Yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, I only tell youwhat is absolutely necessary. Just at this time the famous massacres took placein the south of France. Three brigands, called Trestaillon, Truphemy, andGraffan, publicly assassinated everybody whom they suspected of Bonapartism.You have doubtless heard of these massacres, your excellency?”“Vaguely; I was far from France at that period. Go on.”“As I entered Nîmes, I literally waded in blood; at every step youencountered dead bodies and bands of murderers, who killed, plundered, andburned. At the sight of this slaughter and devastation I became terrified, notfor myself—for I, a simple Corsican fisherman, had nothing to fear; onthe contrary, that time was most favorable for us smugglers—but for mybrother, a soldier of the empire, returning from the army of the Loire, withhis uniform and his epaulets, there was everything to apprehend. I hastened tothe innkeeper. My misgivings had been but too true. My brother had arrived theprevious evening at Nîmes, and, at the very door of the house where he wasabout to demand hospitality, he had been assassinated. I did all in my power todiscover the murderers, but no one durst tell me their names, so much were theydreaded. I then thought of that French justice of which I had heard so much,and which feared nothing, and I went to the king’s attorney.”“And this king’s attorney was named Villefort?” asked MonteCristo carelessly.“Yes, your excellency; he came from Marseilles, where he had been deputyprocureur. His zeal had procured him advancement, and he was said to be one ofthe first who had informed the government of the departure from the Island ofElba.”“Then,” said Monte Cristo “you went to him?”“‘Monsieur,’ I said, ‘my brother was assassinatedyesterday in the streets of Nîmes, I know not by whom, but it is your duty tofind out. You are the representative of justice here, and it is for justice toavenge those she has been unable to protect.’“‘Who was your brother?’ asked he.“‘A lieutenant in the Corsican battalion.’“‘A soldier of the usurper, then?’“‘A soldier of the French army.’“‘Well,’ replied he, ‘he has smitten with the sword,and he has perished by the sword.’“‘You are mistaken, monsieur,’ I replied; ‘he hasperished by the poniard.’“‘What do you want me to do?’ asked the magistrate.“‘I have already told you—avenge him.’“‘On whom?’“‘On his murderers.’“‘How should I know who they are?’“‘Order them to be sought for.’“‘Why, your brother has been involved in a quarrel, and killed in aduel. All these old soldiers commit excesses which were tolerated in the timeof the emperor, but which are not suffered now, for the people here do not likesoldiers of such disorderly conduct.’“‘Monsieur,’ I replied, ‘it is not for myself that Ientreat your interference—I should grieve for him or avenge him, but mypoor brother had a wife, and were anything to happen to me, the poor creaturewould perish from want, for my brother’s pay alone kept her. Pray, tryand obtain a small government pension for her.’“‘Every revolution has its catastrophes,’ returned M. deVillefort; ‘your brother has been the victim of this. It is a misfortune,and government owes nothing to his family. If we are to judge by all thevengeance that the followers of the usurper exercised on the partisans of theking, when, in their turn, they were in power, your brother would be today, inall probability, condemned to death. What has happened is quite natural, and inconformity with the law of reprisals.’“‘What,’ cried I, ‘do you, a magistrate, speak thus tome?’“‘All these Corsicans are mad, on my honor,’ replied M. deVillefort; ‘they fancy that their countryman is still emperor. You havemistaken the time, you should have told me this two months ago, it is too latenow. Go now, at once, or I shall have you put out.’“I looked at him an instant to see if there was anything to hope fromfurther entreaty. But he was a man of stone. I approached him, and said in alow voice, ‘Well, since you know the Corsicans so well, you know thatthey always keep their word. You think that it was a good deed to kill mybrother, who was a Bonapartist, because you are a royalist. Well, I, who am aBonapartist also, declare one thing to you, which is, that I will kill you.From this moment I declare the vendetta against you, so protect yourself aswell as you can, for the next time we meet your last hour has come.’ Andbefore he had recovered from his surprise, I opened the door and left theroom.”“Well, well,” said Monte Cristo, “such an innocent lookingperson as you are to do those things, M. Bertuccio, and to a king’sattorney at that! But did he know what was meant by the terrible word‘vendetta’?”“He knew so well, that from that moment he shut himself in his house, andnever went out unattended, seeking me high and low. Fortunately, I was so wellconcealed that he could not find me. Then he became alarmed, and dared not stayany longer at Nîmes, so he solicited a change of residence, and, as he was inreality very influential, he was nominated to Versailles. But, as you know, aCorsican who has sworn to avenge himself cares not for distance, so hiscarriage, fast as it went, was never above half a day’s journey beforeme, who followed him on foot. The most important thing was, not to kill himonly—for I had an opportunity of doing so a hundred times—but tokill him without being discovered—at least, without being arrested. I nolonger belonged to myself, for I had my sister-in-law to protect and providefor.“For three months I watched M. de Villefort, for three months he took nota step out-of-doors without my following him. At length I discovered that hewent mysteriously to Auteuil. I followed him thither, and I saw him enter thehouse where we now are, only, instead of entering by the great door that looksinto the street, he came on horseback, or in his carriage, left the one or theother at the little inn, and entered by the gate you see there.”Monte Cristo made a sign with his head to show that he could discern in thedarkness the door to which Bertuccio alluded.“As I had nothing more to do at Versailles, I went to Auteuil, and gainedall the information I could. If I wished to surprise him, it was evident thiswas the spot to lie in wait for him. The house belonged, as the conciergeinformed your excellency, to M. de Saint-Méran, Villefort’sfather-in-law. M. de Saint-Méran lived at Marseilles, so that this countryhouse was useless to him, and it was reported to be let to a young widow, knownonly by the name of ‘the Baroness.’“One evening, as I was looking over the wall, I saw a young and handsomewoman who was walking alone in that garden, which was not overlooked by anywindows, and I guessed that she was awaiting M. de Villefort. When she wassufficiently near for me to distinguish her features, I saw she was fromeighteen to nineteen, tall and very fair. As she had a loose muslin dress onand as nothing concealed her figure, I saw she would ere long become a mother.A few moments after, the little door was opened and a man entered. The youngwoman hastened to meet him. They threw themselves into each other’s arms,embraced tenderly, and returned together to the house. The man was M. deVillefort; I fully believed that when he went out in the night he would beforced to traverse the whole of the garden alone.”“And,” asked the count, “did you ever know the name of thiswoman?”“No, excellency,” returned Bertuccio; “you will see that Ihad no time to learn it.”“Go on.”“That evening,” continued Bertuccio, “I could have killed theprocureur, but as I was not sufficiently acquainted with the neighborhood, Iwas fearful of not killing him on the spot, and that if his cries wereoverheard I might be taken; so I put it off until the next occasion, and inorder that nothing should escape me, I took a chamber looking into the streetbordered by the wall of the garden. Three days after, about seven o’clockin the evening, I saw a servant on horseback leave the house at full gallop,and take the road to Sèvres. I concluded that he was going to Versailles, and Iwas not deceived. Three hours later, the man returned covered with dust, hiserrand was performed, and two minutes after, another man on foot, muffled in amantle, opened the little door of the garden, which he closed after him. Idescended rapidly; although I had not seen Villefort’s face, I recognizedhim by the beating of my heart. I crossed the street, and stopped at a postplaced at the angle of the wall, and by means of which I had once before lookedinto the garden.“This time I did not content myself with looking, but I took my knife outof my pocket, felt that the point was sharp, and sprang over the wall. My firstcare was to run to the door; he had left the key in it, taking the simpleprecaution of turning it twice in the lock. Nothing, then, preventing my escapeby this means, I examined the grounds. The garden was long and narrow; astretch of smooth turf extended down the middle, and at the corners were clumpsof trees with thick and massy foliage, that made a background for the shrubsand flowers. In order to go from the door to the house, or from the house tothe door, M. de Villefort would be obliged to pass by one of these clumps oftrees.“It was the end of September; the wind blew violently. The faint glimpsesof the pale moon, hidden momentarily by masses of dark clouds that weresweeping across the sky, whitened the gravel walks that led to the house, butwere unable to pierce the obscurity of the thick shrubberies, in which a mancould conceal himself without any fear of discovery. I hid myself in the onenearest to the path Villefort must take, and scarcely was I there when, amidstthe gusts of wind, I fancied I heard groans; but you know, or rather you do notknow, your excellency, that he who is about to commit an assassination fanciesthat he hears low cries perpetually ringing in his ears. Two hours passed thus,during which I imagined I heard moans repeatedly. Midnight struck. As the laststroke died away, I saw a faint light shine through the windows of the privatestaircase by which we have just descended. The door opened, and the man in themantle reappeared.“The terrible moment had come, but I had so long been prepared for itthat my heart did not fail in the least. I drew my knife from my pocket again,opened it, and made ready to strike. The man in the mantle advanced towards me,but as he drew near I saw that he had a weapon in his hand. I was afraid, notof a struggle, but of a failure. When he was only a few paces from me, I sawthat what I had taken for a weapon was only a spade. I was still unable todivine for what reason M. de Villefort had this spade in his hands, when hestopped close to the thicket where I was, glanced round, and began to dig ahole in the earth. I then perceived that he was hiding something under hismantle, which he laid on the grass in order to dig more freely. Then, Iconfess, curiosity mingled with hatred; I wished to see what Villefort wasgoing to do there, and I remained motionless, holding my breath. Then an ideacrossed my mind, which was confirmed when I saw the procureur lift from underhis mantle a box, two feet long, and six or eight inches deep. I let him placethe box in the hole he had made, then, while he stamped with his feet to removeall traces of his occupation, I rushed on him and plunged my knife into hisbreast, exclaiming:“‘I am Giovanni Bertuccio; thy death for my brother’s; thytreasure for his widow; thou seest that my vengeance is more complete than Ihad hoped.’“I know not if he heard these words; I think he did not, for he fellwithout a cry. I felt his blood gush over my face, but I was intoxicated, I wasdelirious, and the blood refreshed, instead of burning me. In a second I haddisinterred the box; then, that it might not be known I had done so, I filledup the hole, threw the spade over the wall, and rushed through the door, whichI double-locked, carrying off the key.”“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “it seems to me this was nothing butmurder and robbery.”“No, your excellency,” returned Bertuccio; “it was a vendettafollowed by restitution.”“And was the sum a large one?”“It was not money.”“Ah, I recollect,” replied the count; “did you not saysomething of an infant?”“Yes, excellency; I hastened to the river, sat down on the bank, and withmy knife forced open the lock of the box. In a fine linen cloth was wrapped anew-born child. Its purple visage, and its violet-colored hands showed that ithad perished from suffocation, but as it was not yet cold, I hesitated to throwit into the water that ran at my feet. After a moment I fancied that I felt aslight pulsation of the heart, and as I had been assistant at the hospital atBastia, I did what a doctor would have done—I inflated the lungs byblowing air into them, and at the expiration of a quarter of an hour, it beganto breathe, and cried feebly. In my turn I uttered a cry, but a cry of joy.“‘God has not cursed me then,’ I cried, ‘since hepermits me to save the life of a human creature, in exchange for the life Ihave taken away.’”“And what did you do with the child?” asked Monte Cristo. “Itwas an embarrassing load for a man seeking to escape.”“I had not for a moment the idea of keeping it, but I knew that at Paristhere was an asylum where they receive such creatures. As I passed the citygates I declared that I had found the child on the road, and I inquired wherethe asylum was; the box confirmed my statement, the linen proved that theinfant belonged to wealthy parents, the blood with which I was covered mighthave proceeded from the child as well as from anyone else. No objection wasraised, but they pointed out the asylum, which was situated at the upper end ofthe Rue d’Enfer, and after having taken the precaution of cutting thelinen in two pieces, so that one of the two letters which marked it was on thepiece wrapped around the child, while the other remained in my possession, Irang the bell, and fled with all speed. A fortnight after I was at Rogliano,and I said to Assunta:“‘Console thyself, sister; Israel is dead, but he isavenged.’“She demanded what I meant, and when I had told herall,—‘Giovanni,’ said she, ‘you should have broughtthis child with you; we would have replaced the parents it has lost, havecalled it Benedetto, and then, in consequence of this good action, God wouldhave blessed us.’ In reply I gave her the half of the linen I had kept inorder to reclaim him if we became rich.”“What letters were marked on the linen?” said Monte Cristo.“An H and an N, surmounted by a baron’s coronet.”“By heaven, M. Bertuccio, you make use of heraldic terms; where did youstudy heraldry?”“In your service, excellency, where everything is learned.”“Go on, I am curious to know two things.”“What are they, your excellency?”“What became of this little boy? for I think you told me it was a boy, M.Bertuccio.”“No excellency, I do not recollect telling you that.”“I thought you did; I must have been mistaken.”“No, you were not, for it was in reality a little boy. But yourexcellency wished to know two things; what was the second?”“The second was the crime of which you were accused when you asked for aconfessor, and the Abbé Busoni came to visit you at your request in the prisonat Nîmes.”“The story will be very long, excellency.”“What matter? you know I take but little sleep, and I do not suppose youare very much inclined for it either.” Bertuccio bowed, and resumed hisstory.“Partly to drown the recollections of the past that haunted me, partly tosupply the wants of the poor widow, I eagerly returned to my trade of smuggler,which had become more easy since that relaxation of the laws which alwaysfollows a revolution. The southern districts were ill-watched in particular, inconsequence of the disturbances that were perpetually breaking out in Avignon,Nîmes, or Uzès. We profited by this respite on the part of the government tomake friends everywhere. Since my brother’s assassination in the streetsof Nîmes, I had never entered the town; the result was that the innkeeper withwhom we were connected, seeing that we would no longer come to him, was forcedto come to us, and had established a branch to his inn, on the road fromBellegarde to Beaucaire, at the sign of the Pont du Gard. We had thus, atAigues-Mortes, Martigues, or Bouc, a dozen places where we left our goods, andwhere, in case of necessity, we concealed ourselves from the gendarmes andcustom-house officers. Smuggling is a profitable trade, when a certain degreeof vigor and intelligence is employed; as for myself, brought up in themountains, I had a double motive for fearing the gendarmes and custom-houseofficers, as my appearance before the judges would cause an inquiry, and aninquiry always looks back into the past. And in my past life they might findsomething far more grave than the selling of smuggled cigars, or barrels ofbrandy without a permit. So, preferring death to capture, I accomplished themost astonishing deeds, and which, more than once, showed me that the too greatcare we take of our bodies is the only obstacle to the success of thoseprojects which require rapid decision, and vigorous and determined execution.In reality, when you have once devoted your life to your enterprises, you areno longer the equal of other men, or, rather, other men are no longer yourequals, and whosoever has taken this resolution, feels his strength andresources doubled.”“Philosophy, M. Bertuccio,” interrupted the count; “you havedone a little of everything in your life.”“Oh, excellency!”“No, no; but philosophy at half-past ten at night is somewhat late; yet Ihave no other observation to make, for what you say is correct, which is morethan can be said for all philosophy.”“My journeys became more and more extensive and more productive. Assuntatook care of all, and our little fortune increased. One day as I was settingoff on an expedition, ‘Go,’ said she; ‘at your return I willgive you a surprise.’ I questioned her, but in vain; she would tell menothing, and I departed. Our expedition lasted nearly six weeks; we had been toLucca to take in oil, to Leghorn for English cottons, and we ran our cargowithout opposition, and returned home full of joy. When I entered the house,the first thing I beheld in the middle of Assunta’s chamber was a cradlethat might be called sumptuous compared with the rest of the furniture, and init a baby seven or eight months old. I uttered a cry of joy; the only momentsof sadness I had known since the assassination of the procureur were caused bythe recollection that I had abandoned this child. For the assassination itselfI had never felt any remorse. Poor Assunta had guessed all. She had profited bymy absence, and furnished with the half of the linen, and having written downthe day and hour at which I had deposited the child at the asylum, had set offfor Paris, and had reclaimed it. No objection was raised, and the infant wasgiven up to her. Ah, I confess, your excellency, when I saw this poor creaturesleeping peacefully in its cradle, I felt my eyes filled with tears. ‘Ah,Assunta,’ cried I, ‘you are an excellent woman, and Heaven willbless you.’”“This,” said Monte Cristo, “is less correct than yourphilosophy,—it is only faith.”“Alas, your excellency is right,” replied Bertuccio, “and Godmade this infant the instrument of our punishment. Never did a perverse naturedeclare itself more prematurely, and yet it was not owing to any fault in hisbringing up. He was a most lovely child, with large blue eyes, of that deepcolor that harmonizes so well with the blond complexion; only his hair, whichwas too light, gave his face a most singular expression, and added to thevivacity of his look, and the malice of his smile.“Unfortunately, there is a proverb which says that ‘red is eitheraltogether good or altogether bad.’ The proverb was but too correct asregarded Benedetto, and even in his infancy he manifested the worstdisposition. It is true that the indulgence of his foster-mother encouragedhim. This child, for whom my poor sister would go to the town, five or sixleagues off, to purchase the earliest fruits and the most tempting sweetmeats,preferred to Palma grapes or Genoese preserves, the chestnuts stolen from aneighbor’s orchard, or the dried apples in his loft, when he could eat aswell of the nuts and apples that grew in my garden.“One day, when Benedetto was about five or six, our neighbor Wasilio,who, according to the custom of the country, never locked up his purse or hisvaluables—for, as your excellency knows, there are no thieves inCorsica—complained that he had lost a louis out of his purse; we thoughthe must have made a mistake in counting his money, but he persisted in theaccuracy of his statement. One day, Benedetto, who had been gone from the housesince morning, to our great anxiety, did not return until late in the evening,dragging a monkey after him, which he said he had found chained to the foot ofa tree. For more than a month past, the mischievous child, who knew not what towish for, had taken it into his head to have a monkey. A boatman, who hadpassed by Rogliano, and who had several of these animals, whose tricks hadgreatly diverted him, had, doubtless, suggested this idea to him.‘Monkeys are not found in our woods chained to trees,’ said I;‘confess how you obtained this animal.’ Benedetto maintained thetruth of what he had said, and accompanied it with details that did more honorto his imagination than to his veracity. I became angry; he began to laugh, Ithreatened to strike him, and he made two steps backwards. ‘You cannotbeat me,’ said he; ‘you have no right, for you are not myfather.’“We never knew who had revealed this fatal secret, which we had socarefully concealed from him; however, it was this answer, in which thechild’s whole character revealed itself, that almost terrified me, and myarm fell without touching him.“The boy triumphed, and this victory rendered him so audacious, that allthe money of Assunta, whose affection for him seemed to increase as he becamemore unworthy of it, was spent in caprices she knew not how to contend against,and follies she had not the courage to prevent. When I was at Roglianoeverything went on properly, but no sooner was my back turned than Benedettobecame master, and everything went ill. When he was only eleven, he chose hiscompanions from among the young men of eighteen or twenty, the worst charactersin Bastia, or, indeed, in Corsica, and they had already, for some mischievouspranks, been several times threatened with a prosecution. I became alarmed, asany prosecution might be attended with serious consequences. I was compelled,at this period, to leave Corsica on an important expedition; I reflected for along time, and with the hope of averting some impending misfortune, I resolvedthat Benedetto should accompany me.“I hoped that the active and laborious life of a smuggler, with thesevere discipline on board, would have a salutary effect on his character,which was now well-nigh, if not quite, corrupt. I spoke to Benedetto alone, andproposed to him to accompany me, endeavoring to tempt him by all the promisesmost likely to dazzle the imagination of a child of twelve. He heard mepatiently, and when I had finished, burst out laughing.“‘Are you mad, uncle?’ (he called me by this name when he wasin good humor); ‘do you think I am going to change the life I lead foryour mode of existence—my agreeable indolence for the hard and precarioustoil you impose on yourself, exposed to the bitter frost at night, and thescorching heat by day, compelled to conceal yourself, and when you areperceived, receive a volley of bullets, all to earn a paltry sum? Why, I haveas much money as I want; mother Assunta always furnishes me when I ask for it!You see that I should be a fool to accept your offer.’“The arguments, and his audacity, perfectly stupefied me. Benedettorejoined his associates, and I saw him from a distance point me out to them asa fool.”“Sweet child,” murmured Monte Cristo.“Oh, had he been my own son,” replied Bertuccio, “or even mynephew, I would have brought him back to the right road, for the knowledge thatyou are doing your duty gives you strength, but the idea that I was striking achild whose father I had killed, made it impossible for me to punish him. Igave my sister, who constantly defended the unfortunate boy, good advice, andas she confessed that she had several times missed money to a considerableamount, I showed her a safe place in which to conceal our little treasure forthe future. My mind was already made up. Benedetto could read, write, andcipher perfectly, for when the fit seized him, he learned more in a day thanothers in a week. My intention was to enter him as a clerk in some ship, andwithout letting him know anything of my plan, to convey him some morning onboard; by this means his future treatment would depend upon his own conduct. Iset off for France, after having fixed upon the plan. Our cargo was to belanded in the Gulf of Lyons, and this was a difficult thing to do because itwas then the year 1829. The most perfect tranquillity was restored, and thevigilance of the custom-house officers was redoubled, and their strictness wasincreased at this time, in consequence of the fair at Beaucaire.“Our expedition made a favorable beginning. We anchored ourvessel—which had a double hold, where our goods wereconcealed—amidst a number of other vessels that bordered the banks of theRhône from Beaucaire to Arles. On our arrival we began to discharge our cargoin the night, and to convey it into the town, by the help of the innkeeper withwhom we were connected.“Whether success rendered us imprudent, or whether we were betrayed, Iknow not; but one evening, about five o’clock, our little cabin-boy camebreathlessly, to inform us that he had seen a detachment of custom-houseofficers advancing in our direction. It was not their proximity that alarmedus, for detachments were constantly patrolling along the banks of the Rhône,but the care, according to the boy’s account, that they took to avoidbeing seen. In an instant we were on the alert, but it was too late; our vesselwas surrounded, and amongst the custom-house officers I observed severalgendarmes, and, as terrified at the sight of their uniforms as I was brave atthe sight of any other, I sprang into the hold, opened a port, and dropped intothe river, dived, and only rose at intervals to breathe, until I reached aditch that had recently been made from the Rhône to the canal that runs fromBeaucaire to Aigues-Mortes. I was now safe, for I could swim along the ditchwithout being seen, and I reached the canal in safety. I had designedly takenthis direction. I have already told your excellency of an innkeeper from Nîmeswho had set up a little tavern on the road from Bellegarde to Beaucaire.”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I perfectly recollect him; I thinkhe was your colleague.”“Precisely,” answered Bertuccio; “but he had, seven or eightyears before this period, sold his establishment to a tailor at Marseilles,who, having almost ruined himself in his old trade, wished to make his fortunein another. Of course, we made the same arrangements with the new landlord thatwe had with the old; and it was of this man that I intended to askshelter.”“What was his name?” inquired the count, who seemed to becomesomewhat interested in Bertuccio’s story.“Gaspard Caderousse; he had married a woman from the village of Carconte,and whom we did not know by any other name than that of her village. She wassuffering from malarial fever, and seemed dying by inches. As for her husband,he was a strapping fellow of forty, or five-and-forty, who had more than once,in time of danger, given ample proof of his presence of mind andcourage.”“And you say,” interrupted Monte Cristo “that this took placetowards the year——”“1829, your excellency.”“In what month?”“June.”“The beginning or the end?”“The evening of the 3rd.”“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “the evening of the 3rd of June,1829. Go on.”“It was from Caderousse that I intended demanding shelter, and, as wenever entered by the door that opened onto the road, I resolved not to breakthrough the rule, so climbing over the garden-hedge, I crept amongst the oliveand wild fig trees, and fearing that Caderousse might have some guest, Ientered a kind of shed in which I had often passed the night, and which wasonly separated from the inn by a partition, in which holes had been made inorder to enable us to watch an opportunity of announcing our presence.“My intention was, if Caderousse was alone, to acquaint him with mypresence, finish the meal the custom-house officers had interrupted, and profitby the threatened storm to return to the Rhône, and ascertain the state of ourvessel and its crew. I stepped into the shed, and it was fortunate I did so,for at that moment Caderousse entered with a stranger.“I waited patiently, not to overhear what they said, but because I coulddo nothing else; besides, the same thing had occurred often before. The man whowas with Caderousse was evidently a stranger to the South of France; he was oneof those merchants who come to sell jewellery at the Beaucaire fair, and whoduring the month the fair lasts, and during which there is so great an influxof merchants and customers from all parts of Europe, often have dealings to theamount of 100,000 to 150,000 francs. Caderousse entered hastily. Then, seeingthat the room was, as usual, empty, and only guarded by the dog, he called tohis wife, ‘Hello, Carconte,’ said he, ‘the worthy priest hasnot deceived us; the diamond is real.’“An exclamation of joy was heard, and the staircase creaked beneath afeeble step. ‘What do you say?’ asked his wife, pale as death.“‘I say that the diamond is real, and that this gentleman, one ofthe first jewellers of Paris, will give us 50,000 francs for it. Only, in orderto satisfy himself that it really belongs to us, he wishes you to relate tohim, as I have done already, the miraculous manner in which the diamond cameinto our possession. In the meantime please to sit down, monsieur, and I willfetch you some refreshment.’“The jeweller examined attentively the interior of the inn and theapparent poverty of the persons who were about to sell him a diamond thatseemed to have come from the casket of a prince.“‘Relate your story, madame,’ said he, wishing, no doubt, toprofit by the absence of the husband, so that the latter could not influencethe wife’s story, to see if the two recitals tallied.“‘Oh,’ returned she, ‘it was a gift of heaven. Myhusband was a great friend, in 1814 or 1815, of a sailor named Edmond Dantès.This poor fellow, whom Caderousse had forgotten, had not forgotten him, and athis death he bequeathed this diamond to him.’“‘But how did he obtain it?’ asked the jeweller; ‘hadhe it before he was imprisoned?’“‘No, monsieur; but it appears that in prison he made theacquaintance of a rich Englishman, and as in prison he fell sick, and Dantèstook the same care of him as if he had been his brother, the Englishman, whenhe was set free, gave this stone to Dantès, who, less fortunate, died, and, inhis turn, left it to us, and charged the excellent abbé, who was here thismorning, to deliver it.’“‘The same story,’ muttered the jeweller; ‘andimprobable as it seemed at first, it may be true. There’s only the pricewe are not agreed about.’“‘How not agreed about?’ said Caderousse. ‘I thought weagreed for the price I asked.’“‘That is,’ replied the jeweller, ‘I offered 40,000francs.’‘Forty thousand,’ cried La Carconte; ‘we will not part withit for that sum. The abbé told us it was worth 50,000 without thesetting.’“‘What was the abbé’s name?’ asked the indefatigablequestioner.“‘The Abbé Busoni,’ said La Carconte.“‘He was a foreigner?’“‘An Italian from the neighborhood of Mantua, I believe.’“‘Let me see this diamond again,’ replied the jeweller;‘the first time you are often mistaken as to the value of a stone.’“Caderousse took from his pocket a small case of black shagreen, opened,and gave it to the jeweller. At the sight of the diamond, which was as large asa hazel-nut, La Carconte’s eyes sparkled with cupidity.”“And what did you think of this fine story, eavesdropper?” saidMonte Cristo; “did you credit it?”“Yes, your excellency. I did not look on Caderousse as a bad man, and Ithought him incapable of committing a crime, or even a theft.”“That did more honor to your heart than to your experience, M. Bertuccio.Had you known this Edmond Dantès, of whom they spoke?”“No, your excellency, I had never heard of him before, and never but onceafterwards, and that was from the Abbé Busoni himself, when I saw him in theprison at Nîmes.”“Go on.”“The jeweller took the ring, and drawing from his pocket a pair of steelpliers and a small set of copper scales, he took the stone out of its setting,and weighed it carefully.“‘I will give you 45,000,’ said he, ‘but not a soumore; besides, as that is the exact value of the stone, I brought just that sumwith me.’“‘Oh, that’s no matter,’ replied Caderousse, ‘Iwill go back with you to fetch the other 5,000 francs.’“‘No,’ returned the jeweller, giving back the diamond and thering to Caderousse, ‘no, it is worth no more, and I am sorry I offered somuch, for the stone has a flaw in it, which I had not seen. However, I will notgo back on my word, and I will give 45,000.’“‘At least, replace the diamond in the ring,’ said LaCarconte sharply.“‘Ah, true,’ replied the jeweller, and he reset the stone.“‘No matter,’ observed Caderousse, replacing the box in hispocket, ‘someone else will purchase it.’“‘Yes,’ continued the jeweller; ‘but someone else willnot be so easy as I am, or content himself with the same story. It is notnatural that a man like you should possess such a diamond. He will informagainst you. You will have to find the Abbé Busoni; and abbés who give diamondsworth two thousand louis are rare. The law would seize it, and put you inprison; if at the end of three or four months you are set at liberty, the ringwill be lost, or a false stone, worth three francs, will be given you, insteadof a diamond worth 50,000 or perhaps 55,000 francs; from which you must allowthat one runs considerable risk in purchasing.’“Caderousse and his wife looked eagerly at each other.“‘No,’ said Caderousse, ‘we are not rich enough to lose5,000 francs.’“‘As you please, my dear sir,’ said the jeweller; ‘Ihad, however, as you see, brought you the money in bright coin.’ And hedrew from his pocket a handful of gold, and held it sparkling before thedazzled eyes of the innkeeper, and in the other hand he held a packet ofbank-notes.“There was evidently a severe struggle in the mind of Caderousse; it wasplain that the small shagreen case, which he turned over and over in his hand,did not seem to him commensurate in value to the enormous sum which fascinatedhis gaze. He turned towards his wife.“‘What do you think of this?’ he asked in a low voice.“‘Let him have it—let him have it,’ she said. ‘Ifhe returns to Beaucaire without the diamond, he will inform against us, and, ashe says, who knows if we shall ever again see the Abbé Busoni?—in allprobability we shall never see him.’“‘Well, then, so I will!’ said Caderousse; ‘so you mayhave the diamond for 45,000 francs. But my wife wants a gold chain, and I wanta pair of silver buckles.’“The jeweller drew from his pocket a long flat box, which containedseveral samples of the articles demanded. ‘Here,’ he said, ‘Iam very straightforward in my dealings—take your choice.’“The woman selected a gold chain worth about five louis, and the husbanda pair of buckles, worth perhaps fifteen francs.“‘I hope you will not complain now?’ said the jeweller.“‘The abbé told me it was worth 50,000 francs,’ mutteredCaderousse.“‘Come, come—give it to me! What a strange fellow youare,’ said the jeweller, taking the diamond from his hand. ‘I giveyou 45,000 francs—that is, 2,500 livres of income,—a fortune suchas I wish I had myself, and you are not satisfied!’“‘And the five-and-forty thousand francs,’ inquiredCaderousse in a hoarse voice, ‘where are they? Come—let us seethem.’“‘Here they are,’ replied the jeweller, and he counted outupon the table 15,000 francs in gold, and 30,000 francs in bank-notes.“‘Wait whilst I light the lamp,’ said La Carconte; ‘itis growing dark, and there may be some mistake.’ In fact, night had comeon during this conversation, and with night the storm which had beenthreatening for the last half-hour. The thunder growled in the distance; but itwas apparently not heard by the jeweller, Caderousse, or La Carconte, absorbedas they were all three with the demon of gain. I myself felt a strange kind offascination at the sight of all this gold and all these bank-notes; it seemedto me that I was in a dream, and, as it always happens in a dream, I feltmyself riveted to the spot. Caderousse counted and again counted the gold andthe notes, then handed them to his wife, who counted and counted them again inher turn. During this time, the jeweller made the diamond play and sparkle inthe lamplight, and the gem threw out jets of light which made him unmindful ofthose which—precursors of the storm—began to play in at thewindows.“‘Well,’ inquired the jeweller, ‘is the cash allright?’“‘Yes,’ said Caderousse. ‘Give me the pocket-book, LaCarconte, and find a bag somewhere.’“La Carconte went to a cupboard, and returned with an old leathernpocket-book and a bag. From the former she took some greasy letters, and put intheir place the bank-notes, and from the bag took two or three crowns of sixlivres each, which, in all probability, formed the entire fortune of themiserable couple.“‘There,’ said Caderousse; ‘and now, although you havewronged us of perhaps 10,000 francs, will you have your supper with us? Iinvite you with good-will.’“‘Thank you,’ replied the jeweller, ‘it must be gettinglate, and I must return to Beaucaire—my wife will be gettinguneasy.’ He drew out his watch, and exclaimed, ‘Morbleu!nearly nine o’clock—why, I shall not get back to Beaucaire beforemidnight! Good-night, my friends. If the Abbé Busoni should by any accidentreturn, think of me.’“‘In another week you will have left Beaucaire,’ remarkedCaderousse, ‘for the fair ends in a few days.’“‘True, but that makes no difference. Write to me at Paris, to M.Joannes, in the Palais Royal, arcade Pierre, No. 45. I will make the journey onpurpose to see him, if it is worth while.’“At this moment there was a tremendous clap of thunder, accompanied by aflash of lightning so vivid, that it quite eclipsed the light of the lamp.“‘See here,’ exclaimed Caderousse. ‘You cannot think ofgoing out in such weather as this.’“‘Oh, I am not afraid of thunder,’ said the jeweller.“‘And then there are robbers,’ said La Carconte. ‘Theroad is never very safe during fair time.’“‘Oh, as to the robbers,’ said Joannes, ‘here issomething for them,’ and he drew from his pocket a pair of small pistols,loaded to the muzzle. ‘Here,’ said he, ‘are dogs who bark andbite at the same time, they are for the two first who shall have a longing foryour diamond, Friend Caderousse.’“Caderousse and his wife again interchanged a meaning look. It seemed asthough they were both inspired at the same time with some horrible thought.‘Well, then, a good journey to you,’ said Caderousse.“‘Thanks,’ replied the jeweller. He then took his cane, whichhe had placed against an old cupboard, and went out. At the moment when heopened the door, such a gust of wind came in that the lamp was nearlyextinguished. ‘Oh,’ said he, ‘this is very nice weather, andtwo leagues to go in such a storm.’“‘Remain,’ said Caderousse. ‘You can sleep here.’“‘Yes; do stay,’ added La Carconte in a tremulous voice;‘we will take every care of you.’“‘No; I must sleep at Beaucaire. So, once more, good-night.’Caderousse followed him slowly to the threshold. ‘I can see neitherheaven nor earth,’ said the jeweller, who was outside the door. ‘DoI turn to the right, or to the left hand?’“‘To the right,’ said Caderousse. ‘You cannot gowrong—the road is bordered by trees on both sides.’“‘Good—all right,’ said a voice almost lost in thedistance.“‘Close the door,’ said La Carconte; ‘I do not likeopen doors when it thunders.’“‘Particularly when there is money in the house, eh?’answered Caderousse, double-locking the door.“He came into the room, went to the cupboard, took out the bag andpocket-book, and both began, for the third time, to count their gold andbank-notes. I never saw such an expression of cupidity as the flickering lamprevealed in those two countenances. The woman, especially, was hideous; herusual feverish tremulousness was intensified, her countenance had become livid,and her eyes resembled burning coals.“‘Why,’ she inquired in a hoarse voice, ‘did you invitehim to sleep here tonight?’“‘Why?’ said Caderousse with a shudder; ‘why, that hemight not have the trouble of returning to Beaucaire.’“‘Ah,’ responded the woman, with an expression impossible todescribe; ‘I thought it was for something else.’“‘Woman, woman—why do you have such ideas?’ criedCaderousse; ‘or, if you have them, why don’t you keep them toyourself?’“‘Well,’ said La Carconte, after a moment’s pause,‘you are not a man.’“‘What do you mean?’ added Caderousse.“‘If you had been a man, you would not have let him go fromhere.’“‘Woman!’“‘Or else he should not have reached Beaucaire.’“‘Woman!’“‘The road takes a turn—he is obliged to followit—while alongside of the canal there is a shorter road.’“‘Woman!—you offend the good God. There—listen!’And at this moment there was a tremendous peal of thunder, while the lividlightning illumined the room, and the thunder, rolling away in the distance,seemed to withdraw unwillingly from the cursed abode. ‘Mercy!’ saidCaderousse, crossing himself.“At the same moment, and in the midst of the terrifying silence whichusually follows a clap of thunder, they heard a knocking at the door.Caderousse and his wife started and looked aghast at each other.“‘Who’s there?’ cried Caderousse, rising, and drawingup in a heap the gold and notes scattered over the table, and which he coveredwith his two hands.“‘It is I,’ shouted a voice.“‘And who are you?’“‘Eh, pardieu! Joannes, the jeweller.’“‘Well, and you said I offended the good God,’ said LaCarconte with a horrid smile. ‘Why, the good God sends him backagain.’ Caderousse sank pale and breathless into his chair.“La Carconte, on the contrary, rose, and going with a firm step towardsthe door, opened it, saying, as she did so:“‘Come in, dear M. Joannes.’“‘Ma foi,’ said the jeweller, drenched with rain,‘I am not destined to return to Beaucaire tonight. The shortest folliesare best, my dear Caderousse. You offered me hospitality, and I accept it, andhave returned to sleep beneath your friendly roof.’“Caderousse stammered out something, while he wiped away the sweat thatstarted to his brow. La Carconte double-locked the door behind thejeweller.” Chapter 45. The Rain ofBloodAs the jeweller returnedto the apartment, he cast around him a scrutinizing glance—but there wasnothing to excite suspicion, if it did not exist, or to confirm it, if it werealready awakened. Caderousse’s hands still grasped the gold andbank-notes, and La Carconte called up her sweetest smiles while welcoming thereappearance of their guest.“‘Well, well,’ said the jeweller, ‘you seem, my goodfriends, to have had some fears respecting the accuracy of your money, bycounting it over so carefully directly I was gone.’“‘Oh, no,’ answered Caderousse, ‘that was not myreason, I can assure you; but the circumstances by which we have becomepossessed of this wealth are so unexpected, as to make us scarcely credit ourgood fortune, and it is only by placing the actual proof of our riches beforeour eyes that we can persuade ourselves that the whole affair is not adream.’“The jeweller smiled. ‘Have you any other guests in yourhouse?’ inquired he.“‘Nobody but ourselves,’ replied Caderousse; ‘the factis, we do not lodge travellers—indeed, our tavern is so near the town,that nobody would think of stopping here.’“‘Then I am afraid I shall very much inconvenience you.’“‘Inconvenience us? Not at all, my dear sir,’ said LaCarconte in her most gracious manner. ‘Not at all, I assure you.’“‘But where will you manage to stow me?’“‘In the chamber overhead.’“‘Surely that is where you yourselves sleep?’“‘Never mind that; we have a second bed in the adjoiningroom.’“Caderousse stared at his wife with much astonishment.“The jeweller, meanwhile, was humming a song as he stood warming his backat the fire La Carconte had kindled to dry the wet garments of her guest; andthis done, she next occupied herself in arranging his supper, by spreading anapkin at the end of the table, and placing on it the slender remains of theirdinner, to which she added three or four fresh-laid eggs. Caderousse had oncemore parted with his treasure—the banknotes were replaced in thepocket-book, the gold put back into the bag, and the whole carefully locked inthe cupboard. He then began pacing the room with a pensive and gloomy air,glancing from time to time at the jeweller, who stood reeking with the steamfrom his wet clothes, and merely changing his place on the warm hearth, toenable the whole of his garments to be dried.“‘There,’ said La Carconte, as she placed a bottle of wine onthe table, ‘supper is ready whenever you are.’“‘And you?’ asked Joannes.“‘I don’t want any supper,’ said Caderousse.“‘We dined so very late,’ hastily interposed La Carconte.“‘Then it seems I am to eat alone,’ remarked the jeweller.“‘Oh, we shall have the pleasure of waiting upon you,’answered La Carconte, with an eager attention she was not accustomed tomanifest even to guests who paid for what they took.“From time to time Caderousse darted on his wife keen, searching glances,but rapid as the lightning flash. The storm still continued.“‘There, there,’ said La Carconte; ‘do you hear that?upon my word, you did well to come back.’“‘Nevertheless,’ replied the jeweller, ‘if by the timeI have finished my supper the tempest has at all abated, I shall make anotherstart.’“‘It’s the mistral,’ said Caderousse, ‘and itwill be sure to last till tomorrow morning.’ He sighed heavily.“‘Well,’ said the jeweller, as he placed himself at table,‘all I can say is, so much the worse for those who are abroad.’“‘Yes,’ chimed in La Carconte, ‘they will have awretched night of it.’“The jeweller began eating his supper, and the woman, who was ordinarilyso querulous and indifferent to all who approached her, was suddenlytransformed into the most smiling and attentive hostess. Had the unhappy man onwhom she lavished her assiduities been previously acquainted with her, sosudden an alteration might well have excited suspicion in his mind, or at leasthave greatly astonished him. Caderousse, meanwhile, continued to pace the roomin gloomy silence, sedulously avoiding the sight of his guest; but as soon asthe stranger had completed his repast, the agitated innkeeper went eagerly tothe door and opened it.“‘I believe the storm is over,’ said he.“But as if to contradict his statement, at that instant a violent clap ofthunder seemed to shake the house to its very foundation, while a sudden gustof wind, mingled with rain, extinguished the lamp he held in his hand.“Trembling and awe-struck, Caderousse hastily shut the door and returnedto his guest, while La Carconte lighted a candle by the smouldering ashes thatglimmered on the hearth.“‘You must be tired,’ said she to the jeweller; ‘I havespread a pair of white sheets on your bed; go up when you are ready, and sleepwell.’“Joannes stayed for a while to see whether the storm seemed to abate inits fury, but a brief space of time sufficed to assure him that, instead ofdiminishing, the violence of the rain and thunder momentarily increased;resigning himself, therefore, to what seemed inevitable, he bade his hostgood-night, and mounted the stairs. He passed over my head and I heard theflooring creak beneath his footsteps. The quick, eager glance of La Carcontefollowed him as he ascended, while Caderousse, on the contrary, turned hisback, and seemed most anxiously to avoid even glancing at him.“All these circumstances did not strike me as painfully at the time asthey have since done; in fact, all that had happened (with the exception of thestory of the diamond, which certainly did wear an air of improbability),appeared natural enough, and called for neither apprehension nor mistrust; but,worn out as I was with fatigue, and fully purposing to proceed onwards directlythe tempest abated, I determined to obtain a few hours’ sleep. Overhead Icould accurately distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after makingthe best arrangements in his power for passing a comfortable night, threwhimself on his bed, and I could hear it creak and groan beneath his weight.“Insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and havingno suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. I looked into thekitchen once more and saw Caderousse sitting by the side of a long table uponone of the low wooden stools which in country places are frequently usedinstead of chairs; his back was turned towards me, so that I could not see theexpression of his countenance—neither should I have been able to do sohad he been placed differently, as his head was buried between his two hands.La Carconte continued to gaze on him for some time, then shrugging hershoulders, she took her seat immediately opposite to him.“At this moment the expiring embers threw up a fresh flame from thekindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a bright light flashed over theroom. La Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband, but as he made nosign of changing his position, she extended her hard, bony hand, and touchedhim on the forehead.“Caderousse shuddered. The woman’s lips seemed to move, as thoughshe were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my senseswere dulled by sleep, I did not catch a word she uttered. Confused sights andsounds seemed to float before me, and gradually I fell into a deep, heavyslumber. How long I had been in this unconscious state I know not, when I wassuddenly aroused by the report of a pistol, followed by a fearful cry. Weak andtottering footsteps resounded across the chamber above me, and the next instanta dull, heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on the staircase. I had not yetfully recovered consciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled withhalf-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle. A cry moreprolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans effectually rousedme from my drowsy lethargy. Hastily raising myself on one arm, I looked around,but all was dark; and it seemed to me as if the rain must have penetratedthrough the flooring of the room above, for some kind of moisture appeared tofall, drop by drop, upon my forehead, and when I passed my hand across my brow,I felt that it was wet and clammy.“To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded the mostperfect silence—unbroken, save by the footsteps of a man walking about inthe chamber above. The staircase creaked, he descended into the room below,approached the fire and lit a candle.“The man was Caderousse—he was pale and his shirt was all bloody.Having obtained the light, he hurried upstairs again, and once more I heard hisrapid and uneasy footsteps.“A moment later he came down again, holding in his hand the smallshagreen case, which he opened, to assure himself it contained thediamond,—seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in, then,as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he deposited it in hisred handkerchief, which he carefully rolled round his head.“After this he took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold he had putthere, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and the other into thatof his waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of linen, and rushing towardsthe door, disappeared in the darkness of the night.“Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached myself withwhat had happened, as though I myself had done the guilty deed. I fancied thatI still heard faint moans, and imagining that the unfortunate jeweller mightnot be quite dead, I determined to go to his relief, by way of atoning in someslight degree, not for the crime I had committed, but for that which I had notendeavored to prevent. For this purpose I applied all the strength I possessedto force an entrance from the cramped spot in which I lay to the adjoiningroom. The poorly fastened boards which alone divided me from it yielded to myefforts, and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up the lightedcandle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a body was lying quite acrossthe stairs. It was that of La Carconte. The pistol I had heard had doubtlessbeen fired at her. The shot had frightfully lacerated her throat, leaving twogaping wounds from which, as well as the mouth, the blood was pouring infloods. She was stone dead. I strode past her, and ascended to the sleepingchamber, which presented an appearance of the wildest disorder. The furniturehad been knocked over in the deadly struggle that had taken place there, andthe sheets, to which the unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were draggedacross the room. The murdered man lay on the floor, his head leaning againstthe wall, and about him was a pool of blood which poured forth from three largewounds in his breast; there was a fourth gash, in which a long table knife wasplunged up to the handle.“I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine—it was thesecond pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet. Iapproached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of myfootsteps and the creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them on mewith an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though trying to speak,then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.“This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses, and finding that Icould no longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire was tofly. I rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and uttering a groan ofhorror.“Upon reaching the room below, I found five or six custom-house officers,and two or three gendarmes—all heavily armed. They threw themselves uponme. I made no resistance; I was no longer master of my senses. When I strove tospeak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped my lips.“As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed tomy blood-stained garments, I involuntarily surveyed myself, and then Idiscovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed me as I lay beneaththe staircase must have been the blood of La Carconte. I pointed to the spotwhere I had concealed myself.“‘What does he mean?’ asked a gendarme.“One of the officers went to the place I directed.“‘He means,’ replied the man upon his return, ‘that hegot in that way;’ and he showed the hole I had made when I broke through.“Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recovered force andenergy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while Imanaged to stammer forth:“‘I did not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!’“A couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against mybreast.“‘Stir but a step,’ said they, ‘and you are a deadman.’“‘Why should you threaten me with death,’ cried I,‘when I have already declared my innocence?’“‘Tush, tush,’ cried the men; ‘keep your innocentstories to tell to the judge at Nîmes. Meanwhile, come along with us; and thebest advice we can give you is to do so unresistingly.’“Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterly overpowered bysurprise and terror; and without a word I suffered myself to be handcuffed andtied to a horse’s tail, and thus they took me to Nîmes.“I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me nearthe tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he hadreturned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear the report ofthe pistol, and to take me in the midst of such circumstantial proofs of myguilt as rendered all hopes of proving my innocence utterly futile. One onlychance was left me, that of beseeching the magistrate before whom I was takento cause every inquiry to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at theinn of the Pont du Gard on that morning.“If Caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and thereexisted no such person as the Abbé Busoni, then, indeed, I was lost pastredemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance of Caderoussehimself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.“Two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I mustdo the magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to obtaininformation of the person I declared could exculpate me if he would. Caderoussestill evaded all pursuit, and I had resigned myself to what seemed myinevitable fate. My trial was to come on at the approaching assizes; when, onthe 8th of September—that is to say, precisely three months and five daysafter the events which had perilled my life—the Abbé Busoni, whom I neverventured to believe I should see, presented himself at the prison doors, sayinghe understood one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he added, thathaving learned at Marseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, he hastened tocomply with my desire.“You may easily imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him, and howminutely I related the whole of what I had seen and heard. I felt some degreeof nervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond, but, to myinexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it in every particular, and to myequal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief in all I said.“And then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that he wasacquainted with all the habits and customs of my own country, and consideringalso that pardon for the only crime of which I was really guilty might comewith a double power from lips so benevolent and kind, I besought him to receivemy confession, under the seal of which I recounted the Auteuil affair in allits details, as well as every other transaction of my life. That which I haddone by the impulse of my best feelings produced the same effect as though ithad been the result of calculation. My voluntary confession of theassassination at Auteuil proved to him that I had not committed that of which Istood accused. When he quitted me, he bade me be of good courage, and to relyupon his doing all in his power to convince my judges of my innocence.“I had speedy proofs that the excellent abbé was engaged in my behalf,for the rigors of my imprisonment were alleviated by many trifling thoughacceptable indulgences, and I was told that my trial was to be postponed to theassizes following those now being held.“In the interim it pleased Providence to cause the apprehension ofCaderousse, who was discovered in some distant country, and brought back toFrance, where he made a full confession, refusing to make the fact of hiswife’s having suggested and arranged the murder any excuse for his ownguilt. The wretched man was sentenced to the galleys for life, and I wasimmediately set at liberty.”“And then it was, I presume,” said Monte Cristo “that youcame to me as the bearer of a letter from the Abbé Busoni?”“It was, your excellency; the benevolent abbé took an evident interest inall that concerned me.“‘Your mode of life as a smuggler,’ said he to me one day,‘will be the ruin of you; if you get out, don’t take it upagain.’“‘But how,’ inquired I, ‘am I to maintain myself and mypoor sister?’“‘A person, whose confessor I am,’ replied he, ‘and whoentertains a high regard for me, applied to me a short time since to procurehim a confidential servant. Would you like such a post? If so, I will give youa letter of introduction to him.’“‘Oh, father,’ I exclaimed, ‘you are very good.’“‘But you must swear solemnly that I shall never have reason torepent my recommendation.’“I extended my hand, and was about to pledge myself by any promise hewould dictate, but he stopped me.“‘It is unnecessary for you to bind yourself by any vow,’said he; ‘I know and admire the Corsican nature too well to fear you.Here, take this,’ continued he, after rapidly writing the few lines Ibrought to your excellency, and upon receipt of which you deigned to receive meinto your service, and proudly I ask whether your excellency has ever had causeto repent having done so?”“No,” replied the count; “I take pleasure in saying that youhave served me faithfully, Bertuccio; but you might have shown more confidencein me.”“I, your excellency?”“Yes; you. How comes it, that having both a sister and an adopted son,you have never spoken to me of either?”“Alas, I have still to recount the most distressing period of my life.Anxious as you may suppose I was to behold and comfort my dear sister, I lostno time in hastening to Corsica, but when I arrived at Rogliano I found a houseof mourning, the consequences of a scene so horrible that the neighborsremember and speak of it to this day. Acting by my advice, my poor sister hadrefused to comply with the unreasonable demands of Benedetto, who wascontinually tormenting her for money, as long as he believed there was a souleft in her possession. One morning he threatened her with the severestconsequences if she did not supply him with what he desired, and disappearedand remained away all day, leaving the kind-hearted Assunta, who loved him asif he were her own child, to weep over his conduct and bewail his absence.Evening came, and still, with all the patient solicitude of a mother, shewatched for his return.“As the eleventh hour struck, he entered with a swaggering air, attendedby two of the most dissolute and reckless of his boon companions. She stretchedout her arms to him, but they seized hold of her, and one of thethree—none other than the accursed Benedetto exclaimed:“‘Put her to torture and she’ll soon tell us where her moneyis.’“It unfortunately happened that our neighbor, Wasilio, was at Bastia,leaving no person in his house but his wife; no human creature beside couldhear or see anything that took place within our dwelling. Two held poorAssunta, who, unable to conceive that any harm was intended to her, smiled inthe face of those who were soon to become her executioners. The third proceededto barricade the doors and windows, then returned, and the three united instifling the cries of terror incited by the sight of these preparations, andthen dragged Assunta feet foremost towards the brazier, expecting to wring fromher an avowal of where her supposed treasure was secreted. In the struggle herclothes caught fire, and they were obliged to let go their hold in order topreserve themselves from sharing the same fate. Covered with flames, Assuntarushed wildly to the door, but it was fastened; she flew to the windows, butthey were also secured; then the neighbors heard frightful shrieks; it wasAssunta calling for help. The cries died away in groans, and next morning, assoon as Wasilio’s wife could muster up courage to venture abroad, shecaused the door of our dwelling to be opened by the public authorities, whenAssunta, although dreadfully burnt, was found still breathing; every drawer andcloset in the house had been forced open, and the money stolen. Benedetto neveragain appeared at Rogliano, neither have I since that day either seen or heardanything concerning him.“It was subsequently to these dreadful events that I waited on yourexcellency, to whom it would have been folly to have mentioned Benedetto, sinceall trace of him seemed entirely lost; or of my sister, since she wasdead.”“And in what light did you view the occurrence?” inquired MonteCristo.“As a punishment for the crime I had committed,” answeredBertuccio. “Oh, those Villeforts are an accursed race!”“Truly they are,” murmured the count in a lugubrious tone.“And now,” resumed Bertuccio, “your excellency may, perhaps,be able to comprehend that this place, which I revisit for the firsttime—this garden, the actual scene of my crime—must have given riseto reflections of no very agreeable nature, and produced that gloom anddepression of spirits which excited the notice of your excellency, who waspleased to express a desire to know the cause. At this instant a shudder passesover me as I reflect that possibly I am now standing on the very grave in whichlies M. de Villefort, by whose hand the ground was dug to receive the corpse ofhis child.”“Everything is possible,” said Monte Cristo, rising from the benchon which he had been sitting; “even,” he added in an inaudiblevoice, “even that the procureur be not dead. The Abbé Busoni did right tosend you to me,” he went on in his ordinary tone, “and you havedone well in relating to me the whole of your history, as it will prevent myforming any erroneous opinions concerning you in future. As for that Benedetto,who so grossly belied his name, have you never made any effort to trace outwhither he has gone, or what has become of him?”“No; far from wishing to learn whither he has betaken himself, I shouldshun the possibility of meeting him as I would a wild beast. Thank God, I havenever heard his name mentioned by any person, and I hope and believe he isdead.”“Do not think so, Bertuccio,” replied the count; “for thewicked are not so easily disposed of, for God seems to have them under hisspecial watch-care to make of them instruments of his vengeance.”“So be it,” responded Bertuccio, “all I ask of heaven is thatI may never see him again. And now, your excellency,” he added, bowinghis head, “you know everything—you are my judge on earth, as theAlmighty is in heaven; have you for me no words of consolation?”“My good friend, I can only repeat the words addressed to you by the AbbéBusoni. Villefort merited punishment for what he had done to you, and, perhaps,to others. Benedetto, if still living, will become the instrument of divineretribution in some way or other, and then be duly punished in his turn. As faras you yourself are concerned, I see but one point in which you are reallyguilty. Ask yourself, wherefore, after rescuing the infant from its livinggrave, you did not restore it to its mother? There was the crime,Bertuccio—that was where you became really culpable.”“True, excellency, that was the crime, the real crime, for in that Iacted like a coward. My first duty, directly I had succeeded in recalling thebabe to life, was to restore it to its mother; but, in order to do so, I musthave made close and careful inquiry, which would, in all probability, have ledto my own apprehension; and I clung to life, partly on my sister’saccount, and partly from that feeling of pride inborn in our hearts of desiringto come off untouched and victorious in the execution of our vengeance.Perhaps, too, the natural and instinctive love of life made me wish to avoidendangering my own. And then, again, I am not as brave and courageous as was mypoor brother.”Bertuccio hid his face in his hands as he uttered these words, while MonteCristo fixed on him a look of inscrutable meaning. After a brief silence,rendered still more solemn by the time and place, the count said, in a tone ofmelancholy wholly unlike his usual manner:“In order to bring this conversation to a fitting termination (the lastwe shall ever hold upon this subject), I will repeat to you some words I haveheard from the lips of the Abbé Busoni. For all evils there are tworemedies—time and silence. And now leave me, Monsieur Bertuccio, to walkalone here in the garden. The very circumstances which inflict on you, as aprincipal in the tragic scene enacted here, such painful emotions, are to me,on the contrary, a source of something like contentment, and serve but toenhance the value of this dwelling in my estimation. The chief beauty of treesconsists in the deep shadow of their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures amoving multitude of shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade.Here I have a garden laid out in such a way as to afford the fullest scope forthe imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose leafyscreen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will. This to me, whoexpected but to find a blank enclosure surrounded by a straight wall, is, Iassure you, a most agreeable surprise. I have no fear of ghosts, and I havenever heard it said that so much harm had been done by the dead during sixthousand years as is wrought by the living in a single day. Retire within,Bertuccio, and tranquillize your mind. Should your confessor be less indulgentto you in your dying moments than you found the Abbé Busoni, send for me, if Iam still on earth, and I will soothe your ears with words that shalleffectually calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse theocean called eternity.”Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily. Monte Cristo,left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured:“Here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant’sgrave was dug. There is the little door opening into the garden. At this corneris the private staircase communicating with the sleeping apartment. There willbe no necessity for me to make a note of these particulars, for there, beforemy eyes, beneath my feet, all around me, I have the plan sketched with all theliving reality of truth.”After making the tour of the garden a second time, the count re-entered hiscarriage, while Bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression of hismaster’s features, took his seat beside the driver without uttering aword. The carriage proceeded rapidly towards Paris.That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the Count ofMonte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one long acquaintedwith each nook or corner. Nor, although preceding the party, did he oncemistake one door for another, or commit the smallest error when choosing anyparticular corridor or staircase to conduct him to a place or suite of rooms hedesired to visit. Ali was his principal attendant during this nocturnal survey.Having given various orders to Bertuccio relative to the improvements andalterations he desired to make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch,said to the attentive Nubian:“It is half-past eleven o’clock; Haydée will soon be here. Have theFrench attendants been summoned to await her coming?”Ali extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair Greek,which were so effectually concealed by means of a tapestried entrance, that itwould have puzzled the most curious to have divined their existence. Ali,having pointed to the apartments, held up three fingers of his right hand, andthen, placing it beneath his head, shut his eyes, and feigned to sleep.“I understand,” said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali’spantomime; “you mean to tell me that three female attendants await theirnew mistress in her sleeping-chamber.”Ali, with considerable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.“Madame will be tired tonight,” continued Monte Cristo, “andwill, no doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French attendants not to weary herwith questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. You willalso see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of thiscountry.”He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heard hailing the concierge. The gateopened, a carriage rolled down the avenue, and stopped at the steps. The counthastily descended, presented himself at the already opened carriage door, andheld out his hand to a young woman, completely enveloped in a green silk mantleheavily embroidered with gold. She raised the hand extended towards her to herlips, and kissed it with a mixture of love and respect. Some few words passedbetween them in that sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods converse.The young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness, while the countreplied with an air of gentle gravity.Preceded by Ali, who carried a rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the younglady, who was no other than the lovely Greek who had been Monte Cristo’scompanion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the count retired tothe pavilion reserved for himself. In another hour every light in the house wasextinguished, and it might have been thought that all its inmates slept. Chapter 46. UnlimitedCreditAbout two o’clockthe following day a calash, drawn by a pair of magnificent English horses,stopped at the door of Monte Cristo and a person, dressed in a blue coat, withbuttons of a similar color, a white waistcoat, over which was displayed amassive gold chain, brown trousers, and a quantity of black hair descending solow over his eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial solittle did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles stamped onhis features—a person, in a word, who, although evidently past fifty,desired to be taken for not more than forty, bent forwards from the carriagedoor, on the panels of which were emblazoned the armorial bearings of a baron,and directed his groom to inquire at the porter’s lodge whether the Countof Monte Cristo resided there, and if he were within.While waiting, the occupant of the carriage surveyed the house, the garden asfar as he could distinguish it, and the livery of servants who passed to andfro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat impertinent. His glance waskeen but showed cunning rather than intelligence; his lips were straight, andso thin that, as they closed, they were drawn in over the teeth; hischeek-bones were broad and projecting, a never-failing proof of audacity andcraftiness; while the flatness of his forehead, and the enlargement of the backof his skull, which rose much higher than his large and coarsely shaped ears,combined to form a physiognomy anything but prepossessing, save in the eyes ofsuch as considered that the owner of so splendid an equipage must needs be allthat was admirable and enviable, more especially when they gazed on theenormous diamond that glittered in his shirt, and the red ribbon that dependedfrom his button-hole.The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of theporter’s lodge, saying:“Pray, does not the Count of Monte Cristo live here?”“His excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge;“but——” added he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali.Ali returned a sign in the negative.“But what?” asked the groom.“His excellency does not receive visitors today.”“Then here is my master’s card, the Baron Danglars. You will takeit to the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the Chamber, mymaster came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”“I never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge;“the valet de chambre will carry your message.”The groom returned to the carriage.“Well?” asked Danglars.The man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received, repeated what theconcierge had said.“Bless me,” murmured Baron Danglars, “this must surely be aprince instead of a count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ andonly venturing to address him by the medium of his valet de chambre. However,it does not signify; he has a letter of credit on me, so I must see him when herequires his money.”Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars called out to hiscoachman, in a voice that might be heard across the road, “To the Chamberof Deputies.”Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, from behind theblinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of anexcellent lorgnette, as Danglars himself had scrutinized the house, garden, andservants.“That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance,” said the count in atone of disgust, as he shut up his glass into its ivory case. “How comesit that all do not retreat in aversion at sight of that flat, receding,serpent-like forehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked nose, likethe beak of a buzzard? Ali,” cried he, striking at the same time on thebrazen gong. Ali appeared. “Summon Bertuccio,” said the count.Almost immediately Bertuccio entered the apartment.“Did your excellency desire to see me?” inquired he.“I did,” replied the count. “You no doubt observed the horsesstanding a few minutes since at the door?”“Certainly, your excellency. I noticed them for their remarkablebeauty.”“Then how comes it,” said Monte Cristo with a frown, “that,when I desired you to purchase for me the finest pair of horses to be found inParis, there is another pair, fully as fine as mine, not in my stables?”At the look of displeasure, added to the angry tone in which the count spoke,Ali turned pale and held down his head.“It is not your fault, my good Ali,” said the count in the Arabiclanguage, and with a gentleness none would have thought him capable of showing,either in voice or face—“it is not your fault. You do notunderstand the points of English horses.”The countenance of poor Ali recovered its serenity.“Permit me to assure your excellency,” said Bertuccio, “thatthe horses you speak of were not to be sold when I purchased yours.”Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders. “It seems, sir steward,” saidhe, “that you have yet to learn that all things are to be sold to such ascare to pay the price.”“His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M. Danglars gave 16,000francs for his horses?”“Very well. Then offer him double that sum; a banker never loses anopportunity of doubling his capital.”“Is your excellency really in earnest?” inquired the steward.Monte Cristo regarded the person who durst presume to doubt his words with thelook of one equally surprised and displeased.“I have to pay a visit this evening,” replied he. “I desirethat these horses, with completely new harness, may be at the door with mycarriage.”Bertuccio bowed, and was about to retire; but when he reached the door, hepaused, and then said, “At what o’clock does your excellency wishthe carriage and horses to be ready?”“At five o’clock,” replied the count.“I beg your excellency’s pardon,” interposed the steward in adeprecating manner, “for venturing to observe that it is already twoo’clock.”“I am perfectly aware of that fact,” answered Monte Cristo calmly.Then, turning towards Ali, he said, “Let all the horses in my stables beled before the windows of your young lady, that she may select those sheprefers for her carriage. Request her also to oblige me by saying whether it isher pleasure to dine with me; if so, let dinner be served in her apartments.Now, leave me, and desire my valet de chambre to come hither.”Scarcely had Ali disappeared when the valet entered the chamber.“Monsieur Baptistin,” said the count, “you have been in myservice one year, the time I generally give myself to judge of the merits ordemerits of those about me. You suit me very well.”Baptistin bowed low.“It only remains for me to know whether I also suit you?”“Oh, your excellency!” exclaimed Baptistin eagerly.“Listen, if you please, till I have finished speaking,” repliedMonte Cristo. “You receive 1,500 francs per annum for your serviceshere—more than many a brave subaltern, who continually risks his life forhis country, obtains. You live in a manner far superior to many clerks who workten times harder than you do for their money. Then, though yourself a servant,you have other servants to wait upon you, take care of your clothes, and seethat your linen is duly prepared for you. Again, you make a profit upon eacharticle you purchase for my toilet, amounting in the course of a year to a sumequalling your wages.”“Nay, indeed, your excellency.”“I am not condemning you for this, Monsieur Baptistin; but let yourprofits end here. It would be long indeed ere you would find so lucrative apost as that you have now the good fortune to fill. I neither ill-use norill-treat my servants by word or action. An error I readily forgive, but wilfulnegligence or forgetfulness, never. My commands are ordinarily short, clear,and precise; and I would rather be obliged to repeat my words twice, or eventhree times, than they should be misunderstood. I am rich enough to knowwhatever I desire to know, and I can promise you I am not wanting in curiosity.If, then, I should learn that you had taken upon yourself to speak of me toanyone favorably or unfavorably, to comment on my actions, or watch my conduct,that very instant you would quit my service. You may now retire. I nevercaution my servants a second time—remember that.”Baptistin bowed, and was proceeding towards the door.“I forgot to mention to you,” said the count, “that I layyearly aside a certain sum for each servant in my establishment; those whom Iam compelled to dismiss lose (as a matter of course) all participation in thismoney, while their portion goes to the fund accumulating for those domesticswho remain with me, and among whom it will be divided at my death. You havebeen in my service a year, your fund has already begun to accumulate—letit continue to do so.”This address, delivered in the presence of Ali, who, not understanding one wordof the language in which it was spoken, stood wholly unmoved, produced aneffect on M. Baptistin only to be conceived by such as have occasion to studythe character and disposition of French domestics.“I assure your excellency,” said he, “that at least it shallbe my study to merit your approbation in all things, and I will take M. Ali asmy model.”“By no means,” replied the count in the most frigid tones;“Ali has many faults mixed with most excellent qualities. He cannotpossibly serve you as a pattern for your conduct, not being, as you are, a paidservant, but a mere slave—a dog, who, should he fail in his duty towardsme, I should not discharge from my service, but kill.”Baptistin opened his eyes with astonishment.“You seem incredulous,” said Monte Cristo, who repeated to Ali inthe Arabic language what he had just been saying to Baptistin in French.The Nubian smiled assentingly to his master’s words, then, kneeling onone knee, respectfully kissed the hand of the count. This corroboration of thelesson he had just received put the finishing stroke to the wonder andstupefaction of M. Baptistin. The count then motioned the valet de chambre toretire, and to Ali to follow to his study, where they conversed long andearnestly together. As the hand of the clock pointed to five the count struckthrice upon his gong. When Ali was wanted one stroke was given, two summonedBaptistin, and three Bertuccio. The steward entered.“My horses,” said Monte Cristo.“They are at the door harnessed to the carriage as your excellencydesired. Does your excellency wish me to accompany him?”“No, the coachman, Ali, and Baptistin will go.”The count descended to the door of his mansion, and beheld his carriage drawnby the very pair of horses he had so much admired in the morning as theproperty of Danglars. As he passed them he said:“They are extremely handsome certainly, and you have done well topurchase them, although you were somewhat remiss not to have procured themsooner.”“Indeed, your excellency, I had very considerable difficulty in obtainingthem, and, as it is, they have cost an enormous price.”“Does the sum you gave for them make the animals less beautiful,”inquired the count, shrugging his shoulders.“Nay, if your excellency is satisfied, it is all that I could wish.Whither does your excellency desire to be driven?”“To the residence of Baron Danglars, Rue de la Chausséed’Antin.”This conversation had passed as they stood upon the terrace, from which aflight of stone steps led to the carriage-drive. As Bertuccio, with arespectful bow, was moving away, the count called him back.“I have another commission for you, M. Bertuccio,” said he;“I am desirous of having an estate by the seaside in Normandy—forinstance, between Le Havre and Boulogne. You see I give you a wide range. Itwill be absolutely necessary that the place you may select have a small harbor,creek, or bay, into which my corvette can enter and remain at anchor. She drawsonly fifteen feet. She must be kept in constant readiness to sail immediately Ithink proper to give the signal. Make the requisite inquiries for a place ofthis description, and when you have met with an eligible spot, visit it, and ifit possess the advantages desired, purchase it at once in your own name. Thecorvette must now, I think, be on her way to Fécamp, must she not?”“Certainly, your excellency; I saw her put to sea the same evening wequitted Marseilles.”“And the yacht.”“Was ordered to remain at Martigues.”“’Tis well. I wish you to write from time to time to the captainsin charge of the two vessels so as to keep them on the alert.”“And the steamboat?”“She is at Châlons?”“Yes.”“The same orders for her as for the two sailing vessels.”“Very good.”“When you have purchased the estate I desire, I want constant relays ofhorses at ten leagues apart along the northern and southern road.”“Your excellency may depend upon me.”The Count made a gesture of satisfaction, descended the terrace steps, andsprang into his carriage, which was whirled along swiftly to the banker’shouse.Danglars was engaged at that moment, presiding over a railroad committee. Butthe meeting was nearly concluded when the name of his visitor was announced. Asthe count’s title sounded on his ear he rose, and addressing hiscolleagues, who were members of one or the other Chamber, he said:“Gentlemen, pardon me for leaving you so abruptly; but a most ridiculouscircumstance has occurred, which is this,—Thomson & French, the Romanbankers, have sent to me a certain person calling himself the Count of MonteCristo, and have given him an unlimited credit with me. I confess this is thedrollest thing I have ever met with in the course of my extensive foreigntransactions, and you may readily suppose it has greatly roused my curiosity. Itook the trouble this morning to call on the pretended count—if he were areal count he wouldn’t be so rich. But, would you believe it, ‘Hewas not receiving.’ So the master of Monte Cristo gives himself airsbefitting a great millionaire or a capricious beauty. I made inquiries, andfound that the house in the Champs-Élysées is his own property, and certainlyit was very decently kept up. But,” pursued Danglars with one of hissinister smiles, “an order for unlimited credit calls for something likecaution on the part of the banker to whom that order is given. I am veryanxious to see this man. I suspect a hoax is intended, but the instigators ofit little knew whom they had to deal with. ‘They laugh best who laughlast!’”Having delivered himself of this pompous address, uttered with a degree ofenergy that left the baron almost out of breath, he bowed to the assembledparty and withdrew to his drawing-room, whose sumptuous furnishings of whiteand gold had caused a great sensation in the Chaussée d’Antin. It was tothis apartment he had desired his guest to be shown, with the purpose ofoverwhelming him at the sight of so much luxury. He found the count standingbefore some copies of Albano and Fattore that had been passed off to the bankeras originals; but which, mere copies as they were, seemed to feel theirdegradation in being brought into juxtaposition with the gaudy colors thatcovered the ceiling.The count turned round as he heard the entrance of Danglars into the room. Witha slight inclination of the head, Danglars signed to the count to be seated,pointing significantly to a gilded armchair, covered with white satinembroidered with gold. The count sat down.“I have the honor, I presume, of addressing M. de Monte Cristo.”The count bowed.“And I of speaking to Baron Danglars, chevalier of the Legion of Honor,and member of the Chamber of Deputies?”Monte Cristo repeated all the titles he had read on the baron’s card.Danglars felt the irony and compressed his lips.“You will, I trust, excuse me, monsieur, for not calling you by yourtitle when I first addressed you,” he said, “but you are aware thatwe are living under a popular form of government, and that I am myself arepresentative of the liberties of the people.”“So much so,” replied Monte Cristo, “that while you callyourself baron you are not willing to call anybody else count.”“Upon my word, monsieur,” said Danglars with affected carelessness,“I attach no sort of value to such empty distinctions; but the fact is, Iwas made baron, and also chevalier of the Legion of Honor, in return forservices rendered, but——”“But you have discarded your titles after the example set you by Messrs.de Montmorency and Lafayette? That was a noble example to follow,monsieur.”“Why,” replied Danglars, “not entirely so; with theservants,—you understand.”“I see; to your domestics you are ‘my lord,’ the journalistsstyle you ‘monsieur,’ while your constituents call you‘citizen.’ These are distinctions very suitable under aconstitutional government. I understand perfectly.”Again Danglars bit his lips; he saw that he was no match for Monte Cristo in anargument of this sort, and he therefore hastened to turn to subjects morecongenial.“Permit me to inform you, Count,” said he, bowing, “that Ihave received a letter of advice from Thomson & French, of Rome.”“I am glad to hear it, baron,—for I must claim the privilege ofaddressing you after the manner of your servants. I have acquired the bad habitof calling persons by their titles from living in a country where barons arestill barons by right of birth. But as regards the letter of advice, I amcharmed to find that it has reached you; that will spare me the troublesome anddisagreeable task of coming to you for money myself. You have received aregular letter of advice?”“Yes,” said Danglars, “but I confess I didn’t quitecomprehend its meaning.”“Indeed?”“And for that reason I did myself the honor of calling upon you, in orderto beg for an explanation.”“Go on, monsieur. Here I am, ready to give you any explanation youdesire.”“Why,” said Danglars, “in the letter—I believe I haveit about me”—here he felt in his breast-pocket—“yes,here it is. Well, this letter gives the Count of Monte Cristo unlimited crediton our house.”“Well, baron, what is there difficult to understand about that?”“Merely the term unlimited—nothing else, certainly.”“Is not that word known in France? The people who wrote areAnglo-Germans, you know.”“Oh, as for the composition of the letter, there is nothing to be said;but as regards the competency of the document, I certainly have doubts.”“Is it possible?” asked the count, assuming all air and tone of theutmost simplicity and candor. “Is it possible that Thomson & Frenchare not looked upon as safe and solvent bankers? Pray tell me what you think,baron, for I feel uneasy, I can assure you, having some considerable propertyin their hands.”“Thomson & French are perfectly solvent,” replied Danglars,with an almost mocking smile; “but the word unlimited, infinancial affairs, is so extremely vague.”“Is, in fact, unlimited,” said Monte Cristo.“Precisely what I was about to say,” cried Danglars. “Nowwhat is vague is doubtful; and it was a wise man who said, ‘when indoubt, keep out.’”“Meaning to say,” rejoined Monte Cristo, “that howeverThomson & French may be inclined to commit acts of imprudence and folly,the Baron Danglars is not disposed to follow their example.”“Not at all.”“Plainly enough; Messrs. Thomson & French set no bounds to theirengagements while those of M. Danglars have their limits; he is a wise man,according to his own showing.”“Monsieur,” replied the banker, drawing himself up with a haughtyair, “the extent of my resources has never yet been questioned.”“It seems, then, reserved for me,” said Monte Cristo coldly,“to be the first to do so.”“By what right, sir?”“By right of the objections you have raised, and the explanations youhave demanded, which certainly must have some motive.”Once more Danglars bit his lips. It was the second time he had been worsted,and this time on his own ground. His forced politeness sat awkwardly upon him,and approached almost to impertinence. Monte Cristo on the contrary, preserveda graceful suavity of demeanor, aided by a certain degree of simplicity hecould assume at pleasure, and thus possessed the advantage.“Well, sir,” resumed Danglars, after a brief silence, “I willendeavor to make myself understood, by requesting you to inform me for what sumyou propose to draw upon me?”“Why, truly,” replied Monte Cristo, determined not to lose an inchof the ground he had gained, “my reason for desiring an‘unlimited’ credit was precisely because I did not know how muchmoney I might need.”The banker thought the time had come for him to take the upper hand. Sothrowing himself back in his armchair, he said, with an arrogant andpurse-proud air:“Let me beg of you not to hesitate in naming your wishes; you will thenbe convinced that the resources of the house of Danglars, however limited, arestill equal to meeting the largest demands; and were you even to require amillion——”“I beg your pardon,” interposed Monte Cristo.“I said a million,” replied Danglars, with the confidence ofignorance.“But could I do with a million?” retorted the count. “My dearsir, if a trifle like that could suffice me, I should never have given myselfthe trouble of opening an account. A million? Excuse my smiling when you speakof a sum I am in the habit of carrying in my pocket-book ordressing-case.”And with these words Monte Cristo took from his pocket a small case containinghis visiting-cards, and drew forth two orders on the treasury for 500,000francs each, payable at sight to the bearer. A man like Danglars was whollyinaccessible to any gentler method of correction. The effect of the presentrevelation was stunning; he trembled and was on the verge of apoplexy. Thepupils of his eyes, as he gazed at Monte Cristo dilated horribly.“Come, come,” said Monte Cristo, “confess honestly that youhave not perfect confidence in Thomson & French. I understand, andforeseeing that such might be the case, I took, in spite of my ignorance ofaffairs, certain precautions. See, here are two similar letters to that youhave yourself received; one from the house of Arstein & Eskeles of Vienna,to Baron Rothschild, the other drawn by Baring of London, upon M. Lafitte. Now,sir, you have but to say the word, and I will spare you all uneasiness bypresenting my letter of credit to one or other of these two firms.”The blow had struck home, and Danglars was entirely vanquished; with atrembling hand he took the two letters from the count, who held them carelesslybetween finger and thumb, and proceeded to scrutinize the signatures, with aminuteness that the count might have regarded as insulting, had it not suitedhis present purpose to mislead the banker.“Oh, sir,” said Danglars, after he had convinced himself of theauthenticity of the documents he held, and rising as if to salute the power ofgold personified in the man before him,—“three letters of unlimitedcredit! I can be no longer mistrustful, but you must pardon me, my dear count,for confessing to some degree of astonishment.”“Nay,” answered Monte Cristo, with the most gentlemanly air,“’tis not for such trifling sums as these that your banking houseis to be incommoded. Then, you can let me have some money, can you not?”“Whatever you say, my dear count; I am at your orders.”“Why,” replied Monte Cristo, “since we mutually understandeach other—for such I presume is the case?” Danglars bowedassentingly. “You are quite sure that not a lurking doubt or suspicionlingers in your mind?”“Oh, my dear count,” exclaimed Danglars, “I never for aninstant entertained such a feeling towards you.”“No, you merely wished to be convinced, nothing more; but now that wehave come to so clear an understanding, and that all distrust and suspicion arelaid at rest, we may as well fix a sum as the probable expenditure of the firstyear, suppose we say six millions to——”“Six millions!” gasped Danglars—“so be it.”“Then, if I should require more,” continued Monte Cristo in acareless manner, “why, of course, I should draw upon you; but my presentintention is not to remain in France more than a year, and during that period Iscarcely think I shall exceed the sum I mentioned. However, we shall see. Bekind enough, then, to send me 500,000 francs tomorrow. I shall be at home tillmidday, or if not, I will leave a receipt with my steward.”“The money you desire shall be at your house by ten o’clocktomorrow morning, my dear count,” replied Danglars. “How would youlike to have it? in gold, silver, or notes?”“Half in gold, and the other half in bank-notes, if you please,”said the count, rising from his seat.“I must confess to you, count,” said Danglars, “that I havehitherto imagined myself acquainted with the degree of all the great fortunesof Europe, and still wealth such as yours has been wholly unknown to me. May Ipresume to ask whether you have long possessed it?”“It has been in the family a very long while,” returned MonteCristo, “a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for acertain period of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled thecapital. The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these richesoccurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed by me withinthe last few years. Your ignorance on the subject, therefore, is easilyaccounted for. However, you will be better informed as to me and my possessionsere long.”And the count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied them with oneof those ghastly smiles that used to strike terror into poor Franzd’Épinay.“With your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continuedDanglars, “you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poormiserable millionaires quite in the shade. If I mistake not you are an admirerof paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you appeared to bebestowing on mine when I entered the room. If you will permit me, I shall behappy to show you my picture gallery, composed entirely of works by the ancientmasters—warranted as such. Not a modern picture among them. I cannotendure the modern school of painting.”“You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one greatfault—that they have not yet had time to become old.”“Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues by Thorwaldsen,Bartoloni, and Canova?—all foreign artists, for, as you may perceive, Ithink but very indifferently of our French sculptors.”“You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are yourcompatriots.”“But all this may come later, when we shall be better known to eachother. For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable to you)to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars—excuse my impatience, my dearcount, but a client like you is almost like a member of the family.”Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor; Danglars rangand was answered by a servant in a showy livery.“Is the baroness at home?” inquired Danglars.“Yes, my lord,” answered the man.“And alone?”“No, my lord, madame has visitors.”“Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or doyou desire to preserve a strict incognito?”“No, indeed,” replied Monte Cristo with a smile, “I do notarrogate to myself the right of so doing.”“And who is with madame?—M. Debray?” inquired Danglars, withan air of indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquaintedas he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.“Yes, my lord,” replied the servant, “M. Debray is withmadame.”Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, “M. LucienDebray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the Minister of theInterior. As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered herself by marrying me,for she belongs to one of the most ancient families in France. Her maiden namewas De Servières, and her first husband was Colonel the Marquis ofNargonne.”“I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I have already metM. Lucien Debray.”“Ah, indeed?” said Danglars; “and where was that?”“At the house of M. de Morcerf.”“Ah! you are acquainted with the young viscount, are you?”“We were together a good deal during the Carnival at Rome.”“True, true,” cried Danglars. “Let me see; have I not heardtalk of some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of hishaving had a miraculous escape? I forget how, but I know he used to amuse mywife and daughter by telling them about it after his return from Italy.”“Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen,” said theservant, who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress.“With your permission,” said Danglars, bowing, “I willprecede you, to show you the way.”“By all means,” replied Monte Cristo; “I follow you.” Chapter 47. The DappledGraysThe baron, followed bythe count, traversed a long series of apartments, in which the prevailingcharacteristics were heavy magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatiouswealth, until he reached the boudoir of Madame Danglars—a smalloctagonal-shaped room, hung with pink satin, covered with white Indian muslin.The chairs were of ancient workmanship and materials; over the doors werepainted sketches of shepherds and shepherdesses, after the style and manner ofBoucher; and at each side pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well withthe furnishings of this charming apartment, the only one throughout the greatmansion in which any distinctive taste prevailed. The truth was, it had beenentirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out by M. Danglars andhis architect, who had been selected to aid the baron in the great work ofimprovement solely because he was the most fashionable and celebrated decoratorof the day. The decorations of the boudoir had then been left entirely toMadame Danglars and Lucien Debray. M. Danglars, however, while possessing agreat admiration for the antique, as it was understood during the time of theDirectory, entertained the most sovereign contempt for the simple elegance ofhis wife’s favorite sitting-room, where, by the way, he was neverpermitted to intrude, unless, indeed, he excused his own appearance by usheringin some more agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had rather theair and manner of a person who was himself introduced, than that of being thepresenter of another, his reception being cordial or frigid, in proportion asthe person who accompanied him chanced to please or displease the baroness.Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was stillstrikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate piece ofcabinet and inlaid work, while Lucien Debray, standing before a smallwork-table, was turning over the pages of an album.Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate manyparticulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be remembered that MonteCristo had made a lively impression on the minds of all the party assembled atthe breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf; and although Debray was not in thehabit of yielding to such feelings, he had never been able to shake off thepowerful influence excited in his mind by the impressive look and manner of thecount, consequently the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore thehighly-colored tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by thewonderful stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder thatMadame Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additionalcircumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the albumwas only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most gracious welcomeand unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the count, in return for hisgentlemanly bow, received a formal though graceful courtesy, while Lucienexchanged with the count a sort of distant recognition, and with Danglars afree and easy nod.“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to youthe Count of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by mycorrespondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the ladies inParis court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take up his abode inParis for a year, during which brief period he proposes to spend six millionsof money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn parties without end, in all ofwhich I trust the count will remember us, as he may depend upon it we shallhim, in our own humble entertainments.”In spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this address, Madame Danglarscould not forbear gazing with considerable interest on a man capable ofexpending six millions in twelve months, and who had selected Paris for thescene of his princely extravagance.“And when did you arrive here?” inquired she.“Yesterday morning, madame.”“Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the globe? Pardonme—at least, such I have heard is your custom.”“Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz.”“You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first visit. Parisis a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties, and fêtes are over; theItalian opera is in London; the French opera everywhere except in Paris. As forthe Théatre Français, you know, of course, that it is nowhere. The onlyamusements left us are the indifferent races at the Champ-de-Mars and Satory.Do you propose entering any horses at either of these races, count?”“I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have the good fortuneto find someone who will initiate me into the prevalent ideas ofamusement.”“Are you fond of horses, count?”“I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East, madame, andyou are doubtless aware that the Orientals value only two things—the finebreeding of their horses and the beauty of their women.”“Nay, count,” said the baroness, “it would have been somewhatmore gallant to have placed the ladies first.”“You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I required a preceptorto guide me in all my sayings and doings here.”At this instant the favorite attendant of Madame Danglars entered the boudoir;approaching her mistress, she spoke some words in an undertone. Madame Danglarsturned very pale, then exclaimed:“I cannot believe it; the thing is impossible.”“I assure you, madame,” replied the woman, “it is as I havesaid.”Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, “Isthis true?”“Is what true, madame?” inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.“What my maid tells me.”“But what does she tell you?”“That when my coachman was about to harness the horses to my carriage, hediscovered that they had been removed from the stables without his knowledge. Idesire to know what is the meaning of this?”“Be kind enough, madame, to listen to me,” said Danglars.“Oh, yes; I will listen, monsieur, for I am most curious to hear whatexplanation you will give. These two gentlemen shall decide between us; but,first, I will state the case to them. Gentlemen,” continued the baroness,“among the ten horses in the stables of Baron Danglars, are two thatbelong exclusively to me—a pair of the handsomest and most spiritedcreatures to be found in Paris. But to you, at least, M. Debray, I need notgive a further description, because to you my beautiful pair of dappled grayswere well known. Well, I had promised Madame de Villefort the loan of mycarriage to drive tomorrow to the Bois; but when my coachman goes to fetch thegrays from the stables they are gone—positively gone. No doubt M.Danglars has sacrificed them to the selfish consideration of gaining somethousands of paltry francs. Oh, what a detestable crew they are, thesemercenary speculators!”“Madame,” replied Danglars, “the horses were not sufficientlyquiet for you; they were scarcely four years old, and they made me extremelyuneasy on your account.”“Nonsense,” retorted the baroness; “you could not haveentertained any alarm on the subject, because you are perfectly well aware thatI have had for a month in my service the very best coachman in Paris. But,perhaps, you have disposed of the coachman as well as the horses?”“My dear love, pray do not say any more about them, and I promise youanother pair exactly like them in appearance, only more quiet andsteady.”The baroness shrugged her shoulders with an air of ineffable contempt, whileher husband, affecting not to observe this unconjugal gesture, turned towardsMonte Cristo and said,—“Upon my word, count, I am quite sorry notto have met you sooner. You are setting up an establishment, of course?”“Why, yes,” replied the count.“I should have liked to have made you the offer of these horses. I havealmost given them away, as it is; but, as I before said, I was anxious to getrid of them upon any terms. They were only fit for a young man.”“I am much obliged by your kind intentions towards me,” said MonteCristo; “but this morning I purchased a very excellent pair ofcarriage-horses, and I do not think they were dear. There they are. Come, M.Debray, you are a connoisseur, I believe, let me have your opinion uponthem.”As Debray walked towards the window, Danglars approached his wife.“I could not tell you before others,” said he in a low tone,“the reason of my parting with the horses; but a most enormous price wasoffered me this morning for them. Some madman or fool, bent upon ruininghimself as fast as he can, actually sent his steward to me to purchase them atany cost; and the fact is, I have gained 16,000 francs by the sale of them.Come, don’t look so angry, and you shall have 4,000 francs of the moneyto do what you like with, and Eugénie shall have 2,000. There, what do youthink now of the affair? Wasn’t I right to part with the horses?”Madame Danglars surveyed her husband with a look of withering contempt.“Great heavens?” suddenly exclaimed Debray.“What is it?” asked the baroness.“I cannot be mistaken; there are your horses! The very animals we werespeaking of, harnessed to the count’s carriage!”“My dappled grays?” demanded the baroness, springing to the window.“’Tis indeed they!” said she.Danglars looked absolutely stupefied.“How very singular,” cried Monte Cristo with well-feignedastonishment.“I cannot believe it,” murmured the banker. Madame Danglarswhispered a few words in the ear of Debray, who approached Monte Cristo,saying, “The baroness wishes to know what you paid her husband for thehorses.”“I scarcely know,” replied the count; “it was a littlesurprise prepared for me by my steward, and cost me—well, somewhere about30,000 francs.”Debray conveyed the count’s reply to the baroness. Poor Danglars lookedso crest-fallen and discomfited that Monte Cristo assumed a pitying air towardshim.“See,” said the count, “how very ungrateful women are. Yourkind attention, in providing for the safety of the baroness by disposing of thehorses, does not seem to have made the least impression on her. But so it is; awoman will often, from mere wilfulness, prefer that which is dangerous to thatwhich is safe. Therefore, in my opinion, my dear baron, the best and easiestway is to leave them to their fancies, and allow them to act as they please,and then, if any mischief follows, why, at least, they have no one to blame butthemselves.”Danglars made no reply; he was occupied in anticipations of the coming scenebetween himself and the baroness, whose frowning brow, like that of OlympicJove, predicted a storm. Debray, who perceived the gathering clouds, and feltno desire to witness the explosion of Madame Danglars’ rage, suddenlyrecollected an appointment, which compelled him to take his leave; while MonteCristo, unwilling by prolonging his stay to destroy the advantages he hoped toobtain, made a farewell bow and departed, leaving Danglars to endure the angryreproaches of his wife.“Excellent,” murmured Monte Cristo to himself, as he came away.“All has gone according to my wishes. The domestic peace of this familyis henceforth in my hands. Now, then, to play another master-stroke, by which Ishall gain the heart of both husband and wife—delightful! Still,”added he, “amid all this, I have not yet been presented to MademoiselleEugénie Danglars, whose acquaintance I should have been glad to make.But,” he went on with his peculiar smile, “I am here in Paris, andhave plenty of time before me—by and by will do for that.”With these reflections he entered his carriage and returned home. Two hoursafterwards, Madame Danglars received a most flattering epistle from the count,in which he entreated her to receive back her favorite “dappledgrays,” protesting that he could not endure the idea of making his entryinto the Parisian world of fashion with the knowledge that his splendidequipage had been obtained at the price of a lovely woman’s regrets. Thehorses were sent back wearing the same harness she had seen on them in themorning; only, by the count’s orders, in the centre of each rosette thatadorned either side of their heads, had been fastened a large diamond.To Danglars Monte Cristo also wrote, requesting him to excuse the whimsicalgift of a capricious millionaire, and to beg the baroness to pardon the Easternfashion adopted in the return of the horses.During the evening, Monte Cristo quitted Paris for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali.The following day, about three o’clock, a single blow struck on the gongsummoned Ali to the presence of the count.“Ali,” observed his master, as the Nubian entered the chamber,“you have frequently explained to me how more than commonly skilful youare in throwing the lasso, have you not?”Ali drew himself up proudly, and then returned a sign in the affirmative.“I thought I did not mistake. With your lasso you could stop anox?”Again Ali repeated his affirmative gesture.“Or a tiger?”Ali bowed his head in token of assent.“A lion even?”Ali sprung forwards, imitating the action of one throwing the lasso, then of astrangled lion.“I understand,” said Monte Cristo; “you wish to tell me youhave hunted the lion?”Ali smiled with triumphant pride as he signified that he had indeed both chasedand captured many lions.“But do you believe you could arrest the progress of two horses rushingforwards with ungovernable fury?”The Nubian smiled.“It is well,” said Monte Cristo. “Then listen to me. Ere longa carriage will dash past here, drawn by the pair of dappled gray horses yousaw me with yesterday; now, at the risk of your own life, you must manage tostop those horses before my door.”Ali descended to the street, and marked a straight line on the pavementimmediately at the entrance of the house, and then pointed out the line he hadtraced to the count, who was watching him. The count patted him gently on theshoulder, his usual mode of praising Ali, who, pleased and gratified with thecommission assigned him, walked calmly towards a projecting stone forming theangle of the street and house, and, seating himself thereon, began to smoke hischibouque, while Monte Cristo re-entered his dwelling, perfectly assured of thesuccess of his plan.Still, as five o’clock approached, and the carriage was momentarilyexpected by the count, the indication of more than common impatience anduneasiness might be observed in his manner. He stationed himself in a roomcommanding a view of the street, pacing the chamber with restless steps,stopping merely to listen from time to time for the sound of approachingwheels, then to cast an anxious glance on Ali; but the regularity with whichthe Nubian puffed forth the smoke of his chibouque proved that he at least waswholly absorbed in the enjoyment of his favorite occupation.Suddenly a distant sound of rapidly advancing wheels was heard, and almostimmediately a carriage appeared, drawn by a pair of wild, ungovernable horses,while the terrified coachman strove in vain to restrain their furious speed.In the vehicle was a young woman and a child of about seven or eight clasped ineach other’s arms. Terror seemed to have deprived them even of the powerof uttering a cry. The carriage creaked and rattled as it flew over the roughstones, and the slightest obstacle under the wheels would have caused disaster;but it kept on in the middle of the road, and those who saw it pass utteredcries of terror.Ali suddenly cast aside his chibouque, drew the lasso from his pocket, threw itso skilfully as to catch the forelegs of the near horse in its triple fold, andsuffered himself to be dragged on for a few steps by the violence of the shock,then the animal fell over on the pole, which snapped, and therefore preventedthe other horse from pursuing its way. Gladly availing himself of thisopportunity, the coachman leaped from his box; but Ali had promptly seized thenostrils of the second horse, and held them in his iron grasp, till the beast,snorting with pain, sunk beside his companion.All this was achieved in much less time than is occupied in the recital. Thebrief space had, however, been sufficient for a man, followed by a number ofservants, to rush from the house before which the accident had occurred, and,as the coachman opened the door of the carriage, to take from it a lady who wasconvulsively grasping the cushions with one hand, while with the other shepressed to her bosom the young boy, who had lost consciousness. Monte Cristocarried them both to the salon, and deposited them on a sofa.“Compose yourself, madame,” said he; “all danger isover.” The woman looked up at these words, and, with a glance far moreexpressive than any entreaties could have been, pointed to her child, who stillcontinued insensible. “I understand the nature of your alarms,madame,” said the count, carefully examining the child, “but Iassure you there is not the slightest occasion for uneasiness; your littlecharge has not received the least injury; his insensibility is merely theeffects of terror, and will soon pass.”“Are you quite sure you do not say so to tranquillize my fears? See howdeadly pale he is! My child, my darling Edward; speak to your mother—openyour dear eyes and look on me once again! Oh, sir, in pity send for aphysician; my whole fortune shall not be thought too much for the recovery ofmy boy.”With a calm smile and a gentle wave of the hand, Monte Cristo signed to thedistracted mother to lay aside her apprehensions; then, opening a casket thatstood near, he drew forth a phial of Bohemian glass incrusted with gold,containing a liquid of the color of blood, of which he let fall a single dropon the child’s lips. Scarcely had it reached them, ere the boy, thoughstill pale as marble, opened his eyes, and eagerly gazed around him. At this,the delight of the mother was almost frantic.“Where am I?” exclaimed she; “and to whom am I indebted forso happy a termination to my late dreadful alarm?”“Madame,” answered the count, “you are under the roof of onewho esteems himself most fortunate in having been able to save you from afurther continuance of your sufferings.”“My wretched curiosity has brought all this about,” pursued thelady. “All Paris rung with the praises of Madame Danglars’beautiful horses, and I had the folly to desire to know whether they reallymerited the high praise given to them.”“Is it possible,” exclaimed the count with well-feignedastonishment, “that these horses belong to the baroness?”“They do, indeed. May I inquire if you are acquainted with MadameDanglars?”“I have that honor; and my happiness at your escape from the danger thatthreatened you is redoubled by the consciousness that I have been the unwillingand the unintentional cause of all the peril you have incurred. I yesterdaypurchased these horses of the baron; but as the baroness evidently regrettedparting with them, I ventured to send them back to her, with a request that shewould gratify me by accepting them from my hands.”“You are, then, doubtless, the Count of Monte Cristo, of whom Hermine hastalked to me so much?”“You have rightly guessed, madame,” replied the count.“And I am Madame Héloïse de Villefort.”The count bowed with the air of a person who hears a name for the first time.“How grateful will M. de Villefort be for all your goodness; howthankfully will he acknowledge that to you alone he owes the existence of hiswife and child! Most certainly, but for the prompt assistance of your intrepidservant, this dear child and myself must both have perished.”“Indeed, I still shudder at the fearful danger you were placed in.”“I trust you will allow me to recompense worthily the devotion of yourman.”“I beseech you, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “not to spoilAli, either by too great praise or rewards. I cannot allow him to acquire thehabit of expecting to be recompensed for every trifling service he may render.Ali is my slave, and in saving your life he was but discharging his duty tome.”“Nay,” interposed Madame de Villefort, on whom the authoritativestyle adopted by the count made a deep impression, “nay, but considerthat to preserve my life he has risked his own.”“His life, madame, belongs not to him; it is mine, in return for myhaving myself saved him from death.”Madame de Villefort made no further reply; her mind was utterly absorbed in thecontemplation of the person who, from the first instant she saw him, had madeso powerful an impression on her.During the evident preoccupation of Madame de Villefort, Monte Cristoscrutinized the features and appearance of the boy she kept folded in her arms,lavishing on him the most tender endearments. The child was small for his age,and unnaturally pale. A mass of straight black hair, defying all attempts totrain or curl it, fell over his projecting forehead, and hung down to hisshoulders, giving increased vivacity to eyes already sparkling with a youthfullove of mischief and fondness for every forbidden enjoyment. His mouth waslarge, and the lips, which had not yet regained their color, were particularlythin; in fact, the deep and crafty look, giving a predominant expression to thechild’s face, belonged rather to a boy of twelve or fourteen than to oneso young. His first movement was to free himself by a violent push from theencircling arms of his mother, and to rush forward to the casket from whencethe count had taken the phial of elixir; then, without asking permission ofanyone, he proceeded, in all the wilfulness of a spoiled child unaccustomed torestrain either whims or caprices, to pull the corks out of all the bottles.“Touch nothing, my little friend,” cried the count eagerly;“some of those liquids are not only dangerous to taste, but even toinhale.”Madame de Villefort became very pale, and, seizing her son’s arm, drewhim anxiously toward her; but, once satisfied of his safety, she also cast abrief but expressive glance on the casket, which was not lost upon the count.At this moment Ali entered. At sight of him Madame de Villefort uttered anexpression of pleasure, and, holding the child still closer towards her, shesaid:“Edward, dearest, do you see that good man? He has shown very greatcourage and resolution, for he exposed his own life to stop the horses thatwere running away with us, and would certainly have dashed the carriage topieces. Thank him, then, my child, in your very best manner; for, had he notcome to our aid, neither you nor I would have been alive to speak ourthanks.”The child stuck out his lips and turned away his head in a disdainful manner,saying, “He’s too ugly.”The count smiled as if the child bade fair to realize his hopes, while Madamede Villefort reprimanded her son with a gentleness and moderation very far fromconveying the least idea of a fault having been committed.“This lady,” said the Count, speaking to Ali in the Arabiclanguage, “is desirous that her son should thank you for saving boththeir lives; but the boy refuses, saying you are too ugly.”Ali turned his intelligent countenance towards the boy, on whom he gazedwithout any apparent emotion; but the spasmodic working of the nostrils showedto the practiced eye of Monte Cristo that the Arab had been wounded to theheart.“Will you permit me to inquire,” said Madame de Villefort, as shearose to take her leave, “whether you usually reside here?”“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo; “it is a small place Ihave purchased quite lately. My place of abode is No. 30, Avenue desChamps-Élysées; but I see you have quite recovered from your fright, and are,no doubt, desirous of returning home. Anticipating your wishes, I have desiredthe same horses you came with to be put to one of my carriages, and Ali, hewhom you think so very ugly,” continued he, addressing the boy with asmiling air, “will have the honor of driving you home, while yourcoachman remains here to attend to the necessary repairs of your calash. Assoon as that important business is concluded, I will have a pair of my ownhorses harnessed to convey it direct to Madame Danglars.”“I dare not return with those dreadful horses,” said Madame deVillefort.“You will see,” replied Monte Cristo, “that they will be asdifferent as possible in the hands of Ali. With him they will be gentle anddocile as lambs.”Ali had, indeed, given proof of this; for, approaching the animals, who hadbeen got upon their legs with considerable difficulty, he rubbed theirforeheads and nostrils with a sponge soaked in aromatic vinegar, and wiped offthe sweat and foam that covered their mouths. Then, commencing a loud whistlingnoise, he rubbed them well all over their bodies for several minutes; then,undisturbed by the noisy crowd collected round the broken carriage, Ali quietlyharnessed the pacified animals to the count’s chariot, took the reins inhis hands, and mounted the box, when to the utter astonishment of those who hadwitnessed the ungovernable spirit and maddened speed of the same horses, he wasactually compelled to apply his whip in no very gentle manner before he couldinduce them to start; and even then all that could be obtained from thecelebrated “dappled grays,” now changed into a couple of dull,sluggish, stupid brutes, was a slow, pottering pace, kept up with so muchdifficulty that Madame de Villefort was more than two hours returning to herresidence in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.Scarcely had the first congratulations upon her marvellous escape been gonethrough when she wrote the following letter to Madame Danglars:—“Dear Hermine,—I have just had a wonderful escape from the mostimminent danger, and I owe my safety to the very Count of Monte Cristo we weretalking about yesterday, but whom I little expected to see today. I rememberhow unmercifully I laughed at what I considered your eulogistic and exaggeratedpraises of him; but I have now ample cause to admit that your enthusiasticdescription of this wonderful man fell far short of his merits. Your horses gotas far as Ranelagh, when they darted forward like mad things, and galloped awayat so fearful a rate, that there seemed no other prospect for myself and mypoor Edward but that of being dashed to pieces against the first object thatimpeded their progress, when a strange-looking man,—an Arab, a negro, ora Nubian, at least a black of some nation or other—at a signal from thecount, whose domestic he is, suddenly seized and stopped the infuriatedanimals, even at the risk of being trampled to death himself; and certainly hemust have had a most wonderful escape. The count then hastened to us, and tookus into his house, where he speedily recalled my poor Edward to life. He sentus home in his own carriage. Yours will be returned to you tomorrow. You willfind your horses in bad condition, from the results of this accident; they seemthoroughly stupefied, as if sulky and vexed at having been conquered by man.The count, however, has commissioned me to assure you that two or threedays’ rest, with plenty of barley for their sole food during that time,will bring them back to as fine, that is as terrifying, a condition as theywere in yesterday.Adieu! I cannot return you many thanks for the drive of yesterday; but, afterall, I ought not to blame you for the misconduct of your horses, moreespecially as it procured me the pleasure of an introduction to the Count ofMonte Cristo,—and certainly that illustrious personage, apart from themillions he is said to be so very anxious to dispose of, seemed to me one ofthose curiously interesting problems I, for one, delight in solving at anyrisk, even if it were to necessitate another drive to the Bois behind yourhorses.Edward endured the accident with miraculous courage—he did not utter asingle cry, but fell lifeless into my arms; nor did a tear fall from his eyesafter it was over. I doubt not you will consider these praises the result ofblind maternal affection, but there is a soul of iron in that delicate, fragilebody. Valentine sends many affectionate remembrances to your dear Eugénie. Iembrace you with all my heart.Héloïse de Villefort.P.S.—Do pray contrive some means for me to meet the Count of Monte Cristoat your house. I must and will see him again. I have just made M. de Villefortpromise to call on him, and I hope the visit will be returned.That night the adventure at Auteuil was talked of everywhere. Albert related itto his mother; Château-Renaud recounted it at the Jockey Club, and Debraydetailed it at length in the salons of the minister; even Beauchamp accordedtwenty lines in his journal to the relation of the count’s courage andgallantry, thereby celebrating him as the greatest hero of the day in the eyesof all the feminine members of the aristocracy.Vast was the crowd of visitors and inquiring friends who left their names atthe residence of Madame de Villefort, with the design of renewing their visitat the right moment, of hearing from her lips all the interesting circumstancesof this most romantic adventure.As for M. de Villefort, he fulfilled the predictions of Héloïse to theletter,—donned his dress suit, drew on a pair of white gloves, orderedthe servants to attend the carriage dressed in their full livery, and drovethat same night to No. 30 in the Avenue des Champs-Élysées.VOLUME THREE Chapter 48. IdeologyIf the Count of MonteCristo had been for a long time familiar with the ways of Parisian society, hewould have appreciated better the significance of the step which M. deVillefort had taken. Standing well at court, whether the king regnant was ofthe older or younger branch, whether the government was doctrinaire liberal, orconservative; looked upon by all as a man of talent, since those who have neverexperienced a political check are generally so regarded; hated by many, butwarmly supported by others, without being really liked by anybody, M. deVillefort held a high position in the magistracy, and maintained his eminencelike a Harlay or a Molé. His drawing-room, under the regenerating influence ofa young wife and a daughter by his first marriage, scarcely eighteen, was stillone of the well-regulated Paris salons where the worship of traditional customsand the observance of rigid etiquette were carefully maintained. A freezingpoliteness, a strict fidelity to government principles, a profound contempt fortheories and theorists, a deep-seated hatred of ideality,—these were theelements of private and public life displayed by M. de Villefort.M. de Villefort was not only a magistrate, he was almost a diplomatist. Hisrelations with the former court, of which he always spoke with dignity andrespect, made him respected by the new one, and he knew so many things, thatnot only was he always carefully considered, but sometimes consulted. Perhapsthis would not have been so had it been possible to get rid of M. de Villefort;but, like the feudal barons who rebelled against their sovereign, he dwelt inan impregnable fortress. This fortress was his post as king’s attorney,all the advantages of which he exploited with marvellous skill, and which hewould not have resigned but to be made deputy, and thus to replace neutralityby opposition.Ordinarily M. de Villefort made and returned very few visits. His wife visitedfor him, and this was the received thing in the world, where the weighty andmultifarious occupations of the magistrate were accepted as an excuse for whatwas really only calculated pride, a manifestation of professedsuperiority—in fact, the application of the axiom, Pretend to thinkwell of yourself, and the world will think well of you, an axiom a hundredtimes more useful in society nowadays than that of the Greeks, “Knowthyself,” a knowledge for which, in our days, we have substituted theless difficult and more advantageous science of knowing others.To his friends M. de Villefort was a powerful protector; to his enemies, he wasa silent, but bitter opponent; for those who were neither the one nor theother, he was a statue of the law-made man. He had a haughty bearing, a lookeither steady and impenetrable or insolently piercing and inquisitorial. Foursuccessive revolutions had built and cemented the pedestal upon which hisfortune was based.M. de Villefort had the reputation of being the least curious and the leastwearisome man in France. He gave a ball every year, at which he appeared for aquarter of an hour only,—that is to say, five-and-forty minutes less thanthe king is visible at his balls. He was never seen at the theatres, atconcerts, or in any place of public resort. Occasionally, but seldom, he playedat whist, and then care was taken to select partners worthy ofhim—sometimes they were ambassadors, sometimes archbishops, or sometimesa prince, or a president, or some dowager duchess.Such was the man whose carriage had just now stopped before the Count of MonteCristo’s door. The valet de chambre announced M. de Villefort at themoment when the count, leaning over a large table, was tracing on a map theroute from St. Petersburg to China.The procureur entered with the same grave and measured step he would haveemployed in entering a court of justice. He was the same man, or rather thedevelopment of the same man, whom we have heretofore seen as assistant attorneyat Marseilles. Nature, according to her way, had made no deviation in the pathhe had marked out for himself. From being slender he had now become meagre;once pale, he was now yellow; his deep-set eyes were hollow, and the goldspectacles shielding his eyes seemed to be an integral portion of his face. Hedressed entirely in black, with the exception of his white tie, and his funeralappearance was only mitigated by the slight line of red ribbon which passedalmost imperceptibly through his button-hole, and appeared like a streak ofblood traced with a delicate brush.Although master of himself, Monte Cristo, scrutinized with irrepressiblecuriosity the magistrate whose salute he returned, and who, distrustful byhabit, and especially incredulous as to social prodigies, was much moredespised to look upon “the noble stranger,” as Monte Cristo wasalready called, as an adventurer in search of new fields, or an escapedcriminal, rather than as a prince of the Holy See, or a sultan of theThousand and One Nights.“Sir,” said Villefort, in the squeaky tone assumed by magistratesin their oratorical periods, and of which they cannot, or will not, divestthemselves in society, “sir, the signal service which you yesterdayrendered to my wife and son has made it a duty for me to offer you my thanks. Ihave come, therefore, to discharge this duty, and to express to you myoverwhelming gratitude.”And as he said this, the “eye severe” of the magistrate had lostnothing of its habitual arrogance. He spoke in a voice of theprocureur-general, with the rigid inflexibility of neck and shoulders whichcaused his flatterers to say (as we have before observed) that he was theliving statue of the law.“Monsieur,” replied the count, with a chilling air, “I amvery happy to have been the means of preserving a son to his mother, for theysay that the sentiment of maternity is the most holy of all; and the goodfortune which occurred to me, monsieur, might have enabled you to dispense witha duty which, in its discharge, confers an undoubtedly great honor; for I amaware that M. de Villefort is not usually lavish of the favor which he nowbestows on me,—a favor which, however estimable, is unequal to thesatisfaction which I have in my own consciousness.”Villefort, astonished at this reply, which he by no means expected, startedlike a soldier who feels the blow levelled at him over the armor he wears, anda curl of his disdainful lip indicated that from that moment he noted in thetablets of his brain that the Count of Monte Cristo was by no means a highlybred gentleman.He glanced around, in order to seize on something on which the conversationmight turn, and seemed to fall easily on a topic. He saw the map which MonteCristo had been examining when he entered, and said:“You seem geographically engaged, sir? It is a rich study for you, who,as I learn, have seen as many lands as are delineated on this map.”“Yes, sir,” replied the count; “I have sought to make of thehuman race, taken in the mass, what you practice every day onindividuals—a physiological study. I have believed it was much easier todescend from the whole to a part than to ascend from a part to the whole. It isan algebraic axiom, which makes us proceed from a known to an unknown quantity,and not from an unknown to a known; but sit down, sir, I beg of you.”Monte Cristo pointed to a chair, which the procureur was obliged to take thetrouble to move forwards himself, while the count merely fell back into hisown, on which he had been kneeling when M. Villefort entered. Thus the countwas halfway turned towards his visitor, having his back towards the window, hiselbow resting on the geographical chart which furnished the theme ofconversation for the moment,—a conversation which assumed, as in the caseof the interviews with Danglars and Morcerf, a turn analogous to the persons,if not to the situation.“Ah, you philosophize,” replied Villefort, after a moment’ssilence, during which, like a wrestler who encounters a powerful opponent, hetook breath; “well, sir, really, if, like you, I had nothing else to do,I should seek a more amusing occupation.”“Why, in truth, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s reply, “man isbut an ugly caterpillar for him who studies him through a solar microscope; butyou said, I think, that I had nothing else to do. Now, really, let me ask, sir,have you?—do you believe you have anything to do? or to speak in plainterms, do you really think that what you do deserves being calledanything?”Villefort’s astonishment redoubled at this second thrust so forcibly madeby his strange adversary. It was a long time since the magistrate had heard aparadox so strong, or rather, to say the truth more exactly, it was the firsttime he had ever heard of it. The procureur exerted himself to reply.“Sir,” he responded, “you are a stranger, and I believe yousay yourself that a portion of your life has been spent in Oriental countries,so you are not aware how human justice, so expeditious in barbarous countries,takes with us a prudent and well-studied course.”“Oh, yes—yes, I do, sir; it is the pede claudo of theancients. I know all that, for it is with the justice of all countriesespecially that I have occupied myself—it is with the criminal procedureof all nations that I have compared natural justice, and I must say, sir, thatit is the law of primitive nations, that is, the law of retaliation, that Ihave most frequently found to be according to the law of God.”“If this law were adopted, sir,” said the procureur, “itwould greatly simplify our legal codes, and in that case the magistrates wouldnot (as you just observed) have much to do.”“It may, perhaps, come to this in time,” observed Monte Cristo;“you know that human inventions march from the complex to the simple, andsimplicity is always perfection.”“In the meanwhile,” continued the magistrate, “our codes arein full force, with all their contradictory enactments derived from Galliccustoms, Roman laws, and Frank usages; the knowledge of all which, you willagree, is not to be acquired without extended labor; it needs tedious study toacquire this knowledge, and, when acquired, a strong power of brain to retainit.”“I agree with you entirely, sir; but all that even you know with respectto the French code, I know, not only in reference to that code, but as regardsthe codes of all nations. The English, Turkish, Japanese, Hindu laws, are asfamiliar to me as the French laws, and thus I was right, when I said to you,that relatively (you know that everything is relative, sir)—thatrelatively to what I have done, you have very little to do; but that relativelyto all I have learned, you have yet a great deal to learn.”“But with what motive have you learned all this?” inquiredVillefort, in astonishment.Monte Cristo smiled.“Really, sir,” he observed, “I see that in spite of thereputation which you have acquired as a superior man, you look at everythingfrom the material and vulgar view of society, beginning with man, and endingwith man—that is to say, in the most restricted, most narrow view whichit is possible for human understanding to embrace.”“Pray, sir, explain yourself,” said Villefort, more and moreastonished, “I really do—not—understandyou—perfectly.”“I say, sir, that with the eyes fixed on the social organization ofnations, you see only the springs of the machine, and lose sight of the sublimeworkman who makes them act; I say that you do not recognize before you andaround you any but those office-holders whose commissions have been signed by aminister or king; and that the men whom God has put above those office-holders,ministers, and kings, by giving them a mission to follow out, instead of a postto fill—I say that they escape your narrow, limited field of observation.It is thus that human weakness fails, from its debilitated and imperfectorgans. Tobias took the angel who restored him to light for an ordinary youngman. The nations took Attila, who was doomed to destroy them, for a conquerorsimilar to other conquerors, and it was necessary for both to reveal theirmissions, that they might be known and acknowledged; one was compelled to say,‘I am the angel of the Lord’; and the other, ‘I am the hammerof God,’ in order that the divine essence in both might berevealed.”“Then,” said Villefort, more and more amazed, and really supposinghe was speaking to a mystic or a madman, “you consider yourself as one ofthose extraordinary beings whom you have mentioned?”“And why not?” said Monte Cristo coldly.“Your pardon, sir,” replied Villefort, quite astounded, “butyou will excuse me if, when I presented myself to you, I was unaware that Ishould meet with a person whose knowledge and understanding so far surpass theusual knowledge and understanding of men. It is not usual with us corruptedwretches of civilization to find gentlemen like yourself, possessors, as youare, of immense fortune—at least, so it is said—and I beg you toobserve that I do not inquire, I merely repeat;—it is not usual, I say,for such privileged and wealthy beings to waste their time in speculations onthe state of society, in philosophical reveries, intended at best to consolethose whom fate has disinherited from the goods of this world.”“Really, sir,” retorted the count, “have you attained theeminent situation in which you are, without having admitted, or even withouthaving met with exceptions? and do you never use your eyes, which must haveacquired so much finesse and certainty, to divine, at a glance, the kindof man by whom you are confronted? Should not a magistrate be not merely thebest administrator of the law, but the most crafty expounder of the chicaneryof his profession, a steel probe to search hearts, a touchstone to try the goldwhich in each soul is mingled with more or less of alloy?”“Sir,” said Villefort, “upon my word, you overcome me. Ireally never heard a person speak as you do.”“Because you remain eternally encircled in a round of general conditions,and have never dared to raise your wings into those upper spheres which God haspeopled with invisible or exceptional beings.”“And you allow then, sir, that spheres exist, and that these marked andinvisible beings mingle amongst us?”“Why should they not? Can you see the air you breathe, and yet withoutwhich you could not for a moment exist?”“Then we do not see those beings to whom you allude?”“Yes, we do; you see them whenever God pleases to allow them to assume amaterial form. You touch them, come in contact with them, speak to them, andthey reply to you.”“Ah,” said Villefort, smiling, “I confess I should like to bewarned when one of these beings is in contact with me.”“You have been served as you desire, monsieur, for you were warned justnow, and I now again warn you.”“Then you yourself are one of these marked beings?”“Yes, monsieur, I believe so; for until now, no man has found himself ina position similar to mine. The dominions of kings are limited either bymountains or rivers, or a change of manners, or an alteration of language. Mykingdom is bounded only by the world, for I am not an Italian, or a Frenchman,or a Hindu, or an American, or a Spaniard—I am a cosmopolite. No countrycan say it saw my birth. God alone knows what country will see me die. I adoptall customs, speak all languages. You believe me to be a Frenchman, for I speakFrench with the same facility and purity as yourself. Well, Ali, my Nubian,believes me to be an Arab; Bertuccio, my steward, takes me for a Roman; Haydée,my slave, thinks me a Greek. You may, therefore, comprehend, that being of nocountry, asking no protection from any government, acknowledging no man as mybrother, not one of the scruples that arrest the powerful, or the obstacleswhich paralyze the weak, paralyzes or arrests me. I have only twoadversaries—I will not say two conquerors, for with perseverance I subdueeven them,—they are time and distance. There is a third, and the mostterrible—that is my condition as a mortal being. This alone can stop mein my onward career, before I have attained the goal at which I aim, for allthe rest I have reduced to mathematical terms. What men call the chances offate—namely, ruin, change, circumstances—I have fully anticipated,and if any of these should overtake me, yet it will not overwhelm me. Unless Idie, I shall always be what I am, and therefore it is that I utter the thingsyou have never heard, even from the mouths of kings—for kings have need,and other persons have fear of you. For who is there who does not say tohimself, in a society as incongruously organized as ours, ‘Perhaps someday I shall have to do with the king’s attorney’?”“But can you not say that, sir? The moment you become an inhabitant ofFrance, you are naturally subjected to the French law.”“I know it sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “but when I visit acountry I begin to study, by all the means which are available, the men fromwhom I may have anything to hope or to fear, till I know them as well as,perhaps better than, they know themselves. It follows from this, that theking’s attorney, be he who he may, with whom I should have to deal, wouldassuredly be more embarrassed than I should.”“That is to say,” replied Villefort with hesitation, “thathuman nature being weak, every man, according to your creed, has committedfaults.”“Faults or crimes,” responded Monte Cristo with a negligent air.“And that you alone, amongst the men whom you do not recognize as yourbrothers—for you have said so,” observed Villefort in a tone thatfaltered somewhat—“you alone are perfect.”“No, not perfect,” was the count’s reply; “onlyimpenetrable, that’s all. But let us leave off this strain, sir, if thetone of it is displeasing to you; I am no more disturbed by your justice thanare you by my second-sight.”“No, no,—by no means,” said Villefort, who was afraid ofseeming to abandon his ground. “No; by your brilliant and almost sublimeconversation you have elevated me above the ordinary level; we no longer talk,we rise to dissertation. But you know how the theologians in their collegiatechairs, and philosophers in their controversies, occasionally say cruel truths;let us suppose for the moment that we are theologizing in a social way, or evenphilosophically, and I will say to you, rude as it may seem, ‘My brother,you sacrifice greatly to pride; you may be above others, but above you there isGod.’”“Above us all, sir,” was Monte Cristo’s response, in a toneand with an emphasis so deep that Villefort involuntarily shuddered. “Ihave my pride for men—serpents always ready to threaten everyone whowould pass without crushing them under foot. But I lay aside that pride beforeGod, who has taken me from nothing to make me what I am.”“Then, count, I admire you,” said Villefort, who, for the firsttime in this strange conversation, used the aristocratic form to the unknownpersonage, whom, until now, he had only called monsieur. “Yes, and I sayto you, if you are really strong, really superior, really pious, orimpenetrable, which you were right in saying amounts to the samething—then be proud, sir, for that is the characteristic of predominance.Yet you have unquestionably some ambition.”“I have, sir.”“And what may it be?”“I too, as happens to every man once in his life, have been taken bySatan into the highest mountain in the earth, and when there he showed me allthe kingdoms of the world, and as he said before, so said he to me,‘Child of earth, what wouldst thou have to make thee adore me?’ Ireflected long, for a gnawing ambition had long preyed upon me, and then Ireplied, ‘Listen,—I have always heard of Providence, and yet I havenever seen him, or anything that resembles him, or which can make me believethat he exists. I wish to be Providence myself, for I feel that the mostbeautiful, noblest, most sublime thing in the world, is to recompense andpunish.’ Satan bowed his head, and groaned. ‘You mistake,’ hesaid, ‘Providence does exist, only you have never seen him, because thechild of God is as invisible as the parent. You have seen nothing thatresembles him, because he works by secret springs, and moves by hidden ways.All I can do for you is to make you one of the agents of thatProvidence.’ The bargain was concluded. I may sacrifice my soul, but whatmatters it?” added Monte Cristo. “If the thing were to do again, Iwould again do it.”Villefort looked at Monte Cristo with extreme amazement.“Count,” he inquired, “have you any relations?”“No, sir, I am alone in the world.”“So much the worse.”“Why?” asked Monte Cristo.“Because then you might witness a spectacle calculated to break down yourpride. You say you fear nothing but death?”“I did not say that I feared it; I only said that death alone could checkthe execution of my plans.”“And old age?”“My end will be achieved before I grow old.”“And madness?”“I have been nearly mad; and you know the axiom,—non bis inidem. It is an axiom of criminal law, and, consequently, you understand itsfull application.”“Sir,” continued Villefort, “there is something to fearbesides death, old age, and madness. For instance, there is apoplexy—thatlightning-stroke which strikes but does not destroy you, and yet which bringseverything to an end. You are still yourself as now, and yet you are yourselfno longer; you who, like Ariel, verge on the angelic, are but an inert mass,which, like Caliban, verges on the brutal; and this is called in human tongues,as I tell you, neither more nor less than apoplexy. Come, if so you will,count, and continue this conversation at my house, any day you may be willingto see an adversary capable of understanding and anxious to refute you, and Iwill show you my father, M. Noirtier de Villefort, one of the most fieryJacobins of the French Revolution; that is to say, he had the most remarkableaudacity, seconded by a most powerful organization—a man who has not,perhaps, like yourself seen all the kingdoms of the earth, but who has helpedto overturn one of the greatest; in fact, a man who believed himself, like you,one of the envoys, not of God, but of a supreme being; not of Providence, butof fate. Well, sir, the rupture of a blood-vessel on the lobe of the brain hasdestroyed all this, not in a day, not in an hour, but in a second. M. Noirtier,who, on the previous night, was the old Jacobin, the old senator, the oldCarbonaro, laughing at the guillotine, the cannon, and the dagger—M.Noirtier, playing with revolutions—M. Noirtier, for whom France was avast chess-board, from which pawns, rooks, knights, and queens were todisappear, so that the king was checkmated—M. Noirtier, the redoubtable,was the next morning poor M. Noirtier, the helpless old man, at thetender mercies of the weakest creature in the household, that is, hisgrandchild, Valentine; a dumb and frozen carcass, in fact, living painlesslyon, that time may be given for his frame to decompose without his consciousnessof its decay.”“Alas, sir,” said Monte Cristo “this spectacle is neitherstrange to my eye nor my thought. I am something of a physician, and have, likemy fellows, sought more than once for the soul in living and in dead matter;yet, like Providence, it has remained invisible to my eyes, although present tomy heart. A hundred writers since Socrates, Seneca, St. Augustine, and Gall,have made, in verse and prose, the comparison you have made, and yet I can wellunderstand that a father’s sufferings may effect great changes in themind of a son. I will call on you, sir, since you bid me contemplate, for theadvantage of my pride, this terrible spectacle, which must have been so great asource of sorrow to your family.”“It would have been so unquestionably, had not God given me so large acompensation. In contrast with the old man, who is dragging his way to thetomb, are two children just entering into life—Valentine, the daughter bymy first wife—Mademoiselle Renée de Saint-Méran—and Edward, the boywhose life you have this day saved.”“And what is your deduction from this compensation, sir?” inquiredMonte Cristo.“My deduction is,” replied Villefort, “that my father, ledaway by his passions, has committed some fault unknown to human justice, butmarked by the justice of God. That God, desirous in his mercy to punish but oneperson, has visited this justice on him alone.”Monte Cristo with a smile on his lips, uttered in the depths of his soul agroan which would have made Villefort fly had he but heard it.“Adieu, sir,” said the magistrate, who had risen from his seat;“I leave you, bearing a remembrance of you—a remembrance of esteem,which I hope will not be disagreeable to you when you know me better; for I amnot a man to bore my friends, as you will learn. Besides, you have made aneternal friend of Madame de Villefort.”The count bowed, and contented himself with seeing Villefort to the door of hiscabinet, the procureur being escorted to his carriage by two footmen, who, on asignal from their master, followed him with every mark of attention. When hehad gone, Monte Cristo breathed a profound sigh, and said:“Enough of this poison, let me now seek the antidote.”Then sounding his bell, he said to Ali, who entered:“I am going to madame’s chamber—have the carriage ready atone o’clock.” Chapter 49. HaydéeIt will be recollectedthat the new, or rather old, acquaintances of the Count of Monte Cristo,residing in the Rue Meslay, were no other than Maximilian, Julie, and Emmanuel.The very anticipations of delight to be enjoyed in his forthcomingvisits—the bright, pure gleam of heavenly happiness it diffused over thealmost deadly warfare in which he had voluntarily engaged, illumined his wholecountenance with a look of ineffable joy and calmness, as, immediately afterVillefort’s departure, his thoughts flew back to the cheering prospectbefore him, of tasting, at least, a brief respite from the fierce and stormypassions of his mind. Even Ali, who had hastened to obey the Count’ssummons, went forth from his master’s presence in charmed amazement atthe unusual animation and pleasure depicted on features ordinarily so stern andcold; while, as though dreading to put to flight the agreeable ideas hoveringover his patron’s meditations, whatever they were, the faithful Nubianwalked on tiptoe towards the door, holding his breath, lest its faintest soundshould dissipate his master’s happy reverie.It was noon, and Monte Cristo had set apart one hour to be passed in theapartments of Haydée, as though his oppressed spirit could not all at onceadmit the feeling of pure and unmixed joy, but required a gradual succession ofcalm and gentle emotions to prepare his mind to receive full and perfecthappiness, in the same manner as ordinary natures demand to be inured bydegrees to the reception of strong or violent sensations.The young Greek, as we have already said, occupied apartments whollyunconnected with those of the count. The rooms had been fitted up in strictaccordance with Oriental ideas; the floors were covered with the richestcarpets Turkey could produce; the walls hung with brocaded silk of the mostmagnificent designs and texture; while around each chamber luxurious divanswere placed, with piles of soft and yielding cushions, that needed only to bearranged at the pleasure or convenience of such as sought repose.Haydée had three French maids, and one who was a Greek. The first threeremained constantly in a small waiting-room, ready to obey the summons of asmall golden bell, or to receive the orders of the Romaic slave, who knew justenough French to be able to transmit her mistress’s wishes to the threeother waiting-women; the latter had received most peremptory instructions fromMonte Cristo to treat Haydée with all the deference they would observe to aqueen.The young girl herself generally passed her time in the chamber at the fartherend of her apartments. This was a sort of boudoir, circular, and lighted onlyfrom the roof, which consisted of rose-colored glass. Haydée was reclining uponsoft downy cushions, covered with blue satin spotted with silver; her head,supported by one of her exquisitely moulded arms, rested on the divanimmediately behind her, while the other was employed in adjusting to her lipsthe coral tube of a rich narghile, through whose flexible pipe she drew thesmoke fragrant by its passage through perfumed water. Her attitude, thoughperfectly natural for an Eastern woman would, in a European, have been deemedtoo full of coquettish straining after effect.Her dress, which was that of the women of Epirus, consisted of a pair of whitesatin trousers, embroidered with pink roses, displaying feet so exquisitelyformed and so delicately fair, that they might well have been taken for Parianmarble, had not the eye been undeceived by their movements as they constantlyshifted in and out of a pair of little slippers with upturned toes, beautifullyornamented with gold and pearls. She wore a blue and white-striped vest, withlong open sleeves, trimmed with silver loops and buttons of pearls, and a sortof bodice, which, closing only from the centre to the waist, exhibited thewhole of the ivory throat and upper part of the bosom; it was fastened withthree magnificent diamond clasps. The junction of the bodice and drawers wasentirely concealed by one of the many-colored scarves, whose brilliant hues andrich silken fringe have rendered them so precious in the eyes of Parisianbelles.Tilted on one side of her head she had a small cap of gold-colored silk,embroidered with pearls; while on the other a purple rose mingled its glowingcolors with the luxuriant masses of her hair, of which the blackness was sointense that it was tinged with blue.The extreme beauty of the countenance, that shone forth in loveliness thatmocked the vain attempts of dress to augment it, was peculiarly and purelyGrecian; there were the large, dark, melting eyes, the finely formed nose, thecoral lips, and pearly teeth, that belonged to her race and country.And, to complete the whole, Haydée was in the very springtide and fulness ofyouthful charms—she had not yet numbered more than nineteen or twentysummers.Monte Cristo summoned the Greek attendant, and bade her inquire whether itwould be agreeable to her mistress to receive his visit. Haydée’s onlyreply was to direct her servant by a sign to withdraw the tapestried curtainthat hung before the door of her boudoir, the framework of the opening thusmade serving as a sort of border to the graceful tableau presented by the younggirl’s picturesque attitude and appearance.As Monte Cristo approached, she leaned upon the elbow of the arm that held thenarghile, and extending to him her other hand, said, with a smile ofcaptivating sweetness, in the sonorous language spoken by the women of Athensand Sparta:“Why demand permission ere you enter? Are you no longer my master, orhave I ceased to be your slave?”Monte Cristo returned her smile.“Haydée,” said he, “you well know.”“Why do you address me so coldly—so distantly?” asked theyoung Greek. “Have I by any means displeased you? Oh, if so, punish me asyou will; but do not—do not speak to me in tones and manner so formal andconstrained.”“Haydée,” replied the count, “you know that you are now inFrance, and are free.”“Free to do what?” asked the young girl.“Free to leave me.”“Leave you? Why should I leave you?”“That is not for me to say; but we are now about to mix insociety—to visit and be visited.”“I don’t wish to see anybody but you.”“And should you see one whom you could prefer, I would not be sounjust——”“I have never seen anyone I preferred to you, and I have never lovedanyone but you and my father.”“My poor child,” replied Monte Cristo, “that is merelybecause your father and myself are the only men who have ever talked toyou.”“I don’t want anybody else to talk to me. My father said I was his‘joy’—you style me your ‘love,’—and both ofyou have called me ‘my child.’”“Do you remember your father, Haydée?”The young Greek smiled.“He is here, and here,” said she, touching her eyes and her heart.“And where am I?” inquired Monte Cristo laughingly.“You?” cried she, with tones of thrilling tenderness, “youare everywhere!” Monte Cristo took the delicate hand of the young girl inhis, and was about to raise it to his lips, when the simple child of naturehastily withdrew it, and presented her cheek.“You now understand, Haydée,” said the count, “that from thismoment you are absolutely free; that here you exercise unlimited sway, and areat liberty to lay aside or continue the costume of your country, as it may suityour inclination. Within this mansion you are absolute mistress of youractions, and may go abroad or remain in your apartments as may seem mostagreeable to you. A carriage waits your orders, and Ali and Myrtho willaccompany you whithersoever you desire to go. There is but one favor I wouldentreat of you.”“Speak.”“Guard carefully the secret of your birth. Make no allusion to the past;nor upon any occasion be induced to pronounce the names of your illustriousfather or ill-fated mother.”“I have already told you, my lord, that I shall see no one.”“It is possible, Haydée, that so perfect a seclusion, though conformablewith the habits and customs of the East, may not be practicable in Paris.Endeavor, then, to accustom yourself to our manner of living in these northernclimes as you did to those of Rome, Florence, Milan, and Madrid; it may beuseful to you one of these days, whether you remain here or return to theEast.”The young girl raised her tearful eyes towards Monte Cristo as she said withtouching earnestness, “Whether we return to the East, you mean tosay, my lord, do you not?”“My child,” returned Monte Cristo “you know full well thatwhenever we part, it will be no fault or wish of mine; the tree forsakes notthe flower—the flower falls from the tree.”“My lord,” replied Haydée, “I never will leave you, for I amsure I could not exist without you.”“My poor girl, in ten years I shall be old, and you will be stillyoung.”“My father had a long white beard, but I loved him; he was sixty yearsold, but to me he was handsomer than all the fine youths I saw.”“Then tell me, Haydée, do you believe you shall be able to accustomyourself to our present mode of life?”“Shall I see you?”“Every day.”“Then what do you fear, my lord?”“You might find it dull.”“No, my lord. In the morning, I shall rejoice in the prospect of yourcoming, and in the evening dwell with delight on the happiness I have enjoyedin your presence; then too, when alone, I can call forth mighty pictures of thepast, see vast horizons bounded only by the towering mountains of Pindus andOlympus. Oh, believe me, that when three great passions, such as sorrow, love,and gratitude fill the heart, ennui can find no place.”“You are a worthy daughter of Epirus, Haydée, and your charming andpoetical ideas prove well your descent from that race of goddesses who claimyour country as their birthplace. Depend on my care to see that your youth isnot blighted, or suffered to pass away in ungenial solitude; and of this bewell assured, that if you love me as a father, I love you as a child.”“You are wrong, my lord. The love I have for you is very different fromthe love I had for my father. My father died, but I did not die. If you were todie, I should die too.”The count, with a smile of profound tenderness, extended his hand, and shecarried it to her lips.Monte Cristo, thus attuned to the interview he proposed to hold with Morrel andhis family, departed, murmuring as he went these lines of Pindar, “Youthis a flower of which love is the fruit; happy is he who, after having watchedits silent growth, is permitted to gather and call it his own.” Thecarriage was prepared according to orders, and stepping lightly into it, thecount drove off at his usual rapid pace. Chapter 50. The MorrelFamilyIn a very few minutesthe count reached No. 7 in the Rue Meslay. The house was of white stone, and ina small court before it were two small beds full of beautiful flowers. In theconcierge that opened the gate the count recognized Cocles; but as he had butone eye, and that eye had become somewhat dim in the course of nine years,Cocles did not recognize the count.The carriages that drove up to the door were compelled to turn, to avoid afountain that played in a basin of rockwork,—an ornament that had excitedthe jealousy of the whole quarter, and had gained for the place the appellationof The Little Versailles. It is needless to add that there were gold andsilver fish in the basin. The house, with kitchens and cellars below, had abovethe ground floor, two stories and attics. The whole of the property, consistingof an immense workshop, two pavilions at the bottom of the garden, and thegarden itself, had been purchased by Emmanuel, who had seen at a glance that hecould make of it a profitable speculation. He had reserved the house and halfthe garden, and building a wall between the garden and the workshops, had letthem upon lease with the pavilions at the bottom of the garden. So that for atrifling sum he was as well lodged, and as perfectly shut out from observation,as the inhabitants of the finest mansion in the Faubourg St. Germain.The breakfast-room was finished in oak; the salon in mahogany, and thefurnishings were of blue velvet; the bedroom was in citronwood and greendamask. There was a study for Emmanuel, who never studied, and a music-room forJulie, who never played. The whole of the second story was set apart forMaximilian; it was precisely similar to his sister’s apartments, exceptthat for the breakfast-parlor he had a billiard-room, where he received hisfriends. He was superintending the grooming of his horse, and smoking his cigarat the entrance of the garden, when the count’s carriage stopped at thegate.Cocles opened the gate, and Baptistin, springing from the box, inquired whetherMonsieur and Madame Herbault and Monsieur Maximilian Morrel would see hisexcellency the Count of Monte Cristo.“The Count of Monte Cristo?” cried Morrel, throwing away his cigarand hastening to the carriage; “I should think we would see him. Ah, athousand thanks, count, for not having forgotten your promise.”And the young officer shook the count’s hand so warmly, that Monte Cristocould not be mistaken as to the sincerity of his joy, and he saw that he hadbeen expected with impatience, and was received with pleasure.“Come, come,” said Maximilian, “I will serve as your guide;such a man as you are ought not to be introduced by a servant. My sister is inthe garden plucking the dead roses; my brother is reading his two papers, laPresse and les Débats, within six steps of her; for wherever you seeMadame Herbault, you have only to look within a circle of four yards and youwill find M. Emmanuel, and ‘reciprocally,’ as they say at thePolytechnic School.”At the sound of their steps a young woman of twenty to five-and-twenty, dressedin a silk morning gown, and busily engaged in plucking the dead leaves off anoisette rose-tree, raised her head. This was Julie, who had become, as theclerk of the house of Thomson & French had predicted, Madame EmmanuelHerbault. She uttered a cry of surprise at the sight of a stranger, andMaximilian began to laugh.“Don’t disturb yourself, Julie,” said he. “The counthas only been two or three days in Paris, but he already knows what afashionable woman of the Marais is, and if he does not, you will showhim.”“Ah, monsieur,” returned Julie, “it is treason in my brotherto bring you thus, but he never has any regard for his poor sister. Penelon,Penelon!”An old man, who was digging busily at one of the beds, stuck his spade in theearth, and approached, cap in hand, striving to conceal a quid of tobacco hehad just thrust into his cheek. A few locks of gray mingled with his hair,which was still thick and matted, while his bronzed features and determinedglance well suited an old sailor who had braved the heat of the equator and thestorms of the tropics.“I think you hailed me, Mademoiselle Julie?” said he.Penelon had still preserved the habit of calling his master’s daughter“Mademoiselle Julie,” and had never been able to change the name toMadame Herbault.“Penelon,” replied Julie, “go and inform M. Emmanuel of thisgentleman’s visit, and Maximilian will conduct him to the salon.”Then, turning to Monte Cristo,—“I hope you will permit me to leaveyou for a few minutes,” continued she; and without awaiting any reply,disappeared behind a clump of trees, and escaped to the house by a lateralalley.“I am sorry to see,” observed Monte Cristo to Morrel, “that Icause no small disturbance in your house.”“Look there,” said Maximilian, laughing; “there is herhusband changing his jacket for a coat. I assure you, you are well known in theRue Meslay.”“Your family appears to be a very happy one,” said the count, as ifspeaking to himself.“Oh, yes, I assure you, count, they want nothing that can render themhappy; they are young and cheerful, they are tenderly attached to each other,and with twenty-five thousand francs a year they fancy themselves as rich asRothschild.”“Five-and-twenty thousand francs is not a large sum, however,”replied Monte Cristo, with a tone so sweet and gentle, that it went toMaximilian’s heart like the voice of a father; “but they will notbe content with that. Your brother-in-law is a barrister? a doctor?”“He was a merchant, monsieur, and had succeeded to the business of mypoor father. M. Morrel, at his death, left 500,000 francs, which were dividedbetween my sister and myself, for we were his only children. Her husband, who,when he married her, had no other patrimony than his noble probity, hisfirst-rate ability, and his spotless reputation, wished to possess as much ashis wife. He labored and toiled until he had amassed 250,000 francs; six yearssufficed to achieve this object. Oh, I assure you, sir, it was a touchingspectacle to see these young creatures, destined by their talents for higherstations, toiling together, and through their unwillingness to change any ofthe customs of their paternal house, taking six years to accomplish what lessscrupulous people would have effected in two or three. Marseilles resoundedwith their well-earned praises. At last, one day, Emmanuel came to his wife,who had just finished making up the accounts.“‘Julie,’ said he to her, ‘Cocles has just given me thelast rouleau of a hundred francs; that completes the 250,000 francs we hadfixed as the limits of our gains. Can you content yourself with the smallfortune which we shall possess for the future? Listen to me. Our housetransacts business to the amount of a million a year, from which we derive anincome of 40,000 francs. We can dispose of the business, if we please, in anhour, for I have received a letter from M. Delaunay, in which he offers topurchase the good-will of the house, to unite with his own, for 300,000 francs.Advise me what I had better do.’“‘Emmanuel,’ returned my sister, ‘the house of Morrelcan only be carried on by a Morrel. Is it not worth 300,000 francs to save ourfather’s name from the chances of evil fortune and failure?’“‘I thought so,’ replied Emmanuel; ‘but I wished tohave your advice.’“‘This is my counsel:—Our accounts are made up and our billspaid; all we have to do is to stop the issue of any more, and close ouroffice.’“This was done instantly. It was three o’clock; at a quarter past,a merchant presented himself to insure two ships; it was a clear profit of15,000 francs.“‘Monsieur,’ said Emmanuel, ‘have the goodness toaddress yourself to M. Delaunay. We have quitted business.’“‘How long?’ inquired the astonished merchant.“‘A quarter of an hour,’ was the reply.“And this is the reason, monsieur,” continued Maximilian, “ofmy sister and brother-in-law having only 25,000 francs a year.”Maximilian had scarcely finished his story, during which the count’sheart had swelled within him, when Emmanuel entered wearing a hat and coat. Hesaluted the count with the air of a man who is aware of the rank of his guest;then, after having led Monte Cristo around the little garden, he returned tothe house.A large vase of Japan porcelain, filled with flowers that loaded the air withtheir perfume, stood in the salon. Julie, suitably dressed, and her hairarranged (she had accomplished this feat in less than ten minutes), receivedthe count on his entrance. The songs of the birds were heard in an aviary hardby, and the branches of laburnums and rose acacias formed an exquisiteframework to the blue velvet curtains. Everything in this charming retreat,from the warble of the birds to the smile of the mistress, breathedtranquillity and repose.The count had felt the influence of this happiness from the moment he enteredthe house, and he remained silent and pensive, forgetting that he was expectedto renew the conversation, which had ceased after the first salutations hadbeen exchanged. The silence became almost painful when, by a violent effort,tearing himself from his pleasing reverie:“Madame,” said he at length, “I pray you to excuse myemotion, which must astonish you who are only accustomed to the happiness Imeet here; but contentment is so new a sight to me, that I could never be wearyof looking at yourself and your husband.”“We are very happy, monsieur,” replied Julie; “but we havealso known unhappiness, and few have ever undergone more bitter sufferings thanourselves.”The count’s features displayed an expression of the most intensecuriosity.“Oh, all this is a family history, as Château-Renaud told you the otherday,” observed Maximilian. “This humble picture would have butlittle interest for you, accustomed as you are to behold the pleasures and themisfortunes of the wealthy and industrious; but such as we are, we haveexperienced bitter sorrows.”“And God has poured balm into your wounds, as he does into those of allwho are in affliction?” said Monte Cristo inquiringly.“Yes, count,” returned Julie, “we may indeed say he has, forhe has done for us what he grants only to his chosen; he sent us one of hisangels.”The count’s cheeks became scarlet, and he coughed, in order to have anexcuse for putting his handkerchief to his mouth.“Those born to wealth, and who have the means of gratifying everywish,” said Emmanuel, “know not what is the real happiness of life,just as those who have been tossed on the stormy waters of the ocean on a fewfrail planks can alone realize the blessings of fair weather.”Monte Cristo rose, and without making any answer (for the tremulousness of hisvoice would have betrayed his emotion) walked up and down the apartment with aslow step.“Our magnificence makes you smile, count,” said Maximilian, who hadfollowed him with his eyes.“No, no,” returned Monte Cristo, pale as death, pressing one handon his heart to still its throbbings, while with the other he pointed to acrystal cover, beneath which a silken purse lay on a black velvet cushion.“I was wondering what could be the significance of this purse, with thepaper at one end and the large diamond at the other.”“Count,” replied Maximilian, with an air of gravity, “thoseare our most precious family treasures.”“The stone seems very brilliant,” answered the count.“Oh, my brother does not allude to its value, although it has beenestimated at 100,000 francs; he means, that the articles contained in thispurse are the relics of the angel I spoke of just now.”“This I do not comprehend; and yet I may not ask for an explanation,madame,” replied Monte Cristo bowing. “Pardon me, I had nointention of committing an indiscretion.”“Indiscretion,—oh, you make us happy by giving us an excuse forexpatiating on this subject. If we wanted to conceal the noble action thispurse commemorates, we should not expose it thus to view. Oh, would we couldrelate it everywhere, and to everyone, so that the emotion of our unknownbenefactor might reveal his presence.”“Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo in a half-stifled voice.“Monsieur,” returned Maximilian, raising the glass cover, andrespectfully kissing the silken purse, “this has touched the hand of aman who saved my father from suicide, us from ruin, and our name from shame anddisgrace,—a man by whose matchless benevolence we poor children, doomedto want and wretchedness, can at present hear everyone envying our happy lot.This letter” (as he spoke, Maximilian drew a letter from the purse andgave it to the count)—“this letter was written by him the day thatmy father had taken a desperate resolution, and this diamond was given by thegenerous unknown to my sister as her dowry.”Monte Cristo opened the letter, and read it with an indescribable feeling ofdelight. It was the letter written (as our readers know) to Julie, and signed“Sinbad the Sailor.”“Unknown you say, is the man who rendered you this service—unknownto you?”“Yes; we have never had the happiness of pressing his hand,”continued Maximilian. “We have supplicated Heaven in vain to grant usthis favor, but the whole affair has had a mysterious meaning that we cannotcomprehend—we have been guided by an invisible hand,—a hand aspowerful as that of an enchanter.”“Oh,” cried Julie, “I have not lost all hope of some daykissing that hand, as I now kiss the purse which he has touched. Four yearsago, Penelon was at Trieste—Penelon, count, is the old sailor you saw inthe garden, and who, from quartermaster, has become gardener—Penelon,when he was at Trieste, saw on the quay an Englishman, who was on the point ofembarking on board a yacht, and he recognized him as the person who called onmy father the fifth of June, 1829, and who wrote me this letter on the fifth ofSeptember. He felt convinced of his identity, but he did not venture to addresshim.”“An Englishman,” said Monte Cristo, who grew uneasy at theattention with which Julie looked at him. “An Englishman you say?”“Yes,” replied Maximilian, “an Englishman, who representedhimself as the confidential clerk of the house of Thomson & French, atRome. It was this that made me start when you said the other day, at M. deMorcerf’s, that Messrs. Thomson & French were your bankers. Thathappened, as I told you, in 1829. For God’s sake, tell me, did you knowthis Englishman?”“But you tell me, also, that the house of Thomson & French haveconstantly denied having rendered you this service?”“Yes.”“Then is it not probable that this Englishman may be someone who,grateful for a kindness your father had shown him, and which he himself hadforgotten, has taken this method of requiting the obligation?”“Everything is possible in this affair, even a miracle.”“What was his name?” asked Monte Cristo.“He gave no other name,” answered Julie, looking earnestly at thecount, “than that at the end of his letter—‘Sinbad theSailor.’”“Which is evidently not his real name, but a fictitious one.”Then, noticing that Julie was struck with the sound of his voice:“Tell me,” continued he, “was he not about my height, perhapsa little taller, with his chin imprisoned, as it were, in a high cravat; hiscoat closely buttoned up, and constantly taking out his pencil?”“Oh, do you then know him?” cried Julie, whose eyes sparkled withjoy.“No,” returned Monte Cristo “I only guessed. I knew a LordWilmore, who was constantly doing actions of this kind.”“Without revealing himself?”“He was an eccentric being, and did not believe in the existence ofgratitude.”“Oh, Heaven,” exclaimed Julie, clasping her hands, “in whatdid he believe, then?”“He did not credit it at the period which I knew him,” said MonteCristo, touched to the heart by the accents of Julie’s voice; “but,perhaps, since then he has had proofs that gratitude does exist.”“And do you know this gentleman, monsieur?” inquired Emmanuel.“Oh, if you do know him,” cried Julie, “can you tell us wherehe is—where we can find him? Maximilian—Emmanuel—if we do butdiscover him, he must believe in the gratitude of the heart!”Monte Cristo felt tears start into his eyes, and he again walked hastily up anddown the room.“In the name of Heaven,” said Maximilian, “if you knowanything of him, tell us what it is.”“Alas,” cried Monte Cristo, striving to repress his emotion,“if Lord Wilmore was your unknown benefactor, I fear you will never seehim again. I parted from him two years ago at Palermo, and he was then on thepoint of setting out for the most remote regions; so that I fear he will neverreturn.”“Oh, monsieur, this is cruel of you,” said Julie, much affected;and the young lady’s eyes swam with tears.“Madame,” replied Monte Cristo gravely, and gazing earnestly on thetwo liquid pearls that trickled down Julie’s cheeks, “had LordWilmore seen what I now see, he would become attached to life, for the tearsyou shed would reconcile him to mankind;” and he held out his hand toJulie, who gave him hers, carried away by the look and accent of the count.“But,” continued she, “Lord Wilmore had a family or friends,he must have known someone, can we not——”“Oh, it is useless to inquire,” returned the count; “perhaps,after all, he was not the man you seek for. He was my friend: he had no secretsfrom me, and if this had been so he would have confided in me.”“And he told you nothing?”“Not a word.”“Nothing that would lead you to suppose?”“Nothing.”“And yet you spoke of him at once.”“Ah, in such a case one supposes——”“Sister, sister,” said Maximilian, coming to the count’s aid,“monsieur is quite right. Recollect what our excellent father so oftentold us, ‘It was no Englishman that thus saved us.’”Monte Cristo started. “What did your father tell you, M. Morrel?”said he eagerly.“My father thought that this action had been miraculouslyperformed—he believed that a benefactor had arisen from the grave to saveus. Oh, it was a touching superstition, monsieur, and although I did not myselfbelieve it, I would not for the world have destroyed my father’s faith.How often did he muse over it and pronounce the name of a dear friend—afriend lost to him forever; and on his death-bed, when the near approach ofeternity seemed to have illumined his mind with supernatural light, thisthought, which had until then been but a doubt, became a conviction, and hislast words were, ‘Maximilian, it was Edmond Dantès!’”At these words the count’s paleness, which had for some time beenincreasing, became alarming; he could not speak; he looked at his watch like aman who has forgotten the hour, said a few hurried words to Madame Herbault,and pressing the hands of Emmanuel and Maximilian,—“Madame,”said he, “I trust you will allow me to visit you occasionally; I valueyour friendship, and feel grateful to you for your welcome, for this is thefirst time for many years that I have thus yielded to my feelings;” andhe hastily quitted the apartment.“This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man,” said Emmanuel.“Yes,” answered Maximilian, “but I feel sure he has anexcellent heart, and that he likes us.”“His voice went to my heart,” observed Julie; “and two orthree times I fancied that I had heard it before.” Chapter 51. Pyramus andThisbeAbout two-thirds of theway along the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and in the rear of one of the mostimposing mansions in this rich neighborhood, where the various houses vie witheach other for elegance of design and magnificence of construction, extended alarge garden, where the wide-spreading chestnut-trees raised their heads highabove the walls in a solid rampart, and with the coming of every springscattered a shower of delicate pink and white blossoms into the large stonevases that stood upon the two square pilasters of a curiously wrought irongate, that dated from the time of Louis XIII.This noble entrance, however, in spite of its striking appearance and thegraceful effect of the geraniums planted in the two vases, as they waved theirvariegated leaves in the wind and charmed the eye with their scarlet bloom, hadfallen into utter disuse. The proprietors of the mansion had many years beforethought it best to confine themselves to the possession of the house itself,with its thickly planted courtyard, opening into the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, andto the garden shut in by this gate, which formerly communicated with a finekitchen-garden of about an acre. For the demon of speculation drew a line, orin other words projected a street, at the farther side of the kitchen-garden.The street was laid out, a name was chosen and posted up on an iron plate, butbefore construction was begun, it occurred to the possessor of the propertythat a handsome sum might be obtained for the ground then devoted to fruits andvegetables, by building along the line of the proposed street, and so making ita branch of communication with the Faubourg Saint-Honoré itself, one of themost important thoroughfares in the city of Paris.In matters of speculation, however, though “man proposes,” yet“money disposes.” From some such difficulty the newly named streetdied almost in birth, and the purchaser of the kitchen-garden, having paid ahigh price for it, and being quite unable to find anyone willing to take hisbargain off his hands without a considerable loss, yet still clinging to thebelief that at some future day he should obtain a sum for it that would repayhim, not only for his past outlay, but also the interest upon the capitallocked up in his new acquisition, contented himself with letting the groundtemporarily to some market-gardeners, at a yearly rental of 500 francs.And so, as we have said, the iron gate leading into the kitchen-garden had beenclosed up and left to the rust, which bade fair before long to eat off itshinges, while to prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers and delvers of theground from presuming to sully the aristocratic enclosure belonging to themansion, the gate had been boarded up to a height of six feet. True, the plankswere not so closely adjusted but that a hasty peep might be obtained throughtheir interstices; but the strict decorum and rigid propriety of theinhabitants of the house left no grounds for apprehending that advantage wouldbe taken of that circumstance.Horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in the desertedkitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots, radishes, peas, and melons hadonce flourished, a scanty crop of lucern alone bore evidence of its beingdeemed worthy of cultivation. A small, low door gave egress from the walledspace we have been describing into the projected street, the ground having beenabandoned as unproductive by its various renters, and had now fallen socompletely in general estimation as to return not even the one-half per cent ithad originally paid. Towards the house the chestnut-trees we have beforementioned rose high above the wall, without in any way affecting the growth ofother luxuriant shrubs and flowers that eagerly dressed forward to fill up thevacant spaces, as though asserting their right to enjoy the boon of light andair. At one corner, where the foliage became so thick as almost to shut outday, a large stone bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that this shelteredspot was either in general favor or particular use by some inhabitant of thehouse, which was faintly discernible through the dense mass of verdure thatpartially concealed it, though situated but a hundred paces off.Whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds as the boundary of awalk, or as a place for meditation, was abundantly justified in the choice bythe absence of all glare, the cool, refreshing shade, the screen it affordedfrom the scorching rays of the sun, that found no entrance there even duringthe burning days of hottest summer, the incessant and melodious warbling ofbirds, and the entire removal from either the noise of the street or the bustleof the mansion. On the evening of one of the warmest days spring had yetbestowed on the inhabitants of Paris, might be seen negligently thrown upon thestone bench, a book, a parasol, and a work-basket, from which hung a partlyembroidered cambric handkerchief, while at a little distance from thesearticles was a young woman, standing close to the iron gate, endeavoring todiscern something on the other side by means of the openings in theplanks,—the earnestness of her attitude and the fixed gaze with which sheseemed to seek the object of her wishes, proving how much her feelings wereinterested in the matter.At that instant the little side-gate leading from the waste ground to thestreet was noiselessly opened, and a tall, powerful young man appeared. He wasdressed in a common gray blouse and velvet cap, but his carefully arrangedhair, beard and moustache, all of the richest and glossiest black, ill accordedwith his plebeian attire. After casting a rapid glance around him, in order toassure himself that he was unobserved, he entered by the small gate, and,carefully closing and securing it after him, proceeded with a hurried steptowards the barrier.At the sight of him she expected, though probably not in such a costume, theyoung woman started in terror, and was about to make a hasty retreat. But theeye of love had already seen, even through the narrow chinks of the woodenpalisades, the movement of the white robe, and observed the fluttering of theblue sash. Pressing his lips close to the planks, he exclaimed:“Don’t be alarmed, Valentine—it is I!”Again the timid girl found courage to return to the gate, saying, as she didso:“And why do you come so late today? It is almost dinner-time, and I hadto use no little diplomacy to get rid of my watchful stepmother, my too-devotedmaid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing me about coming to workat my embroidery, which I am in a fair way never to get done. So pray excuseyourself as well as you can for having made me wait, and, after that, tell mewhy I see you in a dress so singular that at first I did not recognizeyou.”“Dearest Valentine,” said the young man, “the differencebetween our respective stations makes me fear to offend you by speaking of mylove, but yet I cannot find myself in your presence without longing to pourforth my soul, and tell you how fondly I adore you. If it be but to carry awaywith me the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even thank you forchiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if you did not expect me(and that indeed would be worse than vanity to suppose), at least I was in yourthoughts. You asked me the cause of my being late, and why I come disguised. Iwill candidly explain the reason of both, and I trust to your goodness topardon me. I have chosen a trade.”“A trade? Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when we have suchdeep cause for uneasiness?”“Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer to me thanlife itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and I will tell you all about it. Ibecame weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously alarmed at theidea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about here your father wouldvery likely have me sent to prison as a thief. That would compromise the honorof the French army, to say nothing of the fact that the continual presence of acaptain of Spahis in a place where no warlike projects could be supposed toaccount for it might well create surprise; so I have become a gardener, and,consequently, adopted the costume of my calling.”“What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!”“Nonsense? Pray do not call what I consider the wisest action of my lifeby such a name. Consider, by becoming a gardener I effectually screen ourmeetings from all suspicion or danger.”“I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell me what youreally mean.”“Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which Istand was to let, I made application for it, was readily accepted by theproprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern. Think of that,Valentine! There is nothing now to prevent my building myself a little hut onmy plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you. Only imagine whathappiness that would afford me. I can scarcely contain myself at the bare idea.Such felicity seems above all price—as a thing impossible andunattainable. But would you believe that I purchase all this delight, joy, andhappiness, for which I would cheerfully have surrendered ten years of my life,at the small cost of 500 francs per annum, paid quarterly? Henceforth we havenothing to fear. I am on my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place aladder against the wall, and to look over when I please, without having anyapprehensions of being taken off by the police as a suspicious character. I mayalso enjoy the precious privilege of assuring you of my fond, faithful, andunalterable affection, whenever you visit your favorite bower, unless, indeed,it offends your pride to listen to professions of love from the lips of a poorworkingman, clad in a blouse and cap.”A faint cry of mingled pleasure and surprise escaped from the lips ofValentine, who almost instantly said, in a saddened tone, as though someenvious cloud darkened the joy which illumined her heart:“Alas, no, Maximilian, this must not be, for many reasons. We shouldpresume too much on our own strength, and, like others, perhaps, be led astrayby our blind confidence in each other’s prudence.”“How can you for an instant entertain so unworthy a thought, dearValentine? Have I not, from the first blessed hour of our acquaintance,schooled all my words and actions to your sentiments and ideas? And you have, Iam sure, the fullest confidence in my honor. When you spoke to me ofexperiencing a vague and indefinite sense of coming danger, I placed myselfblindly and devotedly at your service, asking no other reward than the pleasureof being useful to you; and have I ever since, by word or look, given you causeof regret for having selected me from the numbers that would willingly havesacrificed their lives for you? You told me, my dear Valentine, that you wereengaged to M. d’Épinay, and that your father was resolved upon completingthe match, and that from his will there was no appeal, as M. de Villefort wasnever known to change a determination once formed. I kept in the background, asyou wished, and waited, not for the decision of your heart or my own, buthoping that Providence would graciously interpose in our behalf, and orderevents in our favor. But what cared I for delays or difficulties, Valentine, aslong as you confessed that you loved me, and took pity on me? If you will onlyrepeat that avowal now and then, I can endure anything.”“Ah, Maximilian, that is the very thing that makes you so bold, and whichrenders me at once so happy and unhappy, that I frequently ask myself whetherit is better for me to endure the harshness of my stepmother, and her blindpreference for her own child, or to be, as I now am, insensible to any pleasuresave such as I find in these meetings, so fraught with danger to both.”“I will not admit that word,” returned the young man; “it isat once cruel and unjust. Is it possible to find a more submissive slave thanmyself? You have permitted me to converse with you from time to time,Valentine, but forbidden my ever following you in your walks orelsewhere—have I not obeyed? And since I found means to enter thisenclosure to exchange a few words with you through this gate—to be closeto you without really seeing you—have I ever asked so much as to touchthe hem of your gown or tried to pass this barrier which is but a trifle to oneof my youth and strength? Never has a complaint or a murmur escaped me. I havebeen bound by my promises as rigidly as any knight of olden times. Come, come,dearest Valentine, confess that what I say is true, lest I be tempted to callyou unjust.”“It is true,” said Valentine, as she passed the end of her slenderfingers through a small opening in the planks, and permitted Maximilian topress his lips to them, “and you are a true and faithful friend; butstill you acted from motives of self-interest, my dear Maximilian, for you wellknew that from the moment in which you had manifested an opposite spirit allwould have been ended between us. You promised to bestow on me the friendlyaffection of a brother. For I have no friend but yourself upon earth, who amneglected and forgotten by my father, harassed and persecuted by my stepmother,and left to the sole companionship of a paralyzed and speechless old man, whosewithered hand can no longer press mine, and who can speak to me with the eyealone, although there still lingers in his heart the warmest tenderness for hispoor grandchild. Oh, how bitter a fate is mine, to serve either as a victim oran enemy to all who are stronger than myself, while my only friend andsupporter is a living corpse! Indeed, indeed, Maximilian, I am very miserable,and if you love me it must be out of pity.”“Valentine,” replied the young man, deeply affected, “I willnot say you are all I love in the world, for I dearly prize my sister andbrother-in-law; but my affection for them is calm and tranquil, in no mannerresembling what I feel for you. When I think of you my heart beats fast, theblood burns in my veins, and I can hardly breathe; but I solemnly promise youto restrain all this ardor, this fervor and intensity of feeling, until youyourself shall require me to render them available in serving or assisting you.M. Franz is not expected to return home for a year to come, I am told; in thattime many favorable and unforeseen chances may befriend us. Let us, then, hopefor the best; hope is so sweet a comforter. Meanwhile, Valentine, whilereproaching me with selfishness, think a little what you have been tome—the beautiful but cold resemblance of a marble Venus. What promise offuture reward have you made me for all the submission and obedience I haveevinced?—none whatever. What granted me?—scarcely more. You tell meof M. Franz d’Épinay, your betrothed lover, and you shrink from the ideaof being his wife; but tell me, Valentine, is there no other sorrow in yourheart? You see me devoted to you, body and soul, my life and each warm dropthat circles round my heart are consecrated to your service; you know full wellthat my existence is bound up in yours—that were I to lose you I wouldnot outlive the hour of such crushing misery; yet you speak with calmness ofthe prospect of your being the wife of another! Oh, Valentine, were I in yourplace, and did I feel conscious, as you do, of being worshipped, adored, withsuch a love as mine, a hundred times at least should I have passed my handbetween these iron bars, and said, ‘Take this hand, dearest Maximilian,and believe that, living or dead, I am yours—yours only, andforever!’”The poor girl made no reply, but her lover could plainly hear her sobs andtears. A rapid change took place in the young man’s feelings.“Dearest, dearest Valentine,” exclaimed he, “forgive me if Ihave offended you, and forget the words I spoke if they have unwittingly causedyou pain.”“No, Maximilian, I am not offended,” answered she, “but doyou not see what a poor, helpless being I am, almost a stranger and an outcastin my father’s house, where even he is seldom seen; whose will has beenthwarted, and spirits broken, from the age of ten years, beneath the iron rodso sternly held over me; oppressed, mortified, and persecuted, day by day, hourby hour, minute by minute, no person has cared for, even observed mysufferings, nor have I ever breathed one word on the subject save to yourself.Outwardly and in the eyes of the world, I am surrounded by kindness andaffection; but the reverse is the case. The general remark is, ‘Oh, itcannot be expected that one of so stern a character as M. Villefort couldlavish the tenderness some fathers do on their daughters. What though she haslost her own mother at a tender age, she has had the happiness to find a secondmother in Madame de Villefort.’ The world, however, is mistaken; myfather abandons me from utter indifference, while my stepmother detests me witha hatred so much the more terrible because it is veiled beneath a continualsmile.”“Hate you, sweet Valentine,” exclaimed the young man; “how isit possible for anyone to do that?”“Alas,” replied the weeping girl, “I am obliged to own thatmy stepmother’s aversion to me arises from a very naturalsource—her overweening love for her own child, my brother Edward.”“But why should it?”“I do not know; but, though unwilling to introduce money matters into ourpresent conversation, I will just say this much—that her extreme disliketo me has its origin there; and I much fear she envies me the fortune I enjoyin right of my mother, and which will be more than doubled at the death of M.and Mme. de Saint-Méran, whose sole heiress I am. Madame de Villefort hasnothing of her own, and hates me for being so richly endowed. Alas, how gladlywould I exchange the half of this wealth for the happiness of at least sharingmy father’s love. God knows, I would prefer sacrificing the whole, sothat it would obtain me a happy and affectionate home.”“Poor Valentine!”“I seem to myself as though living a life of bondage, yet at the sametime am so conscious of my own weakness that I fear to break the restraint inwhich I am held, lest I fall utterly helpless. Then, too, my father is not aperson whose orders may be infringed with impunity; protected as he is by hishigh position and firmly established reputation for talent and unswervingintegrity, no one could oppose him; he is all-powerful even with the king; hewould crush you at a word. Dear Maximilian, believe me when I assure you thatif I do not attempt to resist my father’s commands it is more on youraccount than my own.”“But why, Valentine, do you persist in anticipating the worst,—whypicture so gloomy a future?”“Because I judge it from the past.”“Still, consider that although I may not be, strictly speaking, what istermed an illustrious match for you, I am, for many reasons, not altogether somuch beneath your alliance. The days when such distinctions were so nicelyweighed and considered no longer exist in France, and the first families of themonarchy have intermarried with those of the empire. The aristocracy of thelance has allied itself with the nobility of the cannon. Now I belong to thislast-named class; and certainly my prospects of military preferment are mostencouraging as well as certain. My fortune, though small, is free andunfettered, and the memory of my late father is respected in our country,Valentine, as that of the most upright and honorable merchant of the city; Isay our country, because you were born not far from Marseilles.”“Don’t speak of Marseilles, I beg of you, Maximilian; that one wordbrings back my mother to my recollection—my angel mother, who died toosoon for myself and all who knew her; but who, after watching over her childduring the brief period allotted to her in this world, now, I fondly hope,watches from her home in heaven. Oh, if my mother were still living, therewould be nothing to fear, Maximilian, for I would tell her that I loved you,and she would protect us.”“I fear, Valentine,” replied the lover, “that were she livingI should never have had the happiness of knowing you; you would then have beentoo happy to have stooped from your grandeur to bestow a thought on me.”“Now it is you who are unjust, Maximilian,” cried Valentine;“but there is one thing I wish to know.”“And what is that?” inquired the young man, perceiving thatValentine hesitated.“Tell me truly, Maximilian, whether in former days, when our fathersdwelt at Marseilles, there was ever any misunderstanding between them?”“Not that I am aware of,” replied the young man, “unless,indeed, any ill-feeling might have arisen from their being of oppositeparties—your father was, as you know, a zealous partisan of the Bourbons,while mine was wholly devoted to the emperor; there could not possibly be anyother difference between them. But why do you ask?”“I will tell you,” replied the young girl, “for it is butright you should know. Well, on the day when your appointment as an officer ofthe Legion of Honor was announced in the papers, we were all sitting with mygrandfather, M. Noirtier; M. Danglars was there also—you recollect M.Danglars, do you not, Maximilian, the banker, whose horses ran away with mystepmother and little brother, and very nearly killed them? While the rest ofthe company were discussing the approaching marriage of Mademoiselle Danglars,I was reading the paper to my grandfather; but when I came to the paragraphabout you, although I had done nothing else but read it over to myself all themorning (you know you had told me all about it the previous evening), I felt sohappy, and yet so nervous, at the idea of speaking your name aloud, and beforeso many people, that I really think I should have passed it over, but for thefear that my doing so might create suspicions as to the cause of my silence; soI summoned up all my courage, and read it as firmly and as steadily as Icould.”“Dear Valentine!”“Well, would you believe it? directly my father caught the sound of yourname he turned round quite hastily, and, like a poor silly thing, I was sopersuaded that everyone must be as much affected as myself by the utterance ofyour name, that I was not surprised to see my father start, and almost tremble;but I even thought (though that surely must have been a mistake) that M.Danglars trembled too.”“‘Morrel, Morrel,’ cried my father, ‘stop a bit;’then knitting his brows into a deep frown, he added, ‘surely this cannotbe one of the Morrel family who lived at Marseilles, and gave us so muchtrouble from their violent Bonapartism—I mean about the year 1815.’“‘Yes,’ replied M. Danglars, ‘I believe he is the sonof the old shipowner.’”“Indeed,” answered Maximilian; “and what did your father saythen, Valentine?”“Oh, such a dreadful thing, that I don’t dare to tell you.”“Always tell me everything,” said Maximilian with a smile.“‘Ah,’ continued my father, still frowning, ‘theiridolized emperor treated these madmen as they deserved; he called them‘food for cannon,’ which was precisely all they were good for; andI am delighted to see that the present government have adopted this salutaryprinciple with all its pristine vigor; if Algiers were good for nothing but tofurnish the means of carrying so admirable an idea into practice, it would bean acquisition well worthy of struggling to obtain. Though it certainly doescost France somewhat dear to assert her rights in that uncivilizedcountry.’”“Brutal politics, I must confess.” said Maximilian; “butdon’t attach any serious importance, dear, to what your father said. Myfather was not a bit behind yours in that sort of talk. ‘Why,’ saidhe, ‘does not the emperor, who has devised so many clever and efficientmodes of improving the art of war, organize a regiment of lawyers, judges andlegal practitioners, sending them in the hottest fire the enemy could maintain,and using them to save better men?’ You see, my dear, that forpicturesque expression and generosity of spirit there is not much to choosebetween the language of either party. But what did M. Danglars say to thisoutburst on the part of the procureur?”“Oh, he laughed, and in that singular manner so peculiar tohimself—half-malicious, half-ferocious; he almost immediately got up andtook his leave; then, for the first time, I observed the agitation of mygrandfather, and I must tell you, Maximilian, that I am the only person capableof discerning emotion in his paralyzed frame. And I suspected that theconversation that had been carried on in his presence (for they always say anddo what they like before the dear old man, without the smallest regard for hisfeelings) had made a strong impression on his mind; for, naturally enough, itmust have pained him to hear the emperor he so devotedly loved and servedspoken of in that depreciating manner.”“The name of M. Noirtier,” interposed Maximilian, “iscelebrated throughout Europe; he was a statesman of high standing, and you mayor may not know, Valentine, that he took a leading part in every Bonapartistconspiracy set on foot during the restoration of the Bourbons.”“Oh, I have often heard whispers of things that seem to me moststrange—the father a Bonapartist, the son a Royalist; what can have beenthe reason of so singular a difference in parties and politics? But to resumemy story; I turned towards my grandfather, as though to question him as to thecause of his emotion; he looked expressively at the newspaper I had beenreading. ‘What is the matter, dear grandfather?’ said I, ‘areyou pleased?’ He gave me a sign in the affirmative. ‘With what myfather said just now?’ He returned a sign in the negative. ‘Perhapsyou liked what M. Danglars said?’ Another sign in the negative.‘Oh, then, you were glad to hear that M. Morrel (I didn’t dare tosay Maximilian) had been made an officer of the Legion of Honor?’ Hesignified assent; only think of the poor old man’s being so pleased tothink that you, who were a perfect stranger to him, had been made an officer ofthe Legion of Honor! Perhaps it was a mere whim on his part, for he is falling,they say, into second childhood, but I love him for showing so much interest inyou.”“How singular,” murmured Maximilian; “your father hates me,while your grandfather, on the contrary—What strange feelings are arousedby politics.”“Hush,” cried Valentine, suddenly; “someone is coming!”Maximilian leaped at one bound into his crop of lucern, which he began to pullup in the most ruthless way, under the pretext of being occupied in weeding it.“Mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” exclaimed a voice from behind thetrees. “Madame is searching for you everywhere; there is a visitor in thedrawing-room.”“A visitor?” inquired Valentine, much agitated; “who isit?”“Some grand personage—a prince I believe they said—the Countof Monte Cristo.”“I will come directly,” cried Valentine aloud.The name of Monte Cristo sent an electric shock through the young man on theother side of the iron gate, to whom Valentine’s “I amcoming” was the customary signal of farewell.“Now, then,” said Maximilian, leaning on the handle of his spade,“I would give a good deal to know how it comes about that the Count ofMonte Cristo is acquainted with M. de Villefort.” Chapter 52. ToxicologyIt was really the Countof Monte Cristo who had just arrived at Madame de Villefort’s for thepurpose of returning the procureur’s visit, and at his name, as may beeasily imagined, the whole house was in confusion.Madame de Villefort, who was alone in her drawing-room when the count wasannounced, desired that her son might be brought thither instantly to renew histhanks to the count; and Edward, who heard this great personage talked of fortwo whole days, made all possible haste to come to him, not from obedience tohis mother, or out of any feeling of gratitude to the count, but from sheercuriosity, and that some chance remark might give him the opportunity formaking one of the impertinent speeches which made his mother say:“Oh, that naughty child! But I can’t be severe with him, he isreally so bright.”After the usual civilities, the count inquired after M. de Villefort.“My husband dines with the chancellor,” replied the young lady;“he has just gone, and I am sure he’ll be exceedingly sorry not tohave had the pleasure of seeing you before he went.”Two visitors who were there when the count arrived, having gazed at him withall their eyes, retired after that reasonable delay which politeness admits andcuriosity requires.“What is your sister Valentine doing?” inquired Madame de Villefortof Edward; “tell someone to bid her come here, that I may have the honorof introducing her to the count.”“You have a daughter, then, madame?” inquired the count;“very young, I presume?”“The daughter of M. de Villefort by his first marriage,” repliedthe young wife, “a fine well-grown girl.”“But melancholy,” interrupted Master Edward, snatching the feathersout of the tail of a splendid paroquet that was screaming on its gilded perch,in order to make a plume for his hat.Madame de Villefort merely cried, “Be still, Edward!” She thenadded, “This young madcap is, however, very nearly right, and merelyre-echoes what he has heard me say with pain a hundred times; for Mademoisellede Villefort is, in spite of all we can do to rouse her, of a melancholydisposition and taciturn habit, which frequently injure the effect of herbeauty. But what detains her? Go, Edward, and see.”“Because they are looking for her where she is not to be found.”“And where are they looking for her?”“With grandpapa Noirtier.”“And do you think she is not there?”“No, no, no, no, no, she is not there,” replied Edward, singing hiswords.“And where is she, then? If you know, why don’t you tell?”“She is under the big chestnut-tree,” replied the spoiled brat, ashe gave, in spite of his mother’s commands, live flies to the parrot,which seemed keenly to relish such fare.Madame de Villefort stretched out her hand to ring, intending to direct herwaiting-maid to the spot where she would find Valentine, when the young ladyherself entered the apartment. She appeared much dejected; and any person whoconsidered her attentively might have observed the traces of recent tears inher eyes.Valentine, whom we have in the rapid march of our narrative presented to ourreaders without formally introducing her, was a tall and graceful girl ofnineteen, with bright chestnut hair, deep blue eyes, and that reposeful air ofquiet distinction which characterized her mother. Her white and slenderfingers, her pearly neck, her cheeks tinted with varying hues reminded one ofthe lovely Englishwomen who have been so poetically compared in their manner tothe gracefulness of a swan.She entered the apartment, and seeing near her stepmother the stranger of whomshe had already heard so much, saluted him without any girlish awkwardness, oreven lowering her eyes, and with an elegance that redoubled the count’sattention.He rose to return the salutation.“Mademoiselle de Villefort, my step-daughter,” said Madame deVillefort to Monte Cristo, leaning back on her sofa and motioning towardsValentine with her hand.“And M. de Monte Cristo, King of China, Emperor of Cochin-China,”said the young imp, looking slyly towards his sister.Madame de Villefort at this really did turn pale, and was very nearly angrywith this household plague, who answered to the name of Edward; but the count,on the contrary, smiled, and appeared to look at the boy complacently, whichcaused the maternal heart to bound again with joy and enthusiasm.“But, madame,” replied the count, continuing the conversation, andlooking by turns at Madame de Villefort and Valentine, “have I notalready had the honor of meeting yourself and mademoiselle before? I could nothelp thinking so just now; the idea came over my mind, and as mademoiselleentered the sight of her was an additional ray of light thrown on a confusedremembrance; excuse the remark.”“I do not think it likely, sir; Mademoiselle de Villefort is not veryfond of society, and we very seldom go out,” said the young lady.“Then it was not in society that I met with mademoiselle or yourself,madame, or this charming little merry boy. Besides, the Parisian world isentirely unknown to me, for, as I believe I told you, I have been in Paris butvery few days. No,—but, perhaps, you will permit me to call tomind—stay!”The Count placed his hand on his brow as if to collect his thoughts.“No—it was somewhere—away from here—it was—I donot know—but it appears that this recollection is connected with a lovelysky and some religious fête; mademoiselle was holding flowers in herhand, the interesting boy was chasing a beautiful peacock in a garden, and you,madame, were under the trellis of some arbor. Pray come to my aid, madame; donot these circumstances appeal to your memory?”“No, indeed,” replied Madame de Villefort; “and yet itappears to me, sir, that if I had met you anywhere, the recollection of youmust have been imprinted on my memory.”“Perhaps the count saw us in Italy,” said Valentine timidly.“Yes, in Italy; it was in Italy most probably,” replied MonteCristo; “you have travelled then in Italy, mademoiselle?”“Yes; madame and I were there two years ago. The doctors, anxious for mylungs, had prescribed the air of Naples. We went by Bologna, Perugia, andRome.”“Ah, yes—true, mademoiselle,” exclaimed Monte Cristo as ifthis simple explanation was sufficient to revive the recollection he sought.“It was at Perugia on Corpus Christi Day, in the garden of the Hôtel desPostes, when chance brought us together; you, Madame de Villefort, and her son;I now remember having had the honor of meeting you.”“I perfectly well remember Perugia, sir, and the Hôtel des Postes, andthe festival of which you speak,” said Madame de Villefort, “but invain do I tax my memory, of whose treachery I am ashamed, for I really do notrecall to mind that I ever had the pleasure of seeing you before.”“It is strange, but neither do I recollect meeting with you,”observed Valentine, raising her beautiful eyes to the count.“But I remember it perfectly,” interposed the darling Edward.“I will assist your memory, madame,” continued the count;“the day had been burning hot; you were waiting for horses, which weredelayed in consequence of the festival. Mademoiselle was walking in the shadeof the garden, and your son disappeared in pursuit of the peacock.”“And I caught it, mamma, don’t you remember?” interposedEdward, “and I pulled three such beautiful feathers out of histail.”“You, madame, remained under the arbor; do you not remember, that whileyou were seated on a stone bench, and while, as I told you, Mademoiselle deVillefort and your young son were absent, you conversed for a considerable timewith somebody?”“Yes, in truth, yes,” answered the young lady, turning very red,“I do remember conversing with a person wrapped in a long woollen mantle;he was a medical man, I think.”“Precisely so, madame; this man was myself; for a fortnight I had been atthat hotel, during which period I had cured my valet de chambre of a fever, andmy landlord of the jaundice, so that I really acquired a reputation as askilful physician. We discoursed a long time, madame, on different subjects; ofPerugino, of Raphael, of manners, customs, of the famous aqua Tofana, ofwhich they had told you, I think you said, that certain individuals in Perugiahad preserved the secret.”“Yes, true,” replied Madame de Villefort, somewhat uneasily,“I remember now.”“I do not recollect now all the various subjects of which we discoursed,madame,” continued the count with perfect calmness; “but Iperfectly remember that, falling into the error which others had entertainedrespecting me, you consulted me as to the health of Mademoiselle deVillefort.”“Yes, really, sir, you were in fact a medical man,” said Madame deVillefort, “since you had cured the sick.”“Molière or Beaumarchais would reply to you, madame, that it wasprecisely because I was not, that I had cured my patients; for myself, I amcontent to say to you that I have studied chemistry and the natural sciencessomewhat deeply, but still only as an amateur, you understand.”At this moment the clock struck six.“It is six o’clock,” said Madame de Villefort, evidentlyagitated. “Valentine, will you not go and see if your grandpapa will havehis dinner?”Valentine rose, and saluting the count, left the apartment without speaking.“Oh, madame,” said the count, when Valentine had left the room,“was it on my account that you sent Mademoiselle de Villefortaway?”“By no means,” replied the young lady quickly; “but this isthe hour when we usually give M. Noirtier the unwelcome meal that sustains hispitiful existence. You are aware, sir, of the deplorable condition of myhusband’s father?”“Yes, madame, M. de Villefort spoke of it to me—a paralysis, Ithink.”“Alas, yes; the poor old gentleman is entirely helpless; the mind aloneis still active in this human machine, and that is faint and flickering, likethe light of a lamp about to expire. But excuse me, sir, for talking of ourdomestic misfortunes; I interrupted you at the moment when you were telling methat you were a skilful chemist.”“No, madame, I did not say as much as that,” replied the count witha smile; “quite the contrary. I have studied chemistry because, havingdetermined to live in eastern climates I have been desirous of following theexample of King Mithridates.”“Mithridates, rex Ponticus,” said the young scamp, as hetore some beautiful portraits out of a splendid album, “the individualwho took cream in his cup of poison every morning at breakfast.”“Edward, you naughty boy,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, snatchingthe mutilated book from the urchin’s grasp, “you are positivelypast bearing; you really disturb the conversation; go, leave us, and join yoursister Valentine in dear grandpapa Noirtier’s room.”“The album,” said Edward sulkily.“What do you mean?—the album!”“I want the album.”“How dare you tear out the drawings?”“Oh, it amuses me.”“Go—go at once.”“I won’t go unless you give me the album,” said the boy,seating himself doggedly in an armchair, according to his habit of never givingway.“Take it, then, and pray disturb us no longer,” said Madame deVillefort, giving the album to Edward, who then went towards the door, led byhis mother. The count followed her with his eyes.“Let us see if she shuts the door after him,” he muttered.Madame de Villefort closed the door carefully after the child, the countappearing not to notice her; then casting a scrutinizing glance around thechamber, the young wife returned to her chair, in which she seated herself.“Allow me to observe, madame,” said the count, with that kind tonehe could assume so well, “you are really very severe with that dearclever child.”“Oh, sometimes severity is quite necessary,” replied Madame deVillefort, with all a mother’s real firmness.“It was his Cornelius Nepos that Master Edward was repeating when hereferred to King Mithridates,” continued the count, “and youinterrupted him in a quotation which proves that his tutor has by no meansneglected him, for your son is really advanced for his years.”“The fact is, count,” answered the mother, agreeably flattered,“he has great aptitude, and learns all that is set before him. He has butone fault, he is somewhat wilful; but really, on referring for the moment towhat he said, do you truly believe that Mithridates used these precautions, andthat these precautions were efficacious?”“I think so, madame, because I myself have made use of them, that I mightnot be poisoned at Naples, at Palermo, and at Smyrna—that is to say, onthree several occasions when, but for these precautions, I must have lost mylife.”“And your precautions were successful?”“Completely so.”“Yes, I remember now your mentioning to me at Perugia something of thissort.”“Indeed?” said the count with an air of surprise, remarkably wellcounterfeited; “I really did not remember.”“I inquired of you if poisons acted equally, and with the same effect, onmen of the North as on men of the South; and you answered me that the cold andsluggish habits of the North did not present the same aptitude as the rich andenergetic temperaments of the natives of the South.”“And that is the case,” observed Monte Cristo. “I have seenRussians devour, without being visibly inconvenienced, vegetable substanceswhich would infallibly have killed a Neapolitan or an Arab.”“And you really believe the result would be still more sure with us thanin the East, and in the midst of our fogs and rains a man would habituatehimself more easily than in a warm latitude to this progressive absorption ofpoison?”“Certainly; it being at the same time perfectly understood that he shouldhave been duly fortified against the poison to which he had not beenaccustomed.”“Yes, I understand that; and how would you habituate yourself, forinstance, or rather, how did you habituate yourself to it?”“Oh, very easily. Suppose you knew beforehand the poison that would bemade use of against you; suppose the poison was, for instance,brucine——”“Brucine is extracted from the falseangostura[8]is it not?” inquired Madame de Villefort.“Precisely, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but I perceive Ihave not much to teach you. Allow me to compliment you on your knowledge; suchlearning is very rare among ladies.”“Oh, I am aware of that,” said Madame de Villefort; “but Ihave a passion for the occult sciences, which speak to the imagination likepoetry, and are reducible to figures, like an algebraic equation; but go on, Ibeg of you; what you say interests me to the greatest degree.”“Well,” replied Monte Cristo “suppose, then, that this poisonwas brucine, and you were to take a milligramme the first day, two milligrammesthe second day, and so on. Well, at the end of ten days you would have taken acentigramme, at the end of twenty days, increasing another milligramme, youwould have taken three hundred centigrammes; that is to say, a dose which youwould support without inconvenience, and which would be very dangerous for anyother person who had not taken the same precautions as yourself. Well, then, atthe end of a month, when drinking water from the same carafe, you would killthe person who drank with you, without your perceiving, otherwise than fromslight inconvenience, that there was any poisonous substance mingled with thiswater.”“Do you know any other counter-poisons?”“I do not.”“I have often read, and read again, the history of Mithridates,”said Madame de Villefort in a tone of reflection, “and had alwaysconsidered it a fable.”“No, madame, contrary to most history, it is true; but what you tell me,madame, what you inquire of me, is not the result of a chance query, for twoyears ago you asked me the same questions, and said then, that for a very longtime this history of Mithridates had occupied your mind.”“True, sir. The two favorite studies of my youth were botany andmineralogy, and subsequently, when I learned that the use of simples frequentlyexplained the whole history of a people, and the entire life of individuals inthe East, as flowers betoken and symbolize a love affair, I have regretted thatI was not a man, that I might have been a Flamel, a Fontana, or aCabanis.”“And the more, madame,” said Monte Cristo, “as the Orientalsdo not confine themselves, as did Mithridates, to make a cuirass of hispoisons, but they also made them a dagger. Science becomes, in their hands, notonly a defensive weapon, but still more frequently an offensive one; the oneserves against all their physical sufferings, the other against all theirenemies. With opium, belladonna, brucea, snake-wood, and the cherry-laurel,they put to sleep all who stand in their way. There is not one of those women,Egyptian, Turkish, or Greek, whom here you call ‘good women,’ whodo not know how, by means of chemistry, to stupefy a doctor, and in psychologyto amaze a confessor.”“Really,” said Madame de Villefort, whose eyes sparkled withstrange fire at this conversation.“Oh, yes, indeed, madame,” continued Monte Cristo, “thesecret dramas of the East begin with a love philtre and end with a deathpotion—begin with paradise and end with—hell. There are as manyelixirs of every kind as there are caprices and peculiarities in the physicaland moral nature of humanity; and I will say further—the art of thesechemists is capable with the utmost precision to accommodate and proportion theremedy and the bane to yearnings for love or desires for vengeance.”“But, sir,” remarked the young woman, “these Easternsocieties, in the midst of which you have passed a portion of your existence,are as fantastic as the tales that come from their strange land. A man caneasily be put out of the way there, then; it is, indeed, the Bagdad and Bassoraof the Thousand and One Nights. The sultans and viziers who rule oversociety there, and who constitute what in France we call the government, arereally Haroun-al-Raschids and Giaffars, who not only pardon a poisoner, buteven make him a prime minister, if his crime has been an ingenious one, andwho, under such circumstances, have the whole story written in letters of gold,to divert their hours of idleness and ennui.”“By no means, madame; the fanciful exists no longer in the East. There,disguised under other names, and concealed under other costumes, are policeagents, magistrates, attorneys-general, and bailiffs. They hang, behead, andimpale their criminals in the most agreeable possible manner; but some ofthese, like clever rogues, have contrived to escape human justice, and succeedin their fraudulent enterprises by cunning stratagems. Amongst us a simpleton,possessed by the demon of hate or cupidity, who has an enemy to destroy, orsome near relation to dispose of, goes straight to the grocer’s ordruggist’s, gives a false name, which leads more easily to his detectionthan his real one, and under the pretext that the rats prevent him fromsleeping, purchases five or six grammes of arsenic—if he is really acunning fellow, he goes to five or six different druggists or grocers, andthereby becomes only five or six times more easily traced;—then, when hehas acquired his specific, he administers duly to his enemy, or near kinsman, adose of arsenic which would make a mammoth or mastodon burst, and which,without rhyme or reason, makes his victim utter groans which alarm the entireneighborhood. Then arrive a crowd of policemen and constables. They fetch adoctor, who opens the dead body, and collects from the entrails and stomach aquantity of arsenic in a spoon. Next day a hundred newspapers relate the fact,with the names of the victim and the murderer. The same evening the grocer orgrocers, druggist or druggists, come and say, ‘It was I who sold thearsenic to the gentleman;’ and rather than not recognize the guiltypurchaser, they will recognize twenty. Then the foolish criminal is taken,imprisoned, interrogated, confronted, confounded, condemned, and cut off byhemp or steel; or if she be a woman of any consideration, they lock her up forlife. This is the way in which you Northerns understand chemistry, madame.Desrues was, however, I must confess, more skilful.”“What would you have, sir?” said the lady, laughing; “we dowhat we can. All the world has not the secret of the Medicis or theBorgias.”“Now,” replied the count, shrugging his shoulders, “shall Itell you the cause of all these stupidities? It is because, at your theatres,by what at least I could judge by reading the pieces they play, they seepersons swallow the contents of a phial, or suck the button of a ring, and falldead instantly. Five minutes afterwards the curtain falls, and the spectatorsdepart. They are ignorant of the consequences of the murder; they see neitherthe police commissary with his badge of office, nor the corporal with his fourmen; and so the poor fools believe that the whole thing is as easy as lying.But go a little way from France—go either to Aleppo or Cairo, or only toNaples or Rome, and you will see people passing by you in thestreets—people erect, smiling, and fresh-colored, of whom Asmodeus, ifyou were holding on by the skirt of his mantle, would say, ‘That man waspoisoned three weeks ago; he will be a dead man in a month.’”“Then,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “they have againdiscovered the secret of the famous aqua Tofana that they said was lostat Perugia.”“Ah, but madame, does mankind ever lose anything? The arts change aboutand make a tour of the world; things take a different name, and the vulgar donot follow them—that is all; but there is always the same result. Poisonsact particularly on some organ or another—one on the stomach, another onthe brain, another on the intestines. Well, the poison brings on a cough, thecough an inflammation of the lungs, or some other complaint catalogued in thebook of science, which, however, by no means precludes it from being decidedlymortal; and if it were not, would be sure to become so, thanks to the remediesapplied by foolish doctors, who are generally bad chemists, and which will actin favor of or against the malady, as you please; and then there is a humanbeing killed according to all the rules of art and skill, and of whom justicelearns nothing, as was said by a terrible chemist of my acquaintance, theworthy Abbé Adelmonte of Taormina, in Sicily, who has studied these nationalphenomena very profoundly.”“It is quite frightful, but deeply interesting,” said the younglady, motionless with attention. “I thought, I must confess, that thesetales, were inventions of the Middle Ages.”“Yes, no doubt, but improved upon by ours. What is the use of time,rewards of merit, medals, crosses, Monthyon prizes, if they do not lead societytowards more complete perfection? Yet man will never be perfect until he learnsto create and destroy; he does know how to destroy, and that is half thebattle.”“So,” added Madame de Villefort, constantly returning to herobject, “the poisons of the Borgias, the Medicis, the Renées, theRuggieris, and later, probably, that of Baron de Trenck, whose story has beenso misused by modern drama and romance——”“Were objects of art, madame, and nothing more,” replied the count.“Do you suppose that the real savant addresses himself stupidly tothe mere individual? By no means. Science loves eccentricities, leaps andbounds, trials of strength, fancies, if I may be allowed so to term them. Thus,for instance, the excellent Abbé Adelmonte, of whom I spoke just now, made inthis way some marvellous experiments.”“Really?”“Yes; I will mention one to you. He had a remarkably fine garden, full ofvegetables, flowers, and fruit. From amongst these vegetables he selected themost simple—a cabbage, for instance. For three days he watered thiscabbage with a distillation of arsenic; on the third, the cabbage began todroop and turn yellow. At that moment he cut it. In the eyes of everybody itseemed fit for table, and preserved its wholesome appearance. It was onlypoisoned to the Abbé Adelmonte. He then took the cabbage to the room where hehad rabbits—for the Abbé Adelmonte had a collection of rabbits, cats, andguinea-pigs, fully as fine as his collection of vegetables, flowers, and fruit.Well, the Abbé Adelmonte took a rabbit, and made it eat a leaf of the cabbage.The rabbit died. What magistrate would find, or even venture to insinuate,anything against this? What procureur has ever ventured to draw up anaccusation against M. Magendie or M. Flourens, in consequence of the rabbits,cats, and guinea-pigs they have killed?—not one. So, then, the rabbitdies, and justice takes no notice. This rabbit dead, the Abbé Adelmonte has itsentrails taken out by his cook and thrown on the dunghill; on this dunghill isa hen, who, pecking these intestines, is in her turn taken ill, and dies nextday. At the moment when she is struggling in the convulsions of death, avulture is flying by (there are a good many vultures in Adelmonte’scountry); this bird darts on the dead fowl, and carries it away to a rock,where it dines off its prey. Three days afterwards, this poor vulture, whichhas been very much indisposed since that dinner, suddenly feels very giddywhile flying aloft in the clouds, and falls heavily into a fish-pond. The pike,eels, and carp eat greedily always, as everybody knows—well, they feaston the vulture. Now suppose that next day, one of these eels, or pike, or carp,poisoned at the fourth remove, is served up at your table. Well, then, yourguest will be poisoned at the fifth remove, and die, at the end of eight or tendays, of pains in the intestines, sickness, or abscess of the pylorus. Thedoctors open the body and say with an air of profound learning, ‘Thesubject has died of a tumor on the liver, or of typhoid fever!’”“But,” remarked Madame de Villefort, “all these circumstanceswhich you link thus to one another may be broken by the least accident; thevulture may not see the fowl, or may fall a hundred yards from thefish-pond.”“Ah, that is where the art comes in. To be a great chemist in the East,one must direct chance; and this is to be achieved.”Madame de Villefort was in deep thought, yet listened attentively.“But,” she exclaimed, suddenly, “arsenic is indelible,indestructible; in whatsoever way it is absorbed, it will be found again in thebody of the victim from the moment when it has been taken in sufficientquantity to cause death.”“Precisely so,” cried Monte Cristo—“precisely so; andthis is what I said to my worthy Adelmonte. He reflected, smiled, and repliedto me by a Sicilian proverb, which I believe is also a French proverb,‘My son, the world was not made in a day—but in seven. Return onSunday.’ On the Sunday following I did return to him. Instead of havingwatered his cabbage with arsenic, he had watered it this time with a solutionof salts, having their basis in strychnine, strychnos colubrina, as thelearned term it. Now, the cabbage had not the slightest appearance of diseasein the world, and the rabbit had not the smallest distrust; yet, five minutesafterwards, the rabbit was dead. The fowl pecked at the rabbit, and the nextday was a dead hen. This time we were the vultures; so we opened the bird, andthis time all special symptoms had disappeared, there were only generalsymptoms. There was no peculiar indication in any organ—an excitement ofthe nervous system—that was it; a case of cerebralcongestion—nothing more. The fowl had not been poisoned—she haddied of apoplexy. Apoplexy is a rare disease among fowls, I believe, but verycommon among men.”Madame de Villefort appeared more and more thoughtful.“It is very fortunate,” she observed, “that such substancescould only be prepared by chemists; otherwise, all the world would be poisoningeach other.”“By chemists and persons who have a taste for chemistry,” saidMonte Cristo carelessly.“And then,” said Madame de Villefort, endeavoring by a struggle,and with effort, to get away from her thoughts, “however skilfully it isprepared, crime is always crime, and if it avoid human scrutiny, it does notescape the eye of God. The Orientals are stronger than we are in cases ofconscience, and, very prudently, have no hell—that is the point.”“Really, madame, this is a scruple which naturally must occur to a puremind like yours, but which would easily yield before sound reasoning. The badside of human thought will always be defined by the paradox of Jean JacquesRousseau,—you remember,—the mandarin who is killed five hundredleagues off by raising the tip of the finger. Man’s whole life passes indoing these things, and his intellect is exhausted by reflecting on them. Youwill find very few persons who will go and brutally thrust a knife in the heartof a fellow-creature, or will administer to him, in order to remove him fromthe surface of the globe on which we move with life and animation, thatquantity of arsenic of which we just now talked. Such a thing is really out ofrule—eccentric or stupid. To attain such a point, the blood must beheated to thirty-six degrees, the pulse be, at least, at ninety, and thefeelings excited beyond the ordinary limit. But suppose one pass, as ispermissible in philology, from the word itself to its softened synonym, then,instead of committing an ignoble assassination you make an‘elimination;’ you merely and simply remove from your path theindividual who is in your way, and that without shock or violence, without thedisplay of the sufferings which, in the case of becoming a punishment, make amartyr of the victim, and a butcher, in every sense of the word, of him whoinflicts them. Then there will be no blood, no groans, no convulsions, andabove all, no consciousness of that horrid and compromising moment ofaccomplishing the act,—then one escapes the clutch of the human law,which says, ‘Do not disturb society!’ This is the mode in whichthey manage these things, and succeed in Eastern climes, where there are graveand phlegmatic persons who care very little for the questions of time inconjunctures of importance.”“Yet conscience remains,” remarked Madame de Villefort in anagitated voice, and with a stifled sigh.“Yes,” answered Monte Cristo “happily, yes, conscience doesremain; and if it did not, how wretched we should be! After every actionrequiring exertion, it is conscience that saves us, for it supplies us with athousand good excuses, of which we alone are judges; and these reasons,howsoever excellent in producing sleep, would avail us but very little before atribunal, when we were tried for our lives. Thus Richard III., for instance,was marvellously served by his conscience after the putting away of the twochildren of Edward IV.; in fact, he could say, ‘These two children of acruel and persecuting king, who have inherited the vices of their father, whichI alone could perceive in their juvenile propensities—these two childrenare impediments in my way of promoting the happiness of the English people,whose unhappiness they (the children) would infallibly have caused.’ Thuswas Lady Macbeth served by her conscience, when she sought to give her son, andnot her husband (whatever Shakespeare may say), a throne. Ah, maternal love isa great virtue, a powerful motive—so powerful that it excuses a multitudeof things, even if, after Duncan’s death, Lady Macbeth had been at allpricked by her conscience.”Madame de Villefort listened with avidity to these appalling maxims andhorrible paradoxes, delivered by the count with that ironical simplicity whichwas peculiar to him.After a moment’s silence, the lady inquired:“Do you know, my dear count,” she said, “that you are a veryterrible reasoner, and that you look at the world through a somewhatdistempered medium? Have you really measured the world by scrutinies, orthrough alembics and crucibles? For you must indeed be a great chemist, and theelixir you administered to my son, which recalled him to life almostinstantaneously——”“Oh, do not place any reliance on that, madame; one drop of thatelixir sufficed to recall life to a dying child, but three drops would haveimpelled the blood into his lungs in such a way as to have produced mostviolent palpitations; six would have suspended his respiration, and causedsyncope more serious than that in which he was; ten would have destroyed him.You know, madame, how suddenly I snatched him from those phials which he soimprudently touched?”“Is it then so terrible a poison?”“Oh, no! In the first place, let us agree that the word poison does notexist, because in medicine use is made of the most violent poisons, whichbecome, according as they are employed, most salutary remedies.”“What, then, is it?”“A skilful preparation of my friend’s the worthy Abbé Adelmonte,who taught me the use of it.”“Oh,” observed Madame de Villefort, “it must be an admirableanti-spasmodic.”“Perfect, madame, as you have seen,” replied the count; “andI frequently make use of it—with all possible prudence though, be itobserved,” he added with a smile of intelligence.“Most assuredly,” responded Madame de Villefort in the same tone.“As for me, so nervous, and so subject to fainting fits, I should requirea Doctor Adelmonte to invent for me some means of breathing freely andtranquillizing my mind, in the fear I have of dying some fine day ofsuffocation. In the meanwhile, as the thing is difficult to find in France, andyour abbé is not probably disposed to make a journey to Paris on my account, Imust continue to use Monsieur Planche’s anti-spasmodics; and mint andHoffman’s drops are among my favorite remedies. Here are some lozengeswhich I have made up on purpose; they are compounded doubly strong.”Monte Cristo opened the tortoise-shell box, which the lady presented to him,and inhaled the odor of the lozenges with the air of an amateur who thoroughlyappreciated their composition.“They are indeed exquisite,” he said; “but as they arenecessarily submitted to the process of deglutition—a function which itis frequently impossible for a fainting person to accomplish—I prefer myown specific.”“Undoubtedly, and so should I prefer it, after the effects I have seenproduced; but of course it is a secret, and I am not so indiscreet as to ask itof you.”“But I,” said Monte Cristo, rising as he spoke—“I amgallant enough to offer it you.”“How kind you are.”“Only remember one thing—a small dose is a remedy, a large one ispoison. One drop will restore life, as you have seen; five or six willinevitably kill, and in a way the more terrible inasmuch as, poured into aglass of wine, it would not in the slightest degree affect its flavor. But Isay no more, madame; it is really as if I were prescribing for you.”The clock struck half-past six, and a lady was announced, a friend of Madame deVillefort, who came to dine with her.“If I had had the honor of seeing you for the third or fourth time,count, instead of only for the second,” said Madame de Villefort;“if I had had the honor of being your friend, instead of only having thehappiness of being under an obligation to you, I should insist on detaining youto dinner, and not allow myself to be daunted by a first refusal.”“A thousand thanks, madame,” replied Monte Cristo “but I havean engagement which I cannot break. I have promised to escort to the Académie aGreek princess of my acquaintance who has never seen your grand opera, and whorelies on me to conduct her thither.”“Adieu, then, sir, and do not forget the prescription.”“Ah, in truth, madame, to do that I must forget the hour’sconversation I have had with you, which is indeed impossible.”Monte Cristo bowed, and left the house. Madame de Villefort remained immersedin thought.“He is a very strange man,” she said, “and in my opinion ishimself the Adelmonte he talks about.”As to Monte Cristo the result had surpassed his utmost expectations.“Good,” said he, as he went away; “this is a fruitful soil,and I feel certain that the seed sown will not be cast on barren ground.”Next morning, faithful to his promise, he sent the prescription requested. Chapter 53. Robert leDiableThe pretext of an operaengagement was so much the more feasible, as there chanced to be on that verynight a more than ordinary attraction at the Académie Royale. Levasseur, whohad been suffering under severe illness, made his reappearance in the characterof Bertram, and, as usual, the announcement of the most admiredproduction of the favorite composer of the day had attracted a brilliant andfashionable audience. Morcerf, like most other young men of rank and fortune,had his orchestra stall, with the certainty of always finding a seat in atleast a dozen of the principal boxes occupied by persons of his acquaintance;he had, moreover, his right of entry into the omnibus box. Château-Renaudrented a stall beside his own, while Beauchamp, as a journalist, had unlimitedrange all over the theatre. It happened that on this particular night theminister’s box was placed at the disposal of Lucien Debray, who offeredit to the Comte de Morcerf, who again, upon his rejection of it by Mercédès,sent it to Danglars, with an intimation that he should probably do himself thehonor of joining the baroness and her daughter during the evening, in the eventof their accepting the box in question. The ladies received the offer with toomuch pleasure to dream of a refusal. To no class of persons is the presentationof a gratuitous opera-box more acceptable than to the wealthy millionaire, whostill hugs economy while boasting of carrying a king’s ransom in hiswaistcoat pocket.Danglars had, however, protested against showing himself in a ministerial box,declaring that his political principles, and his parliamentary position asmember of the opposition party would not permit him so to commit himself; thebaroness had, therefore, despatched a note to Lucien Debray, bidding him callfor them, it being wholly impossible for her to go alone with Eugénie to theopera.There is no gainsaying the fact that a very unfavorable construction would havebeen put upon the circumstance if the two women had gone without escort, whilethe addition of a third, in the person of her mother’s admitted lover,enabled Mademoiselle Danglars to defy malice and ill-nature. One must take theworld as one finds it.The curtain rose, as usual, to an almost empty house, it being one of theabsurdities of Parisian fashion never to appear at the opera until after thebeginning of the performance, so that the first act is generally played withoutthe slightest attention being paid to it, that part of the audience alreadyassembled being too much occupied in observing the fresh arrivals, whilenothing is heard but the noise of opening and shutting doors, and the buzz ofconversation.“Surely,” said Albert, as the door of a box on the first circleopened, “that must be the Countess G——.”“And who is the Countess G——?” inquired Château-Renaud.“What a question! Now, do you know, baron, I have a great mind to pick aquarrel with you for asking it; as if all the world did not know who theCountess G—— was.”“Ah, to be sure,” replied Château-Renaud; “the lovelyVenetian, is it not?”“Herself.” At this moment the countess perceived Albert, andreturned his salutation with a smile.“You know her, it seems?” said Château-Renaud.“Franz introduced me to her at Rome,” replied Albert.“Well, then, will you do as much for me in Paris as Franz did for you inRome?”“With pleasure.”There was a cry of “Shut up!” from the audience. This manifestationon the part of the spectators of their wish to be allowed to hear the music,produced not the slightest effect on the two young men, who continued theirconversation.“The countess was present at the races in the Champ-de-Mars,” saidChâteau-Renaud.“Today?”“Yes.”“Bless me, I quite forgot the races. Did you bet?”“Oh, merely a paltry fifty louis.”“And who was the winner?”“Nautilus. I staked on him.”“But there were three races, were there not?”“Yes; there was the prize given by the Jockey Club—a gold cup, youknow—and a very singular circumstance occurred about that race.”“What was it?”“Oh, shut up!” again interposed some of the audience.“Why, it was won by a horse and rider utterly unknown on thecourse.”“Is that possible?”“True as day. The fact was, nobody had observed a horse entered by thename of Vampa, or that of a jockey styled Job, when, at the last moment, asplendid roan, mounted by a jockey about as big as your fist, presentedthemselves at the starting-post. They were obliged to stuff at least twentypounds weight of shot in the small rider’s pockets, to make him weight;but with all that he outstripped Ariel and Barbare, against whom he ran, by atleast three whole lengths.”“And was it not found out at last to whom the horse and jockeybelonged?”“No.”“You say that the horse was entered under the name of Vampa?”“Exactly; that was the title.”“Then,” answered Albert, “I am better informed than you are,and know who the owner of that horse was.”“Shut up, there!” cried the pit in chorus. And this time the toneand manner in which the command was given, betokened such growing hostilitythat the two young men perceived, for the first time, that the mandate wasaddressed to them. Leisurely turning round, they calmly scrutinized the variouscountenances around them, as though demanding some one person who would takeupon himself the responsibility of what they deemed excessive impertinence; butas no one responded to the challenge, the friends turned again to the front ofthe theatre, and affected to busy themselves with the stage. At this moment thedoor of the minister’s box opened, and Madame Danglars, accompanied byher daughter, entered, escorted by Lucien Debray, who assiduously conductedthem to their seats.“Ha, ha,” said Château-Renaud, “here come some friends ofyours, viscount! What are you looking at there? don’t you see they aretrying to catch your eye?”Albert turned round, just in time to receive a gracious wave of the fan fromthe baroness; as for Mademoiselle Eugénie, she scarcely vouchsafed to waste theglances of her large black eyes even upon the business of the stage.“I tell you what, my dear fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “Icannot imagine what objection you can possibly have to MademoiselleDanglars—that is, setting aside her want of ancestry and somewhatinferior rank, which by the way I don’t think you care very much about.Now, barring all that, I mean to say she is a deuced fine girl!”“Handsome, certainly,” replied Albert, “but not to my taste,which I confess, inclines to something softer, gentler, and morefeminine.”“Ah, well,” exclaimed Château-Renaud, who because he had seen histhirtieth summer fancied himself duly warranted in assuming a sort of paternalair with his more youthful friend, “you young people are never satisfied;why, what would you have more? your parents have chosen you a bride built onthe model of Diana, the huntress, and yet you are not content.”“No, for that very resemblance affrights me; I should have likedsomething more in the manner of the Venus of Milo or Capua; but thischase-loving Diana, continually surrounded by her nymphs, gives me a sort ofalarm lest she should some day bring on me the fate of Actæon.”And, indeed, it required but one glance at Mademoiselle Danglars to comprehendthe justness of Morcerf’s remark. She was beautiful, but her beauty wasof too marked and decided a character to please a fastidious taste; her hairwas raven black, but its natural waves seemed somewhat rebellious; her eyes, ofthe same color as her hair, were surmounted by well-arched brows, whose greatdefect, however, consisted in an almost habitual frown, while her wholephysiognomy wore that expression of firmness and decision so little inaccordance with the gentler attributes of her sex—her nose was preciselywhat a sculptor would have chosen for a chiselled Juno. Her mouth, which mighthave been found fault with as too large, displayed teeth of pearly whiteness,rendered still more conspicuous by the brilliant carmine of her lips,contrasting vividly with her naturally pale complexion. But that whichcompleted the almost masculine look Morcerf found so little to his taste, was adark mole, of much larger dimensions than these freaks of nature generally are,placed just at the corner of her mouth; and the effect tended to increase theexpression of self-dependence that characterized her countenance.The rest of Mademoiselle Eugénie’s person was in perfect keeping with thehead just described; she, indeed, reminded one of Diana, as Château-Renaudobserved, but her bearing was more haughty and resolute.As regarded her attainments, the only fault to be found with them was the samethat a fastidious connoisseur might have found with her beauty, that they weresomewhat too erudite and masculine for so young a person. She was a perfectlinguist, a first-rate artist, wrote poetry, and composed music; to the studyof the latter she professed to be entirely devoted, following it with anindefatigable perseverance, assisted by a schoolfellow,—a young womanwithout fortune whose talent promised to develop into remarkable powers as asinger. It was rumored that she was an object of almost paternal interest toone of the principal composers of the day, who excited her to spare no pains inthe cultivation of her voice, which might hereafter prove a source of wealthand independence. But this counsel effectually decided Mademoiselle Danglarsnever to commit herself by being seen in public with one destined for atheatrical life; and acting upon this principle, the banker’s daughter,though perfectly willing to allow Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly (that wasthe name of the young virtuosa) to practice with her through the day, tookespecial care not to be seen in her company. Still, though not actuallyreceived at the Hôtel Danglars in the light of an acknowledged friend, Louisewas treated with far more kindness and consideration than is usually bestowedon a governess.The curtain fell almost immediately after the entrance of Madame Danglars intoher box, the band quitted the orchestra for the accustomed half-hour’sinterval allowed between the acts, and the audience were left at liberty topromenade the salon or lobbies, or to pay and receive visits in theirrespective boxes.Morcerf and Château-Renaud were amongst the first to avail themselves of thispermission. For an instant the idea struck Madame Danglars that this eagernesson the part of the young viscount arose from his impatience to join her party,and she whispered her expectations to her daughter, that Albert was hurrying topay his respects to them. Mademoiselle Eugénie, however, merely returned adissenting movement of the head, while, with a cold smile, she directed theattention of her mother to an opposite box on the first circle, in which satthe Countess G——, and where Morcerf had just made his appearance.“So we meet again, my travelling friend, do we?” cried thecountess, extending her hand to him with all the warmth and cordiality of anold acquaintance; “it was really very good of you to recognize me soquickly, and still more so to bestow your first visit on me.”“Be assured,” replied Albert, “that if I had been aware ofyour arrival in Paris, and had known your address, I should have paid myrespects to you before this. Allow me to introduce my friend, Baron deChâteau-Renaud, one of the few true gentlemen now to be found in France, andfrom whom I have just learned that you were a spectator of the races in theChamp-de-Mars, yesterday.”Château-Renaud bowed to the countess.“So you were at the races, baron?” inquired the countess eagerly.“Yes, madame.”“Well, then,” pursued Madame G—— with considerableanimation, “you can probably tell me who won the Jockey Clubstakes?”“I am sorry to say I cannot,” replied the baron; “and I wasjust asking the same question of Albert.”“Are you very anxious to know, countess?” asked Albert.“To know what?”“The name of the owner of the winning horse?”“Excessively; only imagine—but do tell me, viscount, whether youreally are acquainted with it or no?”“I beg your pardon, madame, but you were about to relate some story, wereyou not? You said, ‘only imagine,’—and then paused. Praycontinue.”“Well, then, listen. You must know I felt so interested in the splendidroan horse, with his elegant little rider, so tastefully dressed in a pinksatin jacket and cap, that I could not help praying for their success with asmuch earnestness as though the half of my fortune were at stake; and when I sawthem outstrip all the others, and come to the winning-post in such gallantstyle, I actually clapped my hands with joy. Imagine my surprise, when, uponreturning home, the first object I met on the staircase was the identicaljockey in the pink jacket! I concluded that, by some singular chance, the ownerof the winning horse must live in the same hotel as myself; but, as I enteredmy apartments, I beheld the very gold cup awarded as a prize to the unknownhorse and rider. Inside the cup was a small piece of paper, on which werewritten these words—‘From Lord Ruthven to CountessG——.’”“Precisely; I was sure of it,” said Morcerf.“Sure of what?”“That the owner of the horse was Lord Ruthven himself.”“What Lord Ruthven do you mean?”“Why, our Lord Ruthven—the Vampire of the Salle Argentina!”“Is it possible?” exclaimed the countess; “is he here inParis?”“To be sure,—why not?”“And you visit him?—meet him at your own house andelsewhere?”“I assure you he is my most intimate friend, and M. de Château-Renaud hasalso the honor of his acquaintance.”“But why are you so sure of his being the winner of the Jockey Clubprize?”“Was not the winning horse entered by the name of Vampa?”“What of that?”“Why, do you not recollect the name of the celebrated bandit by whom Iwas made prisoner?”“Oh, yes.”“And from whose hands the count extricated me in so wonderful amanner?”“To be sure, I remember it all now.”“He called himself Vampa. You see, it’s evident where the count gotthe name.”“But what could have been his motive for sending the cup to me?”“In the first place, because I had spoken much of you to him, as you maybelieve; and in the second, because he delighted to see a countrywoman take solively an interest in his success.”“I trust and hope you never repeated to the count all the foolish remarkswe used to make about him?”“I should not like to affirm upon oath that I have not. Besides, hispresenting you the cup under the name of Lord Ruthven——”“Oh, but that is dreadful! Why, the man must owe me a fearfulgrudge.”“Does his action appear like that of an enemy?”“No; certainly not.”“Well, then——”“And so he is in Paris?”“Yes.”“And what effect does he produce?”“Why,” said Albert, “he was talked about for a week; then thecoronation of the queen of England took place, followed by the theft ofMademoiselle Mars’s diamonds; and so people talked of somethingelse.”“My good fellow,” said Château-Renaud, “the count is yourfriend and you treat him accordingly. Do not believe what Albert is tellingyou, countess; so far from the sensation excited in the Parisian circles by theappearance of the Count of Monte Cristo having abated, I take upon myself todeclare that it is as strong as ever. His first astounding act upon comingamongst us was to present a pair of horses, worth 32,000 francs, to MadameDanglars; his second, the almost miraculous preservation of Madame deVillefort’s life; now it seems that he has carried off the prize awardedby the Jockey Club. I therefore maintain, in spite of Morcerf, that not only isthe count the object of interest at this present moment, but also that he willcontinue to be so for a month longer if he pleases to exhibit an eccentricityof conduct which, after all, may be his ordinary mode of existence.”“Perhaps you are right,” said Morcerf; “meanwhile, who is inthe Russian ambassador’s box?”“Which box do you mean?” asked the countess.“The one between the pillars on the first tier—it seems to havebeen fitted up entirely afresh.”“Did you observe anyone during the first act?” askedChâteau-Renaud.“Where?”“In that box.”“No,” replied the countess, “it was certainly empty duringthe first act;” then, resuming the subject of their previousconversation, she said, “And so you really believe it was your mysteriousCount of Monte Cristo that gained the prize?”“I am sure of it.”“And who afterwards sent the cup to me?”“Undoubtedly.”“But I don’t know him,” said the countess; “I have agreat mind to return it.”“Do no such thing, I beg of you; he would only send you another, formedof a magnificent sapphire, or hollowed out of a gigantic ruby. It is his way,and you must take him as you find him.”At this moment the bell rang to announce the drawing up of the curtain for thesecond act. Albert rose to return to his place.“Shall I see you again?” asked the countess.“At the end of the next act, with your permission, I will come andinquire whether there is anything I can do for you in Paris?”“Pray take notice,” said the countess, “that my presentresidence is 22 Rue de Rivoli, and that I am at home to my friends everySaturday evening. So now, you are both forewarned.”The young men bowed, and quitted the box. Upon reaching their stalls, theyfound the whole of the audience in the parterre standing up and directing theirgaze towards the box formerly possessed by the Russian ambassador. A man offrom thirty-five to forty years of age, dressed in deep black, had justentered, accompanied by a young woman dressed after the Eastern style. The ladywas surpassingly beautiful, while the rich magnificence of her attire drew alleyes upon her.“Hullo,” said Albert; “it is Monte Cristo and hisGreek!”The strangers were, indeed, no other than the count and Haydée. In a fewmoments the young girl had attracted the attention of the whole house, and eventhe occupants of the boxes leaned forward to scrutinize her magnificentdiamonds.The second act passed away during one continued buzz of voices—one deepwhisper—intimating that some great and universally interesting event hadoccurred; all eyes, all thoughts, were occupied with the young and beautifulwoman, whose gorgeous apparel and splendid jewels made a most extraordinaryspectacle.Upon this occasion an unmistakable sign from Madame Danglars intimated herdesire to see Albert in her box directly the curtain fell on the second act,and neither the politeness nor good taste of Morcerf would permit hisneglecting an invitation so unequivocally given. At the close of the act hetherefore went to the baroness.Having bowed to the two ladies, he extended his hand to Debray. By the baronesshe was most graciously welcomed, while Eugénie received him with her accustomedcoldness.“My dear fellow,” said Debray, “you have come in the nick oftime. There is madame overwhelming me with questions respecting the count; sheinsists upon it that I can tell her his birth, education, and parentage, wherehe came from, and whither he is going. Being no disciple of Cagliostro, I waswholly unable to do this; so, by way of getting out of the scrape, I said,‘Ask Morcerf; he has got the whole history of his beloved Monte Cristo athis fingers’ ends;’ whereupon the baroness signified her desire tosee you.”“Is it not almost incredible,” said Madame Danglars, “that aperson having at least half a million of secret-service money at his command,should possess so little information?”“Let me assure you, madame,” said Lucien, “that had I reallythe sum you mention at my disposal, I would employ it more profitably than introubling myself to obtain particulars respecting the Count of Monte Cristo,whose only merit in my eyes consists in his being twice as rich as a nabob.However, I have turned the business over to Morcerf, so pray settle it with himas may be most agreeable to you; for my own part, I care nothing about thecount or his mysterious doings.”“I am very sure no nabob would have sent me a pair of horses worth 32,000francs, wearing on their heads four diamonds valued at 5,000 francseach.”“He seems to have a mania for diamonds,” said Morcerf, smiling,“and I verily believe that, like Potemkin, he keeps his pockets filled,for the sake of strewing them along the road, as Tom Thumb did his flintstones.”“Perhaps he has discovered some mine,” said Madame Danglars.“I suppose you know he has an order for unlimited credit on thebaron’s banking establishment?”“I was not aware of it,” replied Albert, “but I can readilybelieve it.”“And, further, that he stated to M. Danglars his intention of onlystaying a year in Paris, during which time he proposed to spend six millions.“He must be the Shah of Persia, travelling incog.”“Have you noticed the remarkable beauty of the young woman, M.Lucien?” inquired Eugénie.“I really never met with one woman so ready to do justice to the charmsof another as yourself,” responded Lucien, raising his lorgnette to hiseye. “A most lovely creature, upon my soul!” was his verdict.“Who is this young person, M. de Morcerf?” inquired Eugénie;“does anybody know?”“Mademoiselle,” said Albert, replying to this direct appeal,“I can give you very exact information on that subject, as well as onmost points relative to the mysterious person of whom we are nowconversing—the young woman is a Greek.”“So I should suppose by her dress; if you know no more than that,everyone here is as well-informed as yourself.”“I am extremely sorry you find me so ignorant a cicerone,”replied Morcerf, “but I am reluctantly obliged to confess, I have nothingfurther to communicate—yes, stay, I do know one thing more, namely, thatshe is a musician, for one day when I chanced to be breakfasting with thecount, I heard the sound of a guzla—it is impossible that it could havebeen touched by any other finger than her own.”“Then your count entertains visitors, does he?” asked MadameDanglars.“Indeed he does, and in a most lavish manner, I can assure you.”“I must try and persuade M. Danglars to invite him to a ball or dinner,or something of the sort, that he may be compelled to ask us in return.”“What,” said Debray, laughing; “do you really mean you wouldgo to his house?”“Why not? my husband could accompany me.”“But do you know this mysterious count is a bachelor?”“You have ample proof to the contrary, if you look opposite,” saidthe baroness, as she laughingly pointed to the beautiful Greek.“No, no!” exclaimed Debray; “that girl is not his wife: hetold us himself she was his slave. Do you not recollect, Morcerf, his tellingus so at your breakfast?”“Well, then,” said the baroness, “if slave she be, she hasall the air and manner of a princess.”“Of the ‘Arabian Nights’.”“If you like; but tell me, my dear Lucien, what it is that constitutes aprincess. Why, diamonds—and she is covered with them.”“To me she seems overloaded,” observed Eugénie; “she wouldlook far better if she wore fewer, and we should then be able to see her finelyformed throat and wrists.”“See how the artist peeps out!” exclaimed Madame Danglars.“My poor Eugénie, you must conceal your passion for the fine arts.”“I admire all that is beautiful,” returned the young lady.“What do you think of the count?” inquired Debray; “he is notmuch amiss, according to my ideas of good looks.”“The count,” repeated Eugénie, as though it had not occurred to herto observe him sooner; “the count?—oh, he is so dreadfullypale.”“I quite agree with you,” said Morcerf; “and the secret ofthat very pallor is what we want to find out. The Countess G——insists upon it that he is a vampire.”“Then the Countess G—— has returned to Paris, has she?”inquired the baroness.“Is that she, mamma?” asked Eugénie; “almost opposite to us,with that profusion of beautiful light hair?”“Yes,” said Madame Danglars, “that is she. Shall I tell youwhat you ought to do, Morcerf?”“Command me, madame.”“Well, then, you should go and bring your Count of Monte Cristo tous.”“What for?” asked Eugénie.“What for? Why, to converse with him, of course. Have you really nodesire to meet him?”“None whatever,” replied Eugénie.“Strange child,” murmured the baroness.“He will very probably come of his own accord,” said Morcerf.“There; do you see, madame, he recognizes you, and bows.”The baroness returned the salute in the most smiling and graceful manner.“Well,” said Morcerf, “I may as well be magnanimous, and tearmyself away to forward your wishes. Adieu; I will go and try if there are anymeans of speaking to him.”“Go straight to his box; that will be the simplest plan.”“But I have never been presented.”“Presented to whom?”“To the beautiful Greek.”“You say she is only a slave?”“While you assert that she is a queen, or at least a princess. No; I hopethat when he sees me leave you, he will come out.”“That is possible—go.”“I am going,” said Albert, as he made his parting bow.Just as he was passing the count’s box, the door opened, and Monte Cristocame forth. After giving some directions to Ali, who stood in the lobby, thecount took Albert’s arm. Carefully closing the box door, Ali placedhimself before it, while a crowd of spectators assembled round the Nubian.“Upon my word,” said Monte Cristo, “Paris is a strange city,and the Parisians a very singular people. See that cluster of persons collectedaround poor Ali, who is as much astonished as themselves; really one mightsuppose he was the only Nubian they had ever beheld. Now I can promise you,that a Frenchman might show himself in public, either in Tunis, Constantinople,Bagdad, or Cairo, without being treated in that way.”“That shows that the Eastern nations have too much good sense to wastetheir time and attention on objects undeserving of either. However, as far asAli is concerned, I can assure you, the interest he excites is merely from thecircumstance of his being your attendant—you, who are at this moment themost celebrated and fashionable person in Paris.”“Really? and what has procured me so flattering a distinction?”“What? why, yourself, to be sure! You give away horses worth a thousandlouis; you save the lives of ladies of high rank and beauty; under the name ofMajor Black you run thoroughbreds ridden by tiny urchins not larger thanmarmots; then, when you have carried off the golden trophy of victory, insteadof setting any value on it, you give it to the first handsome woman you thinkof!”“And who has filled your head with all this nonsense?”“Why, in the first place, I heard it from Madame Danglars, who, by theby, is dying to see you in her box, or to have you seen there by others;secondly, I learned it from Beauchamp’s journal; and thirdly, from my ownimagination. Why, if you sought concealment, did you call your horseVampa?”“That was an oversight, certainly,” replied the count; “buttell me, does the Count of Morcerf never visit the Opera? I have been lookingfor him, but without success.”“He will be here tonight.”“In what part of the house?”“In the baroness’s box, I believe.”“That charming young woman with her is her daughter?”“Yes.”“I congratulate you.”Morcerf smiled.“We will discuss that subject at length some future time,” said he.“But what do you think of the music?”“What music?”“Why, the music you have been listening to.”“Oh, it is well enough as the production of a human composer, sung byfeatherless bipeds, to quote the late Diogenes.”“From which it would seem, my dear count, that you can at pleasure enjoythe seraphic strains that proceed from the seven choirs of paradise?”“You are right, in some degree; when I wish to listen to sounds moreexquisitely attuned to melody than mortal ear ever yet listened to, I go tosleep.”“Then sleep here, my dear count. The conditions are favorable; what elsewas opera invented for?”“No, thank you. Your orchestra is too noisy. To sleep after the manner Ispeak of, absolute calm and silence are necessary, and then a certainpreparation——”“I know—the famous hashish!”“Precisely. So, my dear viscount, whenever you wish to be regaled withmusic come and sup with me.”“I have already enjoyed that treat when breakfasting with you,”said Morcerf.“Do you mean at Rome?”“I do.”“Ah, then, I suppose you heard Haydée’s guzla; the poor exilefrequently beguiles a weary hour in playing over to me the airs of her nativeland.”Morcerf did not pursue the subject, and Monte Cristo himself fell into a silentreverie.The bell rang at this moment for the rising of the curtain.“You will excuse my leaving you,” said the count, turning in thedirection of his box.“What? Are you going?”“Pray, say everything that is kind to Countess G—— on thepart of her friend the vampire.”“And what message shall I convey to the baroness!”“That, with her permission, I shall do myself the honor of paying myrespects in the course of the evening.”The third act had begun; and during its progress the Count of Morcerf,according to his promise, made his appearance in the box of Madame Danglars.The Count of Morcerf was not a person to excite either interest or curiosity ina place of public amusement; his presence, therefore, was wholly unnoticed,save by the occupants of the box in which he had just seated himself.The quick eye of Monte Cristo however, marked his coming; and a slight thoughmeaning smile passed over his lips. Haydée, whose soul seemed centred in thebusiness of the stage, like all unsophisticated natures, delighted in whateveraddressed itself to the eye or ear.The third act passed off as usual. Mesdemoiselles Noblet, Julia, and Lerouxexecuted the customary pirouettes; Robert duly challenged the Prince ofGranada; and the royal father of the princess Isabella, taking his daughter bythe hand, swept round the stage with majestic strides, the better to displaythe rich folds of his velvet robe and mantle. After which the curtain againfell, and the spectators poured forth from the theatre into the lobbies andsalon.The count left his box, and a moment later was saluting the Baronne Danglars,who could not restrain a cry of mingled pleasure and surprise.“You are welcome, count!” she exclaimed, as he entered. “Ihave been most anxious to see you, that I might repeat orally the thankswriting can so ill express.”“Surely so trifling a circumstance cannot deserve a place in yourremembrance. Believe me, madame, I had entirely forgotten it.”“But it is not so easy to forget, monsieur, that the very next day afteryour princely gift you saved the life of my dear friend, Madame de Villefort,which was endangered by the very animals your generosity restored to me.”“This time, at least, I do not deserve your thanks. It was Ali, my Nubianslave, who rendered this service to Madame de Villefort.”“Was it Ali,” asked the Count of Morcerf, “who rescued my sonfrom the hands of bandits?”“No, count,” replied Monte Cristo taking the hand held out to himby the general; “in this instance I may fairly and freely accept yourthanks; but you have already tendered them, and fully discharged yourdebt—if indeed there existed one—and I feel almost mortified tofind you still reverting to the subject. May I beg of you, baroness, to honorme with an introduction to your daughter?”“Oh, you are no stranger—at least not by name,” repliedMadame Danglars, “and the last two or three days we have really talked ofnothing but you. Eugénie,” continued the baroness, turning towards herdaughter, “this is the Count of Monte Cristo.”The count bowed, while Mademoiselle Danglars bent her head slightly.“You have a charming young person with you tonight, count,” saidEugénie. “Is she your daughter?”“No, mademoiselle,” said Monte Cristo, astonished at the coolnessand freedom of the question. “She is a poor unfortunate Greek left undermy care.”“And what is her name?”“Haydée,” replied Monte Cristo.“A Greek?” murmured the Count of Morcerf.“Yes, indeed, count,” said Madame Danglars; “and tell me, didyou ever see at the court of Ali Tepelini, whom you so gloriously and valiantlyserved, a more exquisite beauty or richer costume?”“Did I hear rightly, monsieur,” said Monte Cristo “that youserved at Yanina?”“I was inspector-general of the pasha’s troops,” repliedMorcerf; “and it is no secret that I owe my fortune, such as it is, tothe liberality of the illustrious Albanese chief.”“But look!” exclaimed Madame Danglars.“Where?” stammered Morcerf.“There,” said Monte Cristo placing his arms around the count, andleaning with him over the front of the box, just as Haydée, whose eyes wereoccupied in examining the theatre in search of her guardian, perceived his palefeatures close to Morcerf’s face. It was as if the young girl beheld thehead of Medusa. She bent forwards as though to assure herself of the reality ofwhat she saw, then, uttering a faint cry, threw herself back in her seat. Thesound was heard by the people about Ali, who instantly opened the box-door.“Why, count,” exclaimed Eugénie, “what has happened to yourward? she seems to have been taken suddenly ill.“Very probably,” answered the count. “But do not be alarmedon her account. Haydée’s nervous system is delicately organized, and sheis peculiarly susceptible to the odors even of flowers—nay, there aresome which cause her to faint if brought into her presence. However,”continued Monte Cristo, drawing a small phial from his pocket, “I have aninfallible remedy.”So saying, he bowed to the baroness and her daughter, exchanged a parting shakeof the hand with Debray and the count, and left Madame Danglars’ box.Upon his return to Haydée he found her still very pale. As soon as she saw himshe seized his hand; her own hands were moist and icy cold.“Who was it you were talking with over there?” she asked.“With the Count of Morcerf,” answered Monte Cristo. “He tellsme he served your illustrious father, and that he owes his fortune tohim.”“Wretch!” exclaimed Haydée, her eyes flashing with rage; “hesold my father to the Turks, and the fortune he boasts of was the price of histreachery! Did not you know that, my dear lord?”“Something of this I heard in Epirus,” said Monte Cristo;“but the particulars are still unknown to me. You shall relate them tome, my child. They are, no doubt, both curious and interesting.”“Yes, yes; but let us go. I feel as though it would kill me to remainlong near that dreadful man.”So saying, Haydée arose, and wrapping herself in her burnouse of white cashmereembroidered with pearls and coral, she hastily quitted the box at the momentwhen the curtain was rising upon the fourth act.“Do you observe,” said the Countess G—— to Albert, whohad returned to her side, “that man does nothing like other people; helistens most devoutly to the third act of Robert le Diable, and when thefourth begins, takes his departure.” Chapter 54. A Flurry inStocksSome days after thismeeting, Albert de Morcerf visited the Count of Monte Cristo at his house inthe Champs-Élysées, which had already assumed that palace-like appearance whichthe count’s princely fortune enabled him to give even to his mosttemporary residences. He came to renew the thanks of Madame Danglars which hadbeen already conveyed to the count through the medium of a letter, signed“Baronne Danglars, née Hermine de Servieux.”Albert was accompanied by Lucien Debray, who, joining in his friend’sconversation, added some passing compliments, the source of which thecount’s talent for finesse easily enabled him to guess. He was convincedthat Lucien’s visit was due to a double feeling of curiosity, the largerhalf of which sentiment emanated from the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. Inshort, Madame Danglars, not being able personally to examine in detail thedomestic economy and household arrangements of a man who gave away horses worth30,000 francs and who went to the opera with a Greek slave wearing diamonds tothe amount of a million of money, had deputed those eyes, by which she wasaccustomed to see, to give her a faithful account of the mode of life of thisincomprehensible person. But the count did not appear to suspect that therecould be the slightest connection between Lucien’s visit and thecuriosity of the baroness.“You are in constant communication with the Baron Danglars?” thecount inquired of Albert de Morcerf.“Yes, count, you know what I told you?”“All remains the same, then, in that quarter?”“It is more than ever a settled thing,” said Lucien,—and,considering that this remark was all that he was at that time called upon tomake, he adjusted the glass to his eye, and biting the top of his gold headedcane, began to make the tour of the apartment, examining the arms and thepictures.“Ah,” said Monte Cristo “I did not expect that the affairwould be so promptly concluded.”“Oh, things take their course without our assistance. While we areforgetting them, they are falling into their appointed order; and when, again,our attention is directed to them, we are surprised at the progress they havemade towards the proposed end. My father and M. Danglars served together inSpain, my father in the army and M. Danglars in the commissariat department. Itwas there that my father, ruined by the revolution, and M. Danglars, who neverhad possessed any patrimony, both laid the foundations of their differentfortunes.”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “I think M. Danglars mentioned thatin a visit which I paid him; and,” continued he, casting a side-glance atLucien, who was turning over the leaves of an album, “MademoiselleEugénie is pretty—I think I remember that to be her name.”“Very pretty, or rather, very beautiful,” replied Albert,“but of that style of beauty which I do not appreciate; I am anungrateful fellow.”“You speak as if you were already her husband.”“Ah,” returned Albert, in his turn looking around to see whatLucien was doing.“Really,” said Monte Cristo, lowering his voice, “you do notappear to me to be very enthusiastic on the subject of this marriage.”“Mademoiselle Danglars is too rich for me,” replied Morcerf,“and that frightens me.”“Bah,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “that’s a fine reason togive. Are you not rich yourself?”“My father’s income is about 50,000 francs per annum; and he willgive me, perhaps, ten or twelve thousand when I marry.”“That, perhaps, might not be considered a large sum, in Parisespecially,” said the count; “but everything does not depend onwealth, and it is a fine thing to have a good name, and to occupy a highstation in society. Your name is celebrated, your position magnificent; andthen the Comte de Morcerf is a soldier, and it is pleasing to see the integrityof a Bayard united to the poverty of a Duguesclin; disinterestedness is thebrightest ray in which a noble sword can shine. As for me, I consider the unionwith Mademoiselle Danglars a most suitable one; she will enrich you, and youwill ennoble her.”Albert shook his head, and looked thoughtful.“There is still something else,” said he.“I confess,” observed Monte Cristo, “that I have somedifficulty in comprehending your objection to a young lady who is both rich andbeautiful.”“Oh,” said Morcerf, “this repugnance, if repugnance it may becalled, is not all on my side.”“Whence can it arise, then? for you told me your father desired themarriage.”“It is my mother who dissents; she has a clear and penetrating judgment,and does not smile on the proposed union. I cannot account for it, but sheseems to entertain some prejudice against the Danglars.”“Ah,” said the count, in a somewhat forced tone, “that may beeasily explained; the Comtesse de Morcerf, who is aristocracy and refinementitself, does not relish the idea of being allied by your marriage with one ofignoble birth; that is natural enough.”“I do not know if that is her reason,” said Albert, “but onething I do know, that if this marriage be consummated, it will render her quitemiserable. There was to have been a meeting six weeks ago in order to talk overand settle the affair; but I had such a sudden attack ofindisposition——”“Real?” interrupted the count, smiling.“Oh, real enough, from anxiety doubtless,—at any rate theypostponed the matter for two months. There is no hurry, you know. I am not yettwenty-one, and Eugénie is only seventeen; but the two months expire next week.It must be done. My dear count, you cannot imagine how my mind is harassed. Howhappy you are in being exempt from all this!”“Well, and why should not you be free, too? What prevents you from beingso?”“Oh, it will be too great a disappointment to my father if I do not marryMademoiselle Danglars.”“Marry her then,” said the count, with a significant shrug of theshoulders.“Yes,” replied Morcerf, “but that will plunge my mother intopositive grief.”“Then do not marry her,” said the count.“Well, I shall see. I will try and think over what is the best thing tobe done; you will give me your advice, will you not, and if possible extricateme from my unpleasant position? I think, rather than give pain to my dearmother, I would run the risk of offending the count.”Monte Cristo turned away; he seemed moved by this last remark.“Ah,” said he to Debray, who had thrown himself into an easy-chairat the farthest extremity of the salon, and who held a pencil in his right handand an account book in his left, “what are you doing there? Are youmaking a sketch after Poussin?”“Oh, no,” was the tranquil response; “I am too fond of art toattempt anything of that sort. I am doing a little sum in arithmetic.”“In arithmetic?”“Yes; I am calculating—by the way, Morcerf, that indirectlyconcerns you—I am calculating what the house of Danglars must have gainedby the last rise in Haiti bonds; from 206 they have risen to 409 in three days,and the prudent banker had purchased at 206; therefore he must have made300,000 livres.”“That is not his biggest scoop,” said Morcerf; “did he notmake a million in Spaniards this last year?”“My dear fellow,” said Lucien, “here is the Count of MonteCristo, who will say to you, as the Italians do,—      “‘Denaro e santità,      Metà della metà.’[9]“When they tell me such things, I only shrug my shoulders and saynothing.”“But you were speaking of Haitians?” said Monte Cristo.“Ah, Haitians,—that is quite another thing! Haitians are theécarté of French stock-jobbing. We may like bouillotte, delight inwhist, be enraptured with boston, and yet grow tired of them all; but we alwayscome back to écarté—it is not only a game, it is ahors-d’œuvre! M. Danglars sold yesterday at 405, and pockets300,000 francs. Had he but waited till today, the price would have fallen to205, and instead of gaining 300,000 francs, he would have lost 20 or25,000.”“And what has caused the sudden fall from 409 to 206?” asked MonteCristo. “I am profoundly ignorant of all these stock-jobbingintrigues.”“Because,” said Albert, laughing, “one piece of news followsanother, and there is often great dissimilarity between them.”“Ah,” said the count, “I see that M. Danglars is accustomedto play at gaining or losing 300,000 francs in a day; he must be enormouslyrich.”“It is not he who plays!” exclaimed Lucien; “it is MadameDanglars; she is indeed daring.”“But you who are a reasonable being, Lucien, and who knows how littledependence is to be placed on the news, since you are at the fountain-head,surely you ought to prevent it,” said Morcerf, with a smile.“How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?” asked Lucien;“you know the character of the baroness—no one has any influencewith her, and she does precisely what she pleases.”“Ah, if I were in your place——” said Albert.“Well?”“I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her futureson-in-law.”“How would you set about it?”“Ah, that would be easy enough—I would give her a lesson.”“A lesson?”“Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister renders your authoritygreat on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but thestockbrokers immediately stenograph your words. Cause her to lose a hundredthousand francs, and that would teach her prudence.”“I do not understand,” stammered Lucien.“It is very clear, notwithstanding,” replied the young man, with anartlessness wholly free from affectation; “tell her some fine morning anunheard-of piece of intelligence—some telegraphic despatch, of which youalone are in possession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen yesterday atGabrielle’s. That would boom the market; she will buy heavily, and shewill certainly lose when Beauchamp announces the following day, in his gazette,‘The report circulated by some usually well-informed persons that theking was seen yesterday at Gabrielle’s house, is totally withoutfoundation. We can positively assert that his majesty did not quit thePont-Neuf.’”Lucien half smiled. Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had not lostone word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had even read a hiddensecret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary. This embarrassment hadcompletely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien to shorten his visit; he wasevidently ill at ease. The count, in taking leave of him, said something in alow voice, to which he answered, “Willingly, count; I accept.” Thecount returned to young Morcerf.“Do you not think, on reflection,” said he to him, “that youhave done wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in the presence of M.Debray?”“My dear count,” said Morcerf, “I beg of you not to applythat title so prematurely.”“Now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your mother really so verymuch averse to this marriage?”“So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house, and mymother, has not, I think, visited Madame Danglars twice in her wholelife.”“Then,” said the count, “I am emboldened to speak openly toyou. M. Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me withpoliteness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune enabledme to render him. I predict from all this an avalanche of dinners and routs.Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be beforehand with them, Ihave, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting M. and Madame Danglars, and M.and Madame de Villefort, to my country-house at Auteuil. If I were to inviteyou and the Count and Countess of Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it theappearance of being a matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf wouldlook upon the affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me thehonor to bring his daughter. In that case your mother would hold me inaversion, and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to standhigh in her esteem.”“Indeed, count,” said Morcerf, “I thank you sincerely forhaving used so much candor towards me, and I gratefully accept the exclusionwhich you propose. You say you desire my mother’s good opinion; I assureyou it is already yours to a very unusual extent.”“Do you think so?” said Monte Cristo, with interest.“Oh, I am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after you left us theother day. But to return to what we were saying. If my mother could know ofthis attention on your part—and I will venture to tell her—I amsure that she will be most grateful to you; it is true that my father will beequally angry.” The count laughed.“Well,” said he to Morcerf, “but I think your father will notbe the only angry one; M. and Madame Danglars will think me a very ill-manneredperson. They know that I am intimate with you—that you are, in fact; oneof the oldest of my Parisian acquaintances—and they will not find you atmy house; they will certainly ask me why I did not invite you. Be sure toprovide yourself with some previous engagement which shall have a semblance ofprobability, and communicate the fact to me by a line in writing. You know thatwith bankers nothing but a written document will be valid.”“I will do better than that,” said Albert; “my mother iswishing to go to the sea-side—what day is fixed for your dinner?”“Saturday.”“This is Tuesday—well, tomorrow evening we leave, and the day afterwe shall be at Tréport. Really, count, you have a delightful way of settingpeople at their ease.”“Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wish to do whatwill be agreeable to you, that is all.”“When shall you send your invitations?”“This very day.”“Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell him that mymother and myself must leave Paris tomorrow. I have not seen you, consequentlyI know nothing of your dinner.”“How foolish you are! Have you forgotten that M. Debray has just seen youat my house?”“Ah, true.”“Fix it this way. I have seen you, and invited you without any ceremony,when you instantly answered that it would be impossible for you to accept, asyou were going to Tréport.”“Well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call on my motherbefore tomorrow?”“Before tomorrow?—that will be a difficult matter to arrange,besides, I shall just be in the way of all the preparations fordeparture.”“Well, you can do better. You were only a charming man before, but, ifyou accede to my proposal, you will be adorable.”“What must I do to attain such sublimity?”“You are today free as air—come and dine with me; we shall be asmall party—only yourself, my mother, and I. You have scarcely seen mymother; you shall have an opportunity of observing her more closely. She is aremarkable woman, and I only regret that there does not exist another like her,about twenty years younger; in that case, I assure you, there would very soonbe a Countess and Viscountess of Morcerf. As to my father, you will not seehim; he is officially engaged, and dines with the chief referendary. We willtalk over our travels; and you, who have seen the whole world, will relate youradventures—you shall tell us the history of the beautiful Greek who waswith you the other night at the Opera, and whom you call your slave, and yettreat like a princess. We will talk Italian and Spanish. Come, accept myinvitation, and my mother will thank you.”“A thousand thanks,” said the count, “your invitation is mostgracious, and I regret exceedingly that it is not in my power to accept it. Iam not so much at liberty as you suppose; on the contrary, I have a mostimportant engagement.”“Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case of aninvitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse. I require the proofof a pre-engagement. I am not a banker, like M. Danglars, but I am quite asincredulous as he is.”“I am going to give you a proof,” replied the count, and he rangthe bell.“Humph,” said Morcerf, “this is the second time you haverefused to dine with my mother; it is evident that you wish to avoidher.”Monte Cristo started. “Oh, you do not mean that,” said he;“besides, here comes the confirmation of my assertion.”Baptistin entered, and remained standing at the door.“I had no previous knowledge of your visit, had I?”“Indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that I would not answerfor it.”“At all events, I could not guess that you would invite me todinner.”“Probably not.”“Well, listen, Baptistin, what did I tell you this morning when I calledyou into my laboratory?”“To close the door against visitors as soon as the clock struckfive,” replied the valet.“What then?”“Ah, my dear count,” said Albert.“No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputation that you havegiven me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to be always acting Manfred. I wishmy life to be free and open. Go on, Baptistin.”“Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and hisson.”“You hear—Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti—a man who ranks amongstthe most ancient nobility of Italy, whose name Dante has celebrated in thetenth canto of The Inferno, you remember it, do you not? Then there ishis son, Andrea, a charming young man, about your own age, viscount, bearingthe same title as yourself, and who is making his entry into the Parisianworld, aided by his father’s millions. The major will bring his son withhim this evening, the contino, as we say in Italy; he confides him to mycare. If he proves himself worthy of it, I will do what I can to advance hisinterests. You will assist me in the work, will you not?”“Most undoubtedly. This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend of yours,then?”“By no means. He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest, andagreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy, descendants of veryancient families. I have met him several times at Florence, Bologna and Lucca,and he has now communicated to me the fact of his arrival in Paris. Theacquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort of claim on one; theyeverywhere expect to receive the same attention which you once paid them bychance, as though the civilities of a passing hour were likely to awaken anylasting interest in favor of the man in whose society you may happen to bethrown in the course of your journey. This good Major Cavalcanti is come totake a second view of Paris, which he only saw in passing through in the timeof the Empire, when he was on his way to Moscow. I shall give him a gooddinner, he will confide his son to my care, I will promise to watch over him, Ishall let him follow in whatever path his folly may lead him, and then I shallhave done my part.”“Certainly; I see you are a model Mentor,” said Albert“Good-bye, we shall return on Sunday. By the way, I have received news ofFranz.”“Have you? Is he still amusing himself in Italy?”“I believe so; however, he regrets your absence extremely. He says youwere the sun of Rome, and that without you all appears dark and cloudy; I donot know if he does not even go so far as to say that it rains.”“His opinion of me is altered for the better, then?”“No, he still persists in looking upon you as the most incomprehensibleand mysterious of beings.”“He is a charming young man,” said Monte Cristo “and I felt alively interest in him the very first evening of my introduction, when I methim in search of a supper, and prevailed upon him to accept a portion of mine.He is, I think, the son of General d’Épinay?”“He is.”“The same who was so shamefully assassinated in 1815?”“By the Bonapartists.”“Yes. Really I like him extremely; is there not also a matrimonialengagement contemplated for him?”“Yes, he is to marry Mademoiselle de Villefort.”“Indeed?”“And you know I am to marry Mademoiselle Danglars,” said Albert,laughing.“You smile.”“Yes.”“Why do you do so?”“I smile because there appears to me to be about as much inclination forthe consummation of the engagement in question as there is for my own. Butreally, my dear count, we are talking as much of women as they do of us; it isunpardonable.”Albert rose.“Are you going?”“Really, that is a good idea!—two hours have I been boring you todeath with my company, and then you, with the greatest politeness, ask me if Iam going. Indeed, count, you are the most polished man in the world. And yourservants, too, how very well behaved they are; there is quite a style aboutthem. Monsieur Baptistin especially; I could never get such a man as that. Myservants seem to imitate those you sometimes see in a play, who, because theyhave only a word or two to say, aquit themselves in the most awkward mannerpossible. Therefore, if you part with M. Baptistin, give me the refusal ofhim.”“By all means.”“That is not all; give my compliments to your illustrious Luccanese,Cavalcante of the Cavalcanti; and if by any chance he should be wishing toestablish his son, find him a wife very rich, very noble on her mother’sside at least, and a baroness in right of her father, I will help you in thesearch.”“Ah, ha; you will do as much as that, will you?”“Yes.”“Well, really, nothing is certain in this world.”“Oh, count, what a service you might render me! I should like you ahundred times better if, by your intervention, I could manage to remain abachelor, even were it only for ten years.”“Nothing is impossible,” gravely replied Monte Cristo; and takingleave of Albert, he returned into the house, and struck the gong three times.Bertuccio appeared.“Monsieur Bertuccio, you understand that I intend entertaining company onSaturday at Auteuil.” Bertuccio slightly started. “I shall requireyour services to see that all be properly arranged. It is a beautiful house, orat all events may be made so.”“There must be a good deal done before it can deserve that title, yourexcellency, for the tapestried hangings are very old.”“Let them all be taken away and changed, then, with the exception of thesleeping-chamber which is hung with red damask; you will leave that exactly asit is.” Bertuccio bowed. “You will not touch the garden either; asto the yard, you may do what you please with it; I should prefer that beingaltered beyond all recognition.”“I will do everything in my power to carry out your wishes, yourexcellency. I should be glad, however, to receive your excellency’scommands concerning the dinner.”“Really, my dear M. Bertuccio,” said the count, “since youhave been in Paris, you have become quite nervous, and apparently out of yourelement; you no longer seem to understand me.”“But surely your excellency will be so good as to inform me whom you areexpecting to receive?”“I do not yet know myself, neither is it necessary that you should do so.‘Lucullus dines with Lucullus,’ that is quite sufficient.”Bertuccio bowed, and left the room. Chapter 55. MajorCavalcantiBoth the count andBaptistin had told the truth when they announced to Morcerf the proposed visitof the major, which had served Monte Cristo as a pretext for decliningAlbert’s invitation. Seven o’clock had just struck, and M.Bertuccio, according to the command which had been given him, had two hoursbefore left for Auteuil, when a cab stopped at the door, and after depositingits occupant at the gate, immediately hurried away, as if ashamed of itsemployment. The visitor was about fifty-two years of age, dressed in one of thegreen surtouts, ornamented with black frogs, which have so long maintainedtheir popularity all over Europe. He wore trousers of blue cloth, bootstolerably clean, but not of the brightest polish, and a little too thick in thesoles, buckskin gloves, a hat somewhat resembling in shape those usually wornby the gendarmes, and a black cravat striped with white, which, if theproprietor had not worn it of his own free will, might have passed for ahalter, so much did it resemble one. Such was the picturesque costume of theperson who rang at the gate, and demanded if it was not at No. 30 in the Avenuedes Champs-Élysées that the Count of Monte Cristo lived, and who, beinganswered by the porter in the affirmative, entered, closed the gate after him,and began to ascend the steps.The small and angular head of this man, his white hair and thick graymoustaches, caused him to be easily recognized by Baptistin, who had receivedan exact description of the expected visitor, and who was awaiting him in thehall. Therefore, scarcely had the stranger time to pronounce his name beforethe count was apprised of his arrival. He was ushered into a simple and elegantdrawing-room, and the count rose to meet him with a smiling air.“Ah, my dear sir, you are most welcome; I was expecting you.”“Indeed,” said the Italian, “was your excellency then awareof my visit?”“Yes; I had been told that I should see you today at seveno’clock.”“Then you have received full information concerning my arrival?”“Of course.”“Ah, so much the better, I feared this little precaution might have beenforgotten.”“What precaution?”“That of informing you beforehand of my coming.”“Oh, no, it has not.”“But you are sure you are not mistaken.”“Very sure.”“It really was I whom your excellency expected at seven o’clockthis evening?”“I will prove it to you beyond a doubt.”“Oh, no, never mind that,” said the Italian; “it is not worththe trouble.”“Yes, yes,” said Monte Cristo. His visitor appeared slightlyuneasy. “Let me see,” said the count; “are you not theMarquis Bartolomeo Cavalcanti?”“Bartolomeo Cavalcanti,” joyfully replied the Italian; “yes,I am really he.”“Ex-major in the Austrian service?”“Was I a major?” timidly asked the old soldier.“Yes,” said Monte Cristo “you were a major; that is the titlethe French give to the post which you filled in Italy.”“Very good,” said the major, “I do not demand more, youunderstand——”“Your visit here today is not of your own suggestion, is it?” saidMonte Cristo.“No, certainly not.”“You were sent by some other person?”“Yes.”“By the excellent Abbé Busoni?”“Exactly so,” said the delighted major.“And you have a letter?”“Yes, there it is.”“Give it to me, then.” And Monte Cristo took the letter, which heopened and read. The major looked at the count with his large staring eyes, andthen took a survey of the apartment, but his gaze almost immediately revertedto the proprietor of the room.“Yes, yes, I see. ‘Major Cavalcanti, a worthy patrician of Lucca, adescendant of the Cavalcanti of Florence,’” continued Monte Cristo,reading aloud, “‘possessing an income of half amillion.’”Monte Cristo raised his eyes from the paper, and bowed.“Half a million,” said he, “magnificent!”“Half a million, is it?” said the major.“Yes, in so many words; and it must be so, for the abbé knows correctlythe amount of all the largest fortunes in Europe.”“Be it half a million, then; but on my word of honor, I had no idea thatit was so much.”“Because you are robbed by your steward. You must make some reformationin that quarter.”“You have opened my eyes,” said the Italian gravely; “I willshow the gentlemen the door.”Monte Cristo resumed the perusal of the letter:“‘And who only needs one thing more to make himhappy.’”“Yes, indeed but one!” said the major with a sigh.“‘Which is to recover a lost and adored son.’”“A lost and adored son!”“‘Stolen away in his infancy, either by an enemy of his noblefamily or by the gypsies.’”“At the age of five years!” said the major with a deep sigh, andraising his eye to heaven.“Unhappy father,” said Monte Cristo. The count continued:“‘I have given him renewed life and hope, in the assurance that youhave the power of restoring the son whom he has vainly sought for fifteenyears.’”The major looked at the count with an indescribable expression of anxiety.“I have the power of so doing,” said Monte Cristo. The majorrecovered his self-possession.“So, then,” said he, “the letter was true to the end?”“Did you doubt it, my dear Monsieur Bartolomeo?”“No, indeed; certainly not; a good man, a man holding religious office,as does the Abbé Busoni, could not condescend to deceive or play off a joke;but your excellency has not read all.”“Ah, true,” said Monte Cristo “there is a postscript.”“Yes, yes,” repeated the major,“yes—there—is—a—postscript.”“‘In order to save Major Cavalcanti the trouble of drawing on hisbanker, I send him a draft for 2,000 francs to defray his travelling expenses,and credit on you for the further sum of 48,000 francs, which you still oweme.’”The major awaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently with greatanxiety.“Very good,” said the count.“He said ‘very good,’” muttered the major,“then—sir——” replied he.“Then what?” asked Monte Cristo.“Then the postscript——”“Well; what of the postscript?”“Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the rest of theletter?”“Certainly; the Abbé Busoni and myself have a small account open betweenus. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which I am still owinghim, but I dare say we shall not dispute the difference. You attached greatimportance, then, to this postscript, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti?”“I must explain to you,” said the major, “that, fullyconfiding in the signature of the Abbé Busoni, I had not provided myself withany other funds; so that if this resource had failed me, I should have foundmyself very unpleasantly situated in Paris.”“Is it possible that a man of your standing should be embarrassedanywhere?” said Monte Cristo.“Why, really I know no one,” said the major.“But then you yourself are known to others?”“Yes, I am known, so that——”“Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti.”“So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?”“Certainly, at your first request.” The major’s eyes dilatedwith pleasing astonishment. “But sit down,” said Monte Cristo;“really I do not know what I have been thinking of—I havepositively kept you standing for the last quarter of an hour.”“Don’t mention it.” The major drew an armchair towards him,and proceeded to seat himself.“Now,” said the count, “what will you take—a glass ofsherry, port, or Alicante?”“Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine.”“I have some that is very good. You will take a biscuit with it, will younot?”“Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging.”Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced to meet him.“Well?” said he in a low voice.“The young man is here,” said the valet de chambre in the sametone.“Into what room did you take him?”“Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency’sorders.”“That’s right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits.”Baptistin left the room.“Really,” said the major, “I am quite ashamed of the troubleI am giving you.”“Pray don’t mention such a thing,” said the count. Baptistinre-entered with glasses, wine, and biscuits. The count filled one glass, but inthe other he only poured a few drops of the ruby-colored liquid. The bottle wascovered with spiders’ webs, and all the other signs which indicate theage of wine more truly than do wrinkles on a man’s face. The major made awise choice; he took the full glass and a biscuit. The count told Baptistin toleave the plate within reach of his guest, who began by sipping the Alicantewith an expression of great satisfaction, and then delicately steeped hisbiscuit in the wine.“So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you? You were rich, noble, held ingreat esteem—had all that could render a man happy?”“All,” said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit,“positively all.”“And yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete yourhappiness?”“Only one thing,” said the Italian.“And that one thing, your lost child.”“Ah,” said the major, taking a second biscuit, “thatconsummation of my happiness was indeed wanting.” The worthy major raisedhis eyes to heaven and sighed.“Let me hear, then,” said the count, “who this deeplyregretted son was; for I always understood you were a bachelor.”“That was the general opinion, sir,” said the major, “andI——”“Yes,” replied the count, “and you confirmed the report. Ayouthful indiscretion, I suppose, which you were anxious to conceal from theworld at large?”The major recovered himself, and resumed his usual calm manner, at the sametime casting his eyes down, either to give himself time to compose hiscountenance, or to assist his imagination, all the while giving an under-lookat the count, the protracted smile on whose lips still announced the samepolite curiosity.“Yes,” said the major, “I did wish this fault to be hiddenfrom every eye.”“Not on your own account, surely,” replied Monte Cristo; “fora man is above that sort of thing?”“Oh, no, certainly not on my own account,” said the major with asmile and a shake of the head.“But for the sake of the mother?” said the count.“Yes, for the mother’s sake—his poor mother!” cried themajor, taking a third biscuit.“Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti,” said the count, pouringout for him a second glass of Alicante; “your emotion has quite overcomeyou.”“His poor mother,” murmured the major, trying to get the lachrymalgland in operation, so as to moisten the corner of his eye with a false tear.“She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, I think, did shenot?”“She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count.”“And her name was——”“Do you desire to know her name——?”“Oh,” said Monte Cristo “it would be quite superfluous foryou to tell me, for I already know it.”“The count knows everything,” said the Italian, bowing.“Oliva Corsinari, was it not?”“Oliva Corsinari!”“A marchioness?”“A marchioness!”“And you married her at last, notwithstanding the opposition of herfamily?”“Yes, that was the way it ended.”“And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?” saidMonte Cristo.“What papers?”“The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, and the registerof your child’s birth.”“The register of my child’s birth?”“The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti—of your son; is nothis name Andrea?”“I believe so,” said the major.“What? You believe so?”“I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for so long atime.”“Well, then,” said Monte Cristo “you have all the documentswith you?”“Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it was necessary tocome provided with these papers, I neglected to bring them.”“That is unfortunate,” returned Monte Cristo.“Were they, then, so necessary?”“They were indispensable.”The major passed his hand across his brow. “Ah, perbacco,indispensable, were they?”“Certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubts raised as to thevalidity of your marriage or the legitimacy of your child?”“True,” said the major, “there might be doubts raised.”“In that case your son would be very unpleasantly situated.”“It would be fatal to his interests.”“It might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonialalliance.”“O peccato!”“You must know that in France they are very particular on these points;it is not sufficient, as in Italy, to go to the priest and say, ‘We loveeach other, and want you to marry us.’ Marriage is a civil affair inFrance, and in order to marry in an orthodox manner you must have papers whichundeniably establish your identity.”“That is the misfortune! You see I have not these necessarypapers.”“Fortunately, I have them, though,” said Monte Cristo.“You?”“Yes.”“You have them?”“I have them.”“Ah, indeed?” said the major, who, seeing the object of his journeyfrustrated by the absence of the papers, feared also that his forgetfulnessmight give rise to some difficulty concerning the 48,000francs—“ah, indeed, that is a fortunate circumstance; yes, thatreally is lucky, for it never occurred to me to bring them.”“I do not at all wonder at it—one cannot think of everything; but,happily, the Abbé Busoni thought for you.”“He is an excellent person.”“He is extremely prudent and thoughtful.”“He is an admirable man,” said the major; “and he sent themto you?”“Here they are.”The major clasped his hands in token of admiration.“You married Oliva Corsinari in the church of San Paolo delMonte-Cattini; here is the priest’s certificate.”“Yes indeed, there it is truly,” said the Italian, looking on withastonishment.“And here is Andrea Cavalcanti’s baptismal register, given by thecuré of Saravezza.”“All quite correct.”“Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. You will give themto your son, who will, of course, take great care of them.”“I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them——”“Well, and if he were to lose them?” said Monte Cristo.“In that case,” replied the major, “it would be necessary towrite to the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they couldbe obtained.”“It would be a difficult matter to arrange,” said Monte Cristo.“Almost an impossibility,” replied the major.“I am very glad to see that you understand the value of thesepapers.”“I regard them as invaluable.”“Now,” said Monte Cristo “as to the mother of the youngman——”“As to the mother of the young man——” repeated theItalian, with anxiety.“As regards the Marchesa Corsinari——”“Really,” said the major, “difficulties seem to thicken uponus; will she be wanted in any way?”“No, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “besides, has shenot——”“Yes, sir,” said the major, “she has——”“Paid the last debt of nature?”“Alas, yes,” returned the Italian.“I knew that,” said Monte Cristo; “she has been dead theseten years.”“And I am still mourning her loss,” exclaimed the major, drawingfrom his pocket a checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the leftand then the right eye.“What would you have?” said Monte Cristo; “we are all mortal.Now, you understand, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti, that it is useless for you totell people in France that you have been separated from your son for fifteenyears. Stories of gypsies, who steal children, are not at all in vogue in thispart of the world, and would not be believed. You sent him for his education toa college in one of the provinces, and now you wish him to complete hiseducation in the Parisian world. That is the reason which has induced you toleave Via Reggio, where you have lived since the death of your wife. That willbe sufficient.”“You think so?”“Certainly.”“Very well, then.”“If they should hear of the separation——”“Ah, yes; what could I say?”“That an unfaithful tutor, bought over by the enemies of yourfamily——”“By the Corsinari?”“Precisely. Had stolen away this child, in order that your name mightbecome extinct.”“That is reasonable, since he is an only son.”“Well, now that all is arranged, do not let these newly awakenedremembrances be forgotten. You have, doubtless, already guessed that I waspreparing a surprise for you?”“An agreeable one?” asked the Italian.“Ah, I see the eye of a father is no more to be deceived than hisheart.”“Hum!” said the major.“Someone has told you the secret; or, perhaps, you guessed that he washere.”“That who was here?”“Your child—your son—your Andrea!”“I did guess it,” replied the major with the greatest possiblecoolness. “Then he is here?”“He is,” said Monte Cristo; “when the valet de chambre camein just now, he told me of his arrival.”“Ah, very well, very well,” said the major, clutching the buttonsof his coat at each exclamation.“My dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “I understand your emotion;you must have time to recover yourself. I will, in the meantime, go and preparethe young man for this much-desired interview, for I presume that he is notless impatient for it than yourself.”“I should quite imagine that to be the case,” said Cavalcanti.“Well, in a quarter of an hour he shall be with you.”“You will bring him, then? You carry your goodness so far as even topresent him to me yourself?”“No; I do not wish to come between a father and son. Your interview willbe private. But do not be uneasy; even if the powerful voice of nature shouldbe silent, you cannot well mistake him; he will enter by this door. He is afine young man, of fair complexion—a little too fair,perhaps—pleasing in manners; but you will see and judge foryourself.”“By the way,” said the major, “you know I have only the 2,000francs which the Abbé Busoni sent me; this sum I have expended upon travellingexpenses, and——”“And you want money; that is a matter of course, my dear M. Cavalcanti.Well, here are 8,000 francs on account.”The major’s eyes sparkled brilliantly.“It is 40,000 francs which I now owe you,” said Monte Cristo.“Does your excellency wish for a receipt?” said the major, at thesame time slipping the money into the inner pocket of his coat.“For what?” said the count.“I thought you might want it to show the Abbé Busoni.”“Well, when you receive the remaining 40,000, you shall give me a receiptin full. Between honest men such excessive precaution is, I think, quiteunnecessary.”“Yes, so it is, between perfectly upright people.”“One word more,” said Monte Cristo.“Say on.”“You will permit me to make one remark?”“Certainly; pray do so.”“Then I should advise you to leave off wearing that style ofdress.”“Indeed,” said the major, regarding himself with an air of completesatisfaction.“Yes. It may be worn at Via Reggio; but that costume, however elegant initself, has long been out of fashion in Paris.”“That’s unfortunate.”“Oh, if you really are attached to your old mode of dress; you can easilyresume it when you leave Paris.”“But what shall I wear?”“What you find in your trunks.”“In my trunks? I have but one portmanteau.”“I dare say you have nothing else with you. What is the use of boringone’s self with so many things? Besides an old soldier always likes tomarch with as little baggage as possible.”“That is just the case—precisely so.”“But you are a man of foresight and prudence, therefore you sent yourluggage on before you. It has arrived at the Hôtel des Princes, Rue deRichelieu. It is there you are to take up your quarters.”“Then, in these trunks——”“I presume you have given orders to your valet de chambre to put in allyou are likely to need,—your plain clothes and your uniform. On grandoccasions you must wear your uniform; that will look very well. Do not forgetyour crosses. They still laugh at them in France, and yet always wear them, forall that.”“Very well, very well,” said the major, who was in ecstasy at theattention paid him by the count.“Now,” said Monte Cristo, “that you have fortified yourselfagainst all painful excitement, prepare yourself, my dear M. Cavalcanti, tomeet your lost Andrea.”Saying which Monte Cristo bowed, and disappeared behind the tapestry, leavingthe major fascinated beyond expression with the delightful reception which hehad received at the hands of the count. Chapter 56. AndreaCavalcantiThe Count of MonteCristo entered the adjoining room, which Baptistin had designated as thedrawing-room, and found there a young man, of graceful demeanor and elegantappearance, who had arrived in a cab about half an hour previously. Baptistinhad not found any difficulty in recognizing the person who presented himself atthe door for admittance. He was certainly the tall young man with light hair,red beard, black eyes, and brilliant complexion, whom his master had soparticularly described to him. When the count entered the room the young manwas carelessly stretched on a sofa, tapping his boot with the gold-headed canewhich he held in his hand. On perceiving the count he rose quickly.“The Count of Monte Cristo, I believe?” said he.“Yes, sir, and I think I have the honor of addressing Count AndreaCavalcanti?”“Count Andrea Cavalcanti,” repeated the young man, accompanying hiswords with a bow.“You are charged with a letter of introduction addressed to me, are younot?” said the count.“I did not mention that, because the signature seemed to me sostrange.”“The letter signed ‘Sinbad the Sailor,’ is it not?”“Exactly so. Now, as I have never known any Sinbad, with the exception ofthe one celebrated in the Thousand and One Nights——”“Well, it is one of his descendants, and a great friend of mine; he is avery rich Englishman, eccentric almost to insanity, and his real name is LordWilmore.”“Ah, indeed? Then that explains everything that is extraordinary,”said Andrea. “He is, then, the same Englishman whom Imet—at—ah—yes, indeed. Well, monsieur, I am at yourservice.”“If what you say be true,” replied the count, smiling,“perhaps you will be kind enough to give me some account of yourself andyour family?”“Certainly, I will do so,” said the young man, with a quicknesswhich gave proof of his ready invention. “I am (as you have said) theCount Andrea Cavalcanti, son of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, a descendant ofthe Cavalcanti whose names are inscribed in the golden book at Florence. Ourfamily, although still rich (for my father’s income amounts to half amillion), has experienced many misfortunes, and I myself was, at the age offive years, taken away by the treachery of my tutor, so that for fifteen yearsI have not seen the author of my existence. Since I have arrived at years ofdiscretion and become my own master, I have been constantly seeking him, butall in vain. At length I received this letter from your friend, which statesthat my father is in Paris, and authorizes me to address myself to you forinformation respecting him.”“Really, all you have related to me is exceedingly interesting,”said Monte Cristo, observing the young man with a gloomy satisfaction;“and you have done well to conform in everything to the wishes of myfriend Sinbad; for your father is indeed here, and is seeking you.”The count from the moment of first entering the drawing-room, had not once lostsight of the expression of the young man’s countenance; he had admiredthe assurance of his look and the firmness of his voice; but at these words, sonatural in themselves, “Your father is indeed here, and is seekingyou,” young Andrea started, and exclaimed, “My father? Is my fatherhere?”“Most undoubtedly,” replied Monte Cristo; “your father, MajorBartolomeo Cavalcanti.” The expression of terror which, for the moment,had overspread the features of the young man, had now disappeared.“Ah, yes, that is the name, certainly. Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti. Andyou really mean to say; monsieur, that my dear father is here?”“Yes, sir; and I can even add that I have only just left his company. Thehistory which he related to me of his lost son touched me to the quick; indeed,his griefs, hopes, and fears on that subject might furnish material for a mosttouching and pathetic poem. At length, he one day received a letter, statingthat the abductors of his son now offered to restore him, or at least to givenotice where he might be found, on condition of receiving a large sum of money,by way of ransom. Your father did not hesitate an instant, and the sum was sentto the frontier of Piedmont, with a passport signed for Italy. You were in thesouth of France, I think?”“Yes,” replied Andrea, with an embarrassed air, “I was in thesouth of France.”“A carriage was to await you at Nice?”“Precisely so; and it conveyed me from Nice to Genoa, from Genoa toTurin, from Turin to Chambéry, from Chambéry to Pont-de-Beauvoisin, and fromPont-de-Beauvoisin to Paris.”“Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for itis exactly the same route which he himself took, and that is how we have beenable to trace your journey to this place.”“But,” said Andrea, “if my father had met me, I doubt if hewould have recognized me; I must be somewhat altered since he last sawme.”“Oh, the voice of nature,” said Monte Cristo.“True,” interrupted the young man, “I had not looked upon itin that light.”“Now,” replied Monte Cristo “there is only one source ofuneasiness left in your father’s mind, which is this—he is anxiousto know how you have been employed during your long absence from him, how youhave been treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselvestowards you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is anxious tosee if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad moral influence towhich you have been exposed, and which is infinitely more to be dreaded thanany physical suffering; he wishes to discover if the fine abilities with whichnature had endowed you have been weakened by want of culture; and, in short,whether you consider yourself capable of resuming and retaining in the worldthe high position to which your rank entitles you.”“Sir!” exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, “I hope nofalse report——”“As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friend Wilmore, thephilanthropist. I believe he found you in some unpleasant position, but do notknow of what nature, for I did not ask, not being inquisitive. Your misfortunesengaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been interesting. He told methat he was anxious to restore you to the position which you had lost, and thathe would seek your father until he found him. He did seek, and has found him,apparently, since he is here now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of yourcoming, and gave me a few other instructions relative to your future fortune. Iam quite aware that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and asrich as a gold mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities withoutany fear of their ruining him, and I have promised to adhere to hisinstructions. Now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question I am about toput to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your patron. I would wish toknow if the misfortunes which have happened to you—misfortunes entirelybeyond your control, and which in no degree diminish my regard for you—Iwould wish to know if they have not, in some measure, contributed to render youa stranger to the world in which your fortune and your name entitle you to makea conspicuous figure?”“Sir,” returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner,“make your mind easy on this score. Those who took me from my father, andwho always intended, sooner or later, to sell me again to my originalproprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make the mostof their bargain, it would be politic to leave me in possession of all mypersonal and hereditary worth, and even to increase the value, if possible. Ihave, therefore, received a very good education, and have been treated by thesekidnappers very much as the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose mastersmade them grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in order that they mightfetch a higher price in the Roman market.”Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if he had not expected somuch from M. Andrea Cavalcanti.“Besides,” continued the young man, “if there did appear somedefect in education, or offence against the established forms of etiquette, Isuppose it would be excused, in consideration of the misfortunes whichaccompanied my birth, and followed me through my youth.”“Well,” said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, “you willdo as you please, count, for you are the master of your own actions, and arethe person most concerned in the matter, but if I were you, I would not divulgea word of these adventures. Your history is quite a romance, and the world,which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely mistrusts those whichare bound in living parchment, even though they be gilded like yourself. Thisis the kind of difficulty which I wished to represent to you, my dear count.You would hardly have recited your touching history before it would go forth tothe world, and be deemed unlikely and unnatural. You would be no longer a lostchild found, but you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung up likea mushroom in the night. You might excite a little curiosity, but it is noteveryone who likes to be made the centre of observation and the subject ofunpleasant remark.”“I agree with you, monsieur,” said the young man, turning pale,and, in spite of himself, trembling beneath the scrutinizing look of hiscompanion, “such consequences would be extremely unpleasant.”“Nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil,” said MonteCristo, “for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fall intoanother. You must resolve upon one simple and single line of conduct, and for aman of your intelligence, this plan is as easy as it is necessary; you mustform honorable friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice whichmay attach to the obscurity of your former life.”Andrea visibly changed countenance.“I would offer myself as your surety and friendly adviser,” saidMonte Cristo, “did I not possess a moral distrust of my best friends, anda sort of inclination to lead others to doubt them too; therefore, in departingfrom this rule, I should (as the actors say) be playing a part quite out of myline, and should, therefore, run the risk of being hissed, which would be anact of folly.”“However, your excellency,” said Andrea, “in consideration ofLord Wilmore, by whom I was recommended to you——”“Yes, certainly,” interrupted Monte Cristo; “but Lord Wilmoredid not omit to inform me, my dear M. Andrea, that the season of your youth wasrather a stormy one. Ah,” said the count, watching Andrea’scountenance, “I do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely toavoid that necessity that your father was sent for from Lucca. You shall soonsee him. He is a little stiff and pompous in his manner, and he is disfiguredby his uniform; but when it becomes known that he has been for eighteen yearsin the Austrian service, all that will be pardoned. We are not generally verysevere with the Austrians. In short, you will find your father a verypresentable person, I assure you.”“Ah, sir, you have given me confidence; it is so long since we wereseparated, that I have not the least remembrance of him, and, besides, you knowthat in the eyes of the world a large fortune covers all defects.”“He is a millionaire—his income is 500,000 francs.”“Then,” said the young man, with anxiety, “I shall be sure tobe placed in an agreeable position.”“One of the most agreeable possible, my dear sir; he will allow you anincome of 50,000 livres per annum during the whole time of your stay inParis.”“Then in that case I shall always choose to remain there.”“You cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; ‘man proposes, andGod disposes.’” Andrea sighed.“But,” said he, “so long as I do remain in Paris, and nothingforces me to quit it, do you mean to tell me that I may rely on receiving thesum you just now mentioned to me?”“You may.”“Shall I receive it from my father?” asked Andrea, with someuneasiness.“Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but Lord Wilmorewill be the security for the money. He has, at the request of your father,opened an account of 5,000 francs a month at M. Danglars’, which is oneof the safest banks in Paris.”“And does my father mean to remain long in Paris?” asked Andrea.“Only a few days,” replied Monte Cristo. “His service doesnot allow him to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.”“Ah, my dear father!” exclaimed Andrea, evidently charmed with theidea of his speedy departure.“Therefore,” said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake hismeaning—“therefore I will not, for another instant, retard thepleasure of your meeting. Are you prepared to embrace your worthyfather?”“I hope you do not doubt it.”“Go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where you will findyour father awaiting you.”Andrea made a low bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room. MonteCristo watched him till he disappeared, and then touched a spring in a panelmade to look like a picture, which, in sliding partly from the frame,discovered to view a small opening, so cleverly contrived that it revealed allthat was passing in the drawing-room now occupied by Cavalcanti and Andrea. Theyoung man closed the door behind him, and advanced towards the major, who hadrisen when he heard steps approaching him.“Ah, my dear father!” said Andrea in a loud voice, in order thatthe count might hear him in the next room, “is it really you?”“How do you do, my dear son?” said the major gravely.“After so many years of painful separation,” said Andrea, in thesame tone of voice, and glancing towards the door, “what a happiness itis to meet again!”“Indeed it is, after so long a separation.”“Will you not embrace me, sir?” said Andrea.“If you wish it, my son,” said the major; and the two men embracedeach other after the fashion of actors on the stage; that is to say, eachrested his head on the other’s shoulder.“Then we are once more reunited?” said Andrea.“Once more,” replied the major.“Never more to be separated?”“Why, as to that—I think, my dear son, you must be by this time soaccustomed to France as to look upon it almost as a second country.”“The fact is,” said the young man, “that I should beexceedingly grieved to leave it.”“As for me, you must know I cannot possibly live out of Lucca; thereforeI shall return to Italy as soon as I can.”“But before you leave France, my dear father, I hope you will put me inpossession of the documents which will be necessary to prove my descent.”“Certainly; I am come expressly on that account; it has cost me muchtrouble to find you, but I had resolved on giving them into your hands, and ifI had to recommence my search, it would occupy all the few remaining years ofmy life.”“Where are these papers, then?”“Here they are.”Andrea seized the certificate of his father’s marriage and his ownbaptismal register, and after having opened them with all the eagerness whichmight be expected under the circumstances, he read them with a facility whichproved that he was accustomed to similar documents, and with an expressionwhich plainly denoted an unusual interest in the contents. When he had perusedthe documents, an indefinable expression of pleasure lighted up hiscountenance, and looking at the major with a most peculiar smile, he said, invery excellent Tuscan:“Then there is no longer any such thing, in Italy as being condemned tothe galleys?”The major drew himself up to his full height.“Why?—what do you mean by that question?”“I mean that if there were, it would be impossible to draw up withimpunity two such deeds as these. In France, my dear sir, half such a piece ofeffrontery as that would cause you to be quickly despatched to Toulon for fiveyears, for change of air.”“Will you be good enough to explain your meaning?” said the major,endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air of the greatest majesty.“My dear M. Cavalcanti,” said Andrea, taking the major by the armin a confidential manner, “how much are you paid for being myfather?”The major was about to speak, when Andrea continued, in a low voice:“Nonsense, I am going to set you an example of confidence, they give me50,000 francs a year to be your son; consequently, you can understand that itis not at all likely I shall ever deny my parent.”The major looked anxiously around him.“Make yourself easy, we are quite alone,” said Andrea;“besides, we are conversing in Italian.”“Well, then,” replied the major, “they paid me 50,000 francsdown.”“Monsieur Cavalcanti,” said Andrea, “do you believe in fairytales?”“I used not to do so, but I really feel now almost obliged to have faithin them.”“You have, then, been induced to alter your opinion; you have had someproofs of their truth?” The major drew from his pocket a handful of gold.“Most palpable proofs,” said he, “as you may perceive.”“You think, then, that I may rely on the count’s promises?”“Certainly I do.”“You are sure he will keep his word with me?”“To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must continue to playour respective parts. I, as a tender father——”“And I as a dutiful son, as they choose that I shall be descended fromyou.”“Whom do you mean by they?”“Ma foi, I can hardly tell, but I was alluding to those who wrotethe letter; you received one, did you not?”“Yes.”“From whom?”“From a certain Abbé Busoni.”“Have you any knowledge of him?”“No, I have never seen him.”“What did he say in the letter?”“You will promise not to betray me?”“Rest assured of that; you well know that our interests are thesame.”“Then read for yourself;” and the major gave a letter into theyoung man’s hand. Andrea read in a low voice:“‘You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would you like tobecome rich, or at least independent? Set out immediately for Paris, and demandof the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No. 30, the son whomyou had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken from you at five years ofage. This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti. In order that you may not doubt thekind intention of the writer of this letter, you will find enclosed an orderfor 2,400 francs, payable in Florence, at Signor Gozzi’s; also a letterof introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, on whom I give you a draft of48,000 francs. Remember to go to the count on the 26th May at seveno’clock in the evening.“(Signed) ‘Abbé Busoni.’”“It is the same.”“What do you mean?” said the major.“I was going to say that I received a letter almost to the sameeffect.”“You?”“Yes.”“From the Abbé Busoni?”“No.”“From whom, then?”“From an Englishman, called Lord Wilmore, who takes the name of Sinbadthe Sailor.”“And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the Abbé Busoni?”“You are mistaken; there I am ahead of you.”“You have seen him, then?”“Yes, once.”“Where?”“Ah, that is just what I cannot tell you; if I did, I should make you aswise as myself, which it is not my intention to do.”“And what did the letter contain?”“Read it.”“‘You are poor, and your future prospects are dark and gloomy. Doyou wish for a name? should you like to be rich, and your ownmaster?’”“Parbleu!” said the young man; “was it possible therecould be two answers to such a question?”“‘Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the Porte deGênes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin, Chambéry, and Pont-de-Beauvoisin.Go to the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, on the 26th of May,at seven o’clock in the evening, and demand of him your father. You arethe son of the Marchese Cavalcanti and the Marchesa Oliva Corsinari. Themarquis will give you some papers which will certify this fact, and authorizeyou to appear under that name in the Parisian world. As to your rank, an annualincome of 50,000 livres will enable you to support it admirably. I enclose adraft for 5,000 livres, payable on M. Ferrea, banker at Nice, and also a letterof introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, whom I have directed to supplyall your wants.“‘Sinbad the Sailor.’”“Humph,” said the major; “very good. You have seen the count,you say?”“I have only just left him.”“And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?”“He has.”“Do you understand it?”“Not in the least.”“There is a dupe somewhere.”“At all events, it is neither you nor I.”“Certainly not.”“Well, then——”“Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?”“No; I agree with you there. We must play the game to the end, andconsent to be blindfolded.”“Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part toadmiration.”“I never once doubted your doing so.” Monte Cristo chose thismoment for re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing the sound of his footsteps,the two men threw themselves in each other’s arms, and while they were inthe midst of this embrace, the count entered.“Well, marquis,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be in noway disappointed in the son whom your good fortune has restored to you.”“Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight.”“And what are your feelings?” said Monte Cristo, turning to theyoung man.“As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness.”“Happy father, happy son!” said the count.“There is only one thing which grieves me,” observed the major,“and that is the necessity for my leaving Paris so soon.”“Ah, my dear M. Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leave before I have hadthe honor of presenting you to some of my friends.”“I am at your service, sir,” replied the major.“Now, sir,” said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, “make yourconfession.”“To whom?”“Tell M. Cavalcanti something of the state of your finances.”“Ma foi! monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord.”“Do you hear what he says, major?”“Certainly I do.”“But do you understand?”“I do.”“Your son says he requires money.”“Well, what would you have me do?” said the major.“You should furnish him with some of course,” replied Monte Cristo.“I?”“Yes, you,” said the count, at the same time advancing towardsAndrea, and slipping a packet of bank-notes into the young man’s hand.“What is this?”“It is from your father.”“From my father?”“Yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money? Well, then, hedeputes me to give you this.”“Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?”“No, it is for the first expenses of your settling in Paris.”“Ah, how good my dear father is!”“Silence,” said Monte Cristo; “he does not wish you to knowthat it comes from him.”“I fully appreciate his delicacy,” said Andrea, cramming the noteshastily into his pocket.“And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning,” said Monte Cristo.“And when shall we have the honor of seeing you again, yourexcellency?” asked Cavalcanti.“Ah,” said Andrea, “when may we hope for thatpleasure?”“On Saturday, if you will—Yes.—Let mesee—Saturday—I am to dine at my country house, at Auteuil, on thatday, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28. Several persons are invited, and among others,M. Danglars, your banker. I will introduce you to him, for it will be necessaryhe should know you, as he is to pay your money.”“Full dress?” said the major, half aloud.“Oh, yes, certainly,” said the count; “uniform, cross,knee-breeches.”“And how shall I be dressed?” demanded Andrea.“Oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots, white waistcoat,either a black or blue coat, and a long cravat. Go to Blin or Véronique foryour clothes. Baptistin will tell you where, if you do not know their address.The less pretension there is in your attire, the better will be the effect, asyou are a rich man. If you mean to buy any horses, get them of Devedeux, and ifyou purchase a phaeton, go to Baptiste for it.”“At what hour shall we come?” asked the young man.“About half-past six.”“We will be with you at that time,” said the major. The twoCavalcanti bowed to the count, and left the house. Monte Cristo went to thewindow, and saw them crossing the street, arm in arm.“There go two miscreants;” said he, “it is a pity they arenot really related!” Then, after an instant of gloomy reflection,“Come, I will go to see the Morrels,” said he; “I think thatdisgust is even more sickening than hatred.” Chapter 57. In the LucernPatchOur readers must nowallow us to transport them again to the enclosure surrounding M. deVillefort’s house, and, behind the gate, half screened from view by thelarge chestnut-trees, which on all sides spread their luxuriant branches, weshall find some people of our acquaintance. This time Maximilian was the firstto arrive. He was intently watching for a shadow to appear among the trees, andawaiting with anxiety the sound of a light step on the gravel walk.At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure, as hehad expected, he perceived that two were approaching him. The delay had beenoccasioned by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugénie, which had beenprolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was expected. That she might notappear to fail in her promise to Maximilian, she proposed to MademoiselleDanglars that they should take a walk in the garden, being anxious to show thatthe delay, which was doubtless a cause of vexation to him, was not occasionedby any neglect on her part. The young man, with the intuitive perception of alover, quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarilyplaced, and he was comforted. Besides, although she avoided coming withinspeaking distance, Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could see her pass andrepass, and each time she went by, she managed, unperceived by her companion,to cast an expressive look at the young man, which seemed to say, “Havepatience! You see it is not my fault.”And Maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally contrasting thetwo girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a figure gracefullybending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette, with a fierce and haughtyexpression, and as straight as a poplar. It is unnecessary to state that, inthe eyes of the young man, Valentine did not suffer by the contrast. In abouthalf an hour the girls went away, and Maximilian understood that MademoiselleDanglars’ visit had at last come to an end. In a few minutes Valentinere-entered the garden alone. For fear that anyone should be observing herreturn, she walked slowly; and instead of immediately directing her stepstowards the gate, she seated herself on a bench, and, carefully casting hereyes around, to convince herself that she was not watched, she presently arose,and proceeded quickly to join Maximilian.“Good-evening, Valentine,” said a well-known voice.“Good-evening, Maximilian; I know I have kept you waiting, but you sawthe cause of my delay.”“Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars. I was not aware that you wereso intimate with her.”“Who told you we were intimate, Maximilian?”“No one, but you appeared to be so. From the manner in which you walkedand talked together, one would have thought you were two school-girls tellingyour secrets to each other.”“We were having a confidential conversation,” returned Valentine;“she was owning to me her repugnance to the marriage with M. de Morcerf;and I, on the other hand, was confessing to her how wretched it made me tothink of marrying M. d’Épinay.”“Dear Valentine!”“That will account to you for the unreserved manner which you observedbetween me and Eugénie, as in speaking of the man whom I could not love, mythoughts involuntarily reverted to him on whom my affections were fixed.”“Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess a quality whichcan never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. It is that indefinable charm whichis to a woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the fruit, for thebeauty of either is not the only quality we seek.”“It is your love which makes you look upon everything in thatlight.”“No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I was observing youboth when you were walking in the garden, and, on my honor, without at allwishing to depreciate the beauty of Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot understandhow any man can really love her.”“The fact is, Maximilian, that I was there, and my presence had theeffect of rendering you unjust in your comparison.”“No; but tell me—it is a question of simple curiosity, and whichwas suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind relative to MademoiselleDanglars——”“I dare say it is something disparaging which you are going to say. Itonly proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,”interrupted Valentine.“You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of eachother.”“If we are so, it is because we generally judge under the influence ofexcitement. But return to your question.”“Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M. de Morcerf onaccount of loving another?”“I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy with Eugénie.”“Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being particularlyintimate; own, now, that you did question her on the subject. Ah, I see you aresmiling.”“If you are already aware of the conversation that passed, the woodenpartition which interposed between us and you has proved but a slightsecurity.”“Come, what did she say?”“She told me that she loved no one,” said Valentine; “thatshe disliked the idea of being married; that she would infinitely preferleading an independent and unfettered life; and that she almost wished herfather might lose his fortune, that she might become an artist, like herfriend, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.”“Ah, you see——”“Well, what does that prove?” asked Valentine.“Nothing,” replied Maximilian.“Then why did you smile?”“Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself,Valentine.”“Do you want me to go away?”“Ah, no, no. But do not let us lose time; you are the subject on which Iwish to speak.”“True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes more to passtogether.”“Ma foi!” said Maximilian, in consternation.“Yes, you are right; I am but a poor friend to you. What a life I causeyou to lead, poor Maximilian, you who are formed for happiness! I bitterlyreproach myself, I assure you.”“Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am satisfied, andfeel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five minutesof your society, or two words from your lips? And I have also a deep convictionthat heaven would not have created two hearts, harmonizing as ours do, andalmost miraculously brought us together, to separate us at last.”“Those are kind and cheering words. You must hope for us both,Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy.”“But why must you leave me so soon?”“I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madame de Villefortsent to request my presence, as she had a communication to make on which a partof my fortune depended. Let them take my fortune, I am already too rich; and,perhaps, when they have taken it, they will leave me in peace and quietness.You would love me as much if I were poor, would you not, Maximilian?”“Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for either riches orpoverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt certain that no one coulddeprive me of her? But do you not fear that this communication may relate toyour marriage?”“I do not think that is the case.”“However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. I assure youthat, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!”“Do you think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian?”“Pardon me, you are right. I am a brute. But I was going to tell you thatI met M. de Morcerf the other day.”“Well?”“Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know.”“What then?”“Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz, announcing hisimmediate return.” Valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against thegate.“Ah heavens, if it were that! But no, the communication would not comethrough Madame de Villefort.”“Why not?”“Because—I scarcely know why—but it has appeared as if Madamede Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not chooseopenly to oppose it.”“Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort.”“Do not be in such a hurry to do that,” said Valentine, with a sadsmile.“If she objects to your marrying M. d’Épinay, she would be all themore likely to listen to any other proposition.”“No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de Villefort objects,it is marriage itself.”“Marriage? If she dislikes that so much, why did she ever marryherself?”“You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, I talked ofretiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, in spite of all the remarks whichshe considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the proposition, myfather consented to it at her instigation, and it was only on account of mypoor grandfather that I finally abandoned the project. You can form no idea ofthe expression of that old man’s eye when he looks at me, the only personin the world whom he loves, and, I had almost said, by whom he is beloved inreturn. When he learned my resolution, I shall never forget the reproachfullook which he cast on me, and the tears of utter despair which chased eachother down his lifeless cheeks. Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment,such remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, Iexclaimed,—‘Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; theymay do what they will with me, I will never leave you.’ When I had ceasedspeaking, he thankfully raised his eyes to heaven, but without uttering a word.Ah, Maximilian, I may have much to suffer, but I feel as if mygrandfather’s look at that moment would more than compensate forall.”“Dear Valentine, you are a perfect angel, and I am sure I do not knowwhat I—sabring right and left among the Bedouins—can have done tomerit your being revealed to me, unless, indeed, Heaven took into considerationthe fact that the victims of my sword were infidels. But tell me what interestMadame de Villefort can have in your remaining unmarried?”“Did I not tell you just now that I was rich, Maximilian—too rich?I possess nearly 50,000 livres in right of my mother; my grandfather and mygrandmother, the Marquis and Marquise de Saint-Méran, will leave me as much,and M. Noirtier evidently intends making me his heir. My brother Edward, whoinherits nothing from his mother, will, therefore, be poor in comparison withme. Now, if I had taken the veil, all this fortune would have descended to myfather, and, in reversion, to his son.”“Ah, how strange it seems that such a young and beautiful woman should beso avaricious.”“It is not for herself that she is so, but for her son, and what youregard as a vice becomes almost a virtue when looked at in the light ofmaternal love.”“But could you not compromise matters, and give up a portion of yourfortune to her son?”“How could I make such a proposition, especially to a woman who alwaysprofesses to be so entirely disinterested?”“Valentine, I have always regarded our love in the light of somethingsacred; consequently, I have covered it with the veil of respect, and hid it inthe innermost recesses of my soul. No human being, not even my sister, is awareof its existence. Valentine, will you permit me to make a confidant of a friendand reveal to him the love I bear you?”Valentine started. “A friend, Maximilian; and who is this friend? Itremble to give my permission.”“Listen, Valentine. Have you never experienced for anyone that sudden andirresistible sympathy which made you feel as if the object of it had been yourold and familiar friend, though, in reality, it was the first time you had evermet? Nay, further, have you never endeavored to recall the time, place, andcircumstances of your former intercourse, and failing in this attempt, havealmost believed that your spirits must have held converse with each other insome state of being anterior to the present, and that you are only now occupiedin a reminiscence of the past?”“Yes.”“Well, that is precisely the feeling which I experienced when I first sawthat extraordinary man.”“Extraordinary, did you say?”“Yes.”“You have known him for some time, then?”“Scarcely longer than eight or ten days.”“And do you call a man your friend whom you have only known for eight orten days? Ah, Maximilian, I had hoped you set a higher value on the title offriend.”“Your logic is most powerful, Valentine, but say what you will, I cannever renounce the sentiment which has instinctively taken possession of mymind. I feel as if it were ordained that this man should be associated with allthe good which the future may have in store for me, and sometimes it reallyseems as if his eye was able to see what was to come, and his hand endowed withthe power of directing events according to his own will.”“He must be a prophet, then,” said Valentine, smiling.“Indeed,” said Maximilian, “I have often been almost temptedto attribute to him the gift of prophecy; at all events, he has a wonderfulpower of foretelling any future good.”“Ah,” said Valentine in a mournful tone, “do let me see thisman, Maximilian; he may tell me whether I shall ever be loved sufficiently tomake amends for all I have suffered.”“My poor girl, you know him already.”“I know him?”“Yes; it was he who saved the life of your step-mother and herson.”“The Count of Monte Cristo?”“The same.”“Ah,” cried Valentine, “he is too much the friend of Madamede Villefort ever to be mine.”“The friend of Madame de Villefort! It cannot be; surely, Valentine, youare mistaken?”“No, indeed, I am not; for I assure you, his power over our household isalmost unlimited. Courted by my step-mother, who regards him as the epitome ofhuman wisdom; admired by my father, who says he has never before heard suchsublime ideas so eloquently expressed; idolized by Edward, who, notwithstandinghis fear of the count’s large black eyes, runs to meet him the moment hearrives, and opens his hand, in which he is sure to find some delightfulpresent,—M. de Monte Cristo appears to exert a mysterious and almostuncontrollable influence over all the members of our family.”“If such be the case, my dear Valentine, you must yourself have felt, orat all events will soon feel, the effects of his presence. He meets Albert deMorcerf in Italy—it is to rescue him from the hands of the banditti; heintroduces himself to Madame Danglars—it is that he may give her a royalpresent; your step-mother and her son pass before his door—it is that hisNubian may save them from destruction. This man evidently possesses the powerof influencing events, both as regards men and things. I never saw more simpletastes united to greater magnificence. His smile is so sweet when he addressesme, that I forget it ever can be bitter to others. Ah, Valentine, tell me, ifhe ever looked on you with one of those sweet smiles? if so, depend on it, youwill be happy.”“Me?” said the young girl, “he never even glances at me; onthe contrary, if I accidentally cross his path, he appears rather to avoid me.Ah, he is not generous, neither does he possess that supernatural penetrationwhich you attribute to him, for if he did, he would have perceived that I wasunhappy; and if he had been generous, seeing me sad and solitary, he would haveused his influence to my advantage, and since, as you say, he resembles thesun, he would have warmed my heart with one of his life-giving rays. You say heloves you, Maximilian; how do you know that he does? All would pay deference toan officer like you, with a fierce moustache and a long sabre, but they thinkthey may crush a poor weeping girl with impunity.”“Ah, Valentine, I assure you you are mistaken.”“If it were otherwise—if he treated me diplomatically—that isto say, like a man who wishes, by some means or other, to obtain a footing inthe house, so that he may ultimately gain the power of dictating to itsoccupants—he would, if it had been but once, have honored me with thesmile which you extol so loudly; but no, he saw that I was unhappy, heunderstood that I could be of no use to him, and therefore paid no attention tome whatever. Who knows but that, in order to please Madame de Villefort and myfather, he may not persecute me by every means in his power? It is not justthat he should despise me so, without any reason. Ah, forgive me,” saidValentine, perceiving the effect which her words were producing on Maximilian:“I have done wrong, for I have given utterance to thoughts concerningthat man which I did not even know existed in my heart. I do not deny theinfluence of which you speak, or that I have not myself experienced it, butwith me it has been productive of evil rather than good.”“Well, Valentine,” said Morrel with a sigh, “we will notdiscuss the matter further. I will not make a confidant of him.”“Alas!” said Valentine, “I see that I have given you pain. Ican only say how sincerely I ask pardon for having grieved you. But, indeed, Iam not prejudiced beyond the power of conviction. Tell me what this Count ofMonte Cristo has done for you.”“I own that your question embarrasses me, Valentine, for I cannot saythat the count has rendered me any ostensible service. Still, as I have alreadytold you, I have an instinctive affection for him, the source of which I cannotexplain to you. Has the sun done anything for me? No; he warms me with hisrays, and it is by his light that I see you—nothing more. Has such andsuch a perfume done anything for me? No; its odor charms one of mysenses—that is all I can say when I am asked why I praise it. Myfriendship for him is as strange and unaccountable as his for me. A secretvoice seems to whisper to me that there must be something more than chance inthis unexpected reciprocity of friendship. In his most simple actions, as wellas in his most secret thoughts, I find a relation to my own. You will perhapssmile at me when I tell you that, ever since I have known this man, I haveinvoluntarily entertained the idea that all the good fortune which has befallenme originated from him. However, I have managed to live thirty years withoutthis protection, you will say; but I will endeavor a little to illustrate mymeaning. He invited me to dine with him on Saturday, which was a very naturalthing for him to do. Well, what have I learned since? That your mother and M.de Villefort are both coming to this dinner. I shall meet them there, and whoknows what future advantages may result from the interview? This may appear toyou to be no unusual combination of circumstances; nevertheless, I perceivesome hidden plot in the arrangement—something, in fact, more than isapparent on a casual view of the subject. I believe that this singular man, whoappears to fathom the motives of everyone, has purposely arranged for me tomeet M. and Madame de Villefort, and sometimes, I confess, I have gone so faras to try to read in his eyes whether he was in possession of the secret of ourlove.”“My good friend,” said Valentine, “I should take you for avisionary, and should tremble for your reason, if I were always to hear youtalk in a strain similar to this. Is it possible that you can see anything morethan the merest chance in this meeting? Pray reflect a little. My father, whonever goes out, has several times been on the point of refusing thisinvitation; Madame de Villefort, on the contrary, is burning with the desire ofseeing this extraordinary nabob in his own house, therefore, she has with greatdifficulty prevailed on my father to accompany her. No, no; it is as I havesaid, Maximilian,—there is no one in the world of whom I can ask help butyourself and my grandfather, who is little better than a corpse—nosupport to cling to but my mother in heaven!”“I see that you are right, logically speaking,” said Maximilian;“but the gentle voice which usually has such power over me fails toconvince me today.”“I feel the same as regards yourself.” said Valentine; “and Iown that, if you have no stronger proof to give me——”“I have another,” replied Maximilian; “but I fear you willdeem it even more absurd than the first.”“So much the worse,” said Valentine, smiling.“It is, nevertheless, conclusive to my mind. My ten years of service havealso confirmed my ideas on the subject of sudden inspirations, for I haveseveral times owed my life to a mysterious impulse which directed me to move atonce either to the right or to the left, in order to escape the ball whichkilled the comrade fighting by my side, while it left me unharmed.”“Dear Maximilian, why not attribute your escape to my constant prayersfor your safety? When you are away, I no longer pray for myself, but foryou.”“Yes, since you have known me,” said Morrel, smiling; “butthat cannot apply to the time previous to our acquaintance, Valentine.”“You are very provoking, and will not give me credit for anything; butlet me hear this second proof, which you yourself own to be absurd.”“Well, look through this opening, and you will see the beautiful newhorse which I rode here.”“Ah! what a beautiful creature!” cried Valentine; “why didyou not bring him close to the gate, so that I could talk to him and pathim?”“He is, as you see, a very valuable animal,” said Maximilian.“You know that my means are limited, and that I am what would bedesignated a man of moderate pretensions. Well, I went to a horsedealer’s, where I saw this magnificent horse, which I have named Médéah.I asked the price; they told me it was 4,500 francs. I was, therefore, obligedto give it up, as you may imagine, but I own I went away with rather a heavyheart, for the horse had looked at me affectionately, had rubbed his headagainst me and, when I mounted him, had pranced in the most delightful wayimaginable, so that I was altogether fascinated with him. The same evening somefriends of mine visited me,—M. de Château-Renaud, M. Debray, and five orsix other choice spirits, whom you do not know, even by name. They proposed agame of bouillotte. I never play, for I am not rich enough to afford tolose, or sufficiently poor to desire to gain. But I was at my own house, youunderstand, so there was nothing to be done but to send for the cards, which Idid.“Just as they were sitting down to table, M. de Monte Cristo arrived. Hetook his seat amongst them; they played, and I won. I am almost ashamed to saythat my gains amounted to 5,000 francs. We separated at midnight. I could notdefer my pleasure, so I took a cabriolet and drove to the horse dealer’s.Feverish and excited, I rang at the door. The person who opened it must havetaken me for a madman, for I rushed at once to the stable. Médéah was standingat the rack, eating his hay. I immediately put on the saddle and bridle, towhich operation he lent himself with the best grace possible; then, putting the4,500 francs into the hands of the astonished dealer, I proceeded to fulfil myintention of passing the night in riding in the Champs-Élysées. As I rode bythe count’s house I perceived a light in one of the windows, and fanciedI saw the shadow of his figure moving behind the curtain. Now, Valentine, Ifirmly believe that he knew of my wish to possess this horse, and that he lostexpressly to give me the means of procuring him.”“My dear Maximilian, you are really too fanciful; you will not love evenme long. A man who accustoms himself to live in such a world of poetry andimagination must find far too little excitement in a common, every-day sort ofattachment such as ours. But they are calling me. Do you hear?”“Ah, Valentine,” said Maximilian, “give me but one fingerthrough this opening in the grating, one finger, the littlest finger of all,that I may have the happiness of kissing it.”“Maximilian, we said we would be to each other as two voices, twoshadows.”“As you will, Valentine.”“Shall you be happy if I do what you wish?”“Oh, yes!”Valentine mounted on a bench, and passed not only her finger but her whole handthrough the opening. Maximilian uttered a cry of delight, and, springingforwards, seized the hand extended towards him, and imprinted on it a ferventand impassioned kiss. The little hand was then immediately withdrawn, and theyoung man saw Valentine hurrying towards the house, as though she were almostterrified at her own sensations. Chapter 58. M. Noirtier deVillefortWe will now relate whatwas passing in the house of the king’s attorney after the departure ofMadame Danglars and her daughter, and during the time of the conversationbetween Maximilian and Valentine, which we have just detailed.M. de Villefort entered his father’s room, followed by Madame deVillefort. Both of the visitors, after saluting the old man and speaking toBarrois, a faithful servant, who had been twenty-five years in his service,took their places on either side of the paralytic.M. Noirtier was sitting in an armchair, which moved upon casters, in which hewas wheeled into the room in the morning, and in the same way drawn out againat night. He was placed before a large glass, which reflected the wholeapartment, and so, without any attempt to move, which would have beenimpossible, he could see all who entered the room and everything which wasgoing on around him. M. Noirtier, although almost as immovable as a corpse,looked at the new-comers with a quick and intelligent expression, perceiving atonce, by their ceremonious courtesy, that they were come on business of anunexpected and official character.Sight and hearing were the only senses remaining, and they, like two solitarysparks, remained to animate the miserable body which seemed fit for nothing butthe grave; it was only, however, by means of one of these senses that he couldreveal the thoughts and feelings that still occupied his mind, and the look bywhich he gave expression to his inner life was like the distant gleam of acandle which a traveller sees by night across some desert place, and knows thata living being dwells beyond the silence and obscurity.Noirtier’s hair was long and white, and flowed over his shoulders; whilein his eyes, shaded by thick black lashes, was concentrated, as it oftenhappens with an organ which is used to the exclusion of the others, all theactivity, address, force, and intelligence which were formerly diffused overhis whole body; and so although the movement of the arm, the sound of thevoice, and the agility of the body, were wanting, the speaking eye sufficed forall. He commanded with it; it was the medium through which his thanks wereconveyed. In short, his whole appearance produced on the mind the impression ofa corpse with living eyes, and nothing could be more startling than to observethe expression of anger or joy suddenly lighting up these organs, while therest of the rigid and marble-like features were utterly deprived of the powerof participation. Three persons only could understand this language of the poorparalytic; these were Villefort, Valentine, and the old servant of whom we havealready spoken. But as Villefort saw his father but seldom, and then only whenabsolutely obliged, and as he never took any pains to please or gratify himwhen he was there, all the old man’s happiness was centred in hisgranddaughter. Valentine, by means of her love, her patience, and her devotion,had learned to read in Noirtier’s look all the varied feelings which werepassing in his mind. To this dumb language, which was so unintelligible toothers, she answered by throwing her whole soul into the expression of hercountenance, and in this manner were the conversations sustained between theblooming girl and the helpless invalid, whose body could scarcely be called aliving one, but who, nevertheless, possessed a fund of knowledge andpenetration, united with a will as powerful as ever although clogged by a bodyrendered utterly incapable of obeying its impulses.Valentine had solved the problem, and was able easily to understand histhoughts, and to convey her own in return, and, through her untiring anddevoted assiduity, it was seldom that, in the ordinary transactions ofevery-day life, she failed to anticipate the wishes of the living, thinkingmind, or the wants of the almost inanimate body.As to the servant, he had, as we have said, been with his master forfive-and-twenty years, therefore he knew all his habits, and it was seldom thatNoirtier found it necessary to ask for anything, so prompt was he inadministering to all the necessities of the invalid.Villefort did not need the help of either Valentine or the domestic in order tocarry on with his father the strange conversation which he was about to begin.As we have said, he perfectly understood the old man’s vocabulary, and ifhe did not use it more often, it was only indifference and ennui whichprevented him from so doing. He therefore allowed Valentine to go into thegarden, sent away Barrois, and after having seated himself at hisfather’s right hand, while Madame de Villefort placed herself on theleft, he addressed him thus:“I trust you will not be displeased, sir, that Valentine has not comewith us, or that I dismissed Barrois, for our conference will be one whichcould not with propriety be carried on in the presence of either. Madame deVillefort and I have a communication to make to you.”Noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,while, on the contrary, Villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate intothe inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.“This communication,” continued the procureur, in that cold anddecisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, “will, weare sure, meet with your approbation.”The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of expression whichprevented his son from obtaining any knowledge of the feelings which werepassing in his mind; he listened, nothing more.“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marryingValentine.” Had the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could nothave shown less emotion at this news than was now to be traced there.“The marriage will take place in less than three months,” saidVillefort.Noirtier’s eye still retained its inanimate expression.Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added:“We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who havealways entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only nowremains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she is destined.It is one of the most desirable connections which could possibly be formed; hepossesses fortune, a high rank in society, and every personal qualificationlikely to render Valentine supremely happy,—his name, moreover, cannot bewholly unknown to you. It is M. Franz de Quesnel, Baron d’Épinay.”While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old man’scountenance. When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of Franz, the pupilof M. Noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids trembled with thesame movement that may be perceived on the lips of an individual about tospeak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame de Villefort and his son. Theprocureur, who knew the political hatred which had formerly existed between M.Noirtier and the elder d’Épinay, well understood the agitation and angerwhich the announcement had produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, heimmediately resumed the narrative begun by his wife.“Sir,” said he, “you are aware that Valentine is about toenter her nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should lose notime in forming a suitable alliance. Nevertheless, you have not been forgottenin our plans, and we have fully ascertained beforehand that Valentine’sfuture husband will consent, not to live in this house, for that might not bepleasant for the young people, but that you should live with them; so that youand Valentine, who are so attached to each other, would not be separated, andyou would be able to pursue exactly the same course of life which you havehitherto done, and thus, instead of losing, you will be a gainer by the change,as it will secure to you two children instead of one, to watch over and comfortyou.”Noirtier’s look was furious; it was very evident that something desperatewas passing in the old man’s mind, for a cry of anger and grief rose inhis throat, and not being able to find vent in utterance, appeared almost tochoke him, for his face and lips turned quite purple with the struggle.Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, “It is very warm, and the heataffects M. Noirtier.” He then returned to his place, but did not sitdown.“This marriage,” added Madame de Villefort, “is quiteagreeable to the wishes of M. d’Épinay and his family; besides, he had norelations nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother having died at his birth,and his father having been assassinated in 1815, that is to say, when he wasbut two years old; it naturally followed that the child was permitted to choosehis own pursuits, and he has, therefore, seldom acknowledged any otherauthority but that of his own will.”“That assassination was a mysterious affair,” said Villefort,“and the perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection, although suspicionhas fallen on the head of more than one person.”Noirtier made such an effort that his lips expanded into a smile.“Now,” continued Villefort, “those to whom the guilt reallybelongs, by whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man mayprobably descend here, and the certain judgment of God hereafter, would rejoicein the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a peace-offering asValentine on the son of him whose life they so ruthlessly destroyed.”Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion more than could have beendeemed possible with such an enfeebled and shattered frame.“Yes, I understand,” was the reply contained in his look; and thislook expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound contempt.Villefort fully understood his father’s meaning, and answered by a slightshrug of his shoulders. He then motioned to his wife to take leave.“Now sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “I must bid youfarewell. Would you like me to send Edward to you for a short time?”It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by closinghis eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he had some desireor feeling to express, he raised them to heaven. If he wanted Valentine, heclosed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the left. At Madame deVillefort’s proposition he instantly winked his eyes.Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, “Then shall Isend Valentine to you?” The old man closed his eyes eagerly, therebyintimating that such was his wish.M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders thatValentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feelingsure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the perturbed spiritof the invalid. Valentine, with a color still heightened by emotion, enteredthe room just after her parents had quitted it. One look was sufficient to tellher that her grandfather was suffering, and that there was much on his mindwhich he was wishing to communicate to her.“Dear grandpapa,” cried she, “what has happened? They havevexed you, and you are angry?”The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.“Who has displeased you? Is it my father?”“No.”“Madame de Villefort?”“No.”“Me?” The former sign was repeated.“Are you displeased with me?” cried Valentine in astonishment. M.Noirtier again closed his eyes.“And what have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry withme?” cried Valentine.There was no answer, and she continued:“I have not seen you all day. Has anyone been speaking to you againstme?”“Yes,” said the old man’s look, with eagerness.“Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa—Ah—M. andMadame de Villefort have just left this room, have they not?”“Yes.”“And it was they who told you something which made you angry? What was itthen? May I go and ask them, that I may have the opportunity of making my peacewith you?”“No, no,” said Noirtier’s look.“Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?” and she again triedto think what it could be.“Ah, I know,” said she, lowering her voice and going close to theold man. “They have been speaking of my marriage,—have theynot?”“Yes,” replied the angry look.“I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have preserved on thesubject. The reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping the mattera secret, and begged me not to tell you anything of it. They did not evenacquaint me with their intentions, and I only discovered them by chance, thatis why I have been so reserved with you, dear grandpapa. Pray forgiveme.”But there was no look calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say was,“It is not only your reserve which afflicts me.”“What is it, then?” asked the young girl. “Perhaps you thinkI shall abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget you when I ammarried?”“No.”“They told you, then, that M. d’Épinay consented to our all livingtogether?”“Yes.”“Then why are you still vexed and grieved?” The old man’seyes beamed with an expression of gentle affection.“Yes, I understand,” said Valentine; “it is because you loveme.” The old man assented.“And you are afraid I shall be unhappy?”“Yes.”“You do not like M. Franz?” The eyes repeated several times,“No, no, no.”“Then you are vexed with the engagement?”“Yes.”“Well, listen,” said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, andputting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “I am vexed, too, forI do not love M. Franz d’Épinay.”An expression of intense joy illumined the old man’s eyes.“When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how angry you werewith me?” A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid. “Well,”continued Valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that I mightescape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair.”Noirtier’s breathing came thick and short.“Then the idea of this marriage really grieves you too? Ah, if you couldbut help me—if we could both together defeat their plan! But you areunable to oppose them,—you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will is sofirm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I am myself. Alas,you, who would have been such a powerful protector to me in the days of yourhealth and strength, can now only sympathize in my joys and sorrows, withoutbeing able to take any active part in them. However, this is much, and callsfor gratitude and Heaven has not taken away all my blessings when it leaves meyour sympathy and kindness.”At these words there appeared in Noirtier’s eye an expression of suchdeep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words there:“You are mistaken; I can still do much for you.”“Do you think you can help me, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine.“Yes.” Noirtier raised his eyes, it was the sign agreed on betweenhim and Valentine when he wanted anything.“What is it you want, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine, and sheendeavored to recall to mind all the things which he would be likely to need;and as the ideas presented themselves to her mind, she repeated them aloud,then,—finding that all her efforts elicited nothing but a constant“No,”—she said, “Come, since this plan does notanswer, I will have recourse to another.”She then recited all the letters of the alphabet from A down to N. When shearrived at that letter the paralytic made her understand that she had spokenthe initial letter of the thing he wanted.“Ah,” said Valentine, “the thing you desire begins with theletter N; it is with N that we have to do, then. Well, let me see, what can youwant that begins with N? Na—Ne—Ni—No——”“Yes, yes, yes,” said the old man’s eye.“Ah, it is No, then?”“Yes.”Valentine fetched a dictionary, which she placed on a desk before Noirtier; sheopened it, and, seeing that the old man’s eye was thoroughly fixed on itspages, she ran her finger quickly up and down the columns. During the six yearswhich had passed since Noirtier first fell into this sad state,Valentine’s powers of invention had been too often put to the test not torender her expert in devising expedients for gaining a knowledge of his wishes,and the constant practice had so perfected her in the art that she guessed theold man’s meaning as quickly as if he himself had been able to seek forwhat he wanted. At the word Notary, Noirtier made a sign to her to stop.“Notary,” said she, “do you want a notary, deargrandpapa?” The old man again signified that it was a notary he desired.“You would wish a notary to be sent for then?” said Valentine.“Yes.”“Shall my father be informed of your wish?”“Yes.”“Do you wish the notary to be sent for immediately?”“Yes.”“Then they shall go for him directly, dear grandpapa. Is that all youwant?”“Yes.” Valentine rang the bell, and ordered the servant to tellMonsieur or Madame de Villefort that they were requested to come to M.Noirtier’s room.“Are you satisfied now?” inquired Valentine.“Yes.”“I am sure you are; it is not very difficult to discover that.” Andthe young girl smiled on her grandfather, as if he had been a child. M. deVillefort entered, followed by Barrois.“What do you want me for, sir?” demanded he of the paralytic.“Sir,” said Valentine, “my grandfather wishes for anotary.” At this strange and unexpected demand M. de Villefort and hisfather exchanged looks.“Yes,” motioned the latter, with a firmness which seemed to declarethat with the help of Valentine and his old servant, who both knew what hiswishes were, he was quite prepared to maintain the contest.“Do you wish for a notary?” asked Villefort.“Yes.”“What to do?”Noirtier made no answer.“What do you want with a notary?” again repeated Villefort. Theinvalid’s eye remained fixed, by which expression he intended to intimatethat his resolution was unalterable.“Is it to do us some ill turn? Do you think it is worth while?”said Villefort.“Still,” said Barrois, with the freedom and fidelity of an oldservant, “if M. Noirtier asks for a notary, I suppose he really wishesfor a notary; therefore I shall go at once and fetch one.” Barroisacknowledged no master but Noirtier, and never allowed his desires in any wayto be contradicted.“Yes, I do want a notary,” motioned the old man, shutting his eyeswith a look of defiance, which seemed to say, “and I should like to seethe person who dares to refuse my request.”“You shall have a notary, as you absolutely wish for one, sir,”said Villefort; “but I shall explain to him your state of health, andmake excuses for you, for the scene cannot fail of being a most ridiculousone.”“Never mind that,” said Barrois; “I shall go and fetch anotary, nevertheless.” And the old servant departed triumphantly on hismission. Chapter 59. The WillAs soon as Barrois hadleft the room, Noirtier looked at Valentine with a malicious expression thatsaid many things. The young girl perfectly understood the look, and so didVillefort, for his countenance became clouded, and he knitted his eyebrowsangrily. He took a seat, and quietly awaited the arrival of the notary.Noirtier saw him seat himself with an appearance of perfect indifference, atthe same time giving a side look at Valentine, which made her understand thatshe also was to remain in the room. Three-quarters of an hour after, Barroisreturned, bringing the notary with him.“Sir,” said Villefort, after the first salutations were over,“you were sent for by M. Noirtier, whom you see here. All his limbs havebecome completely paralysed, he has lost his voice also, and we ourselves findmuch trouble in endeavoring to catch some fragments of his meaning.”Noirtier cast an appealing look on Valentine, which look was at once so earnestand imperative, that she answered immediately.“Sir,” said she, “I perfectly understand mygrandfather’s meaning at all times.”“That is quite true,” said Barrois; “and that is what I toldthe gentleman as we walked along.”“Permit me,” said the notary, turning first to Villefort and thento Valentine—“permit me to state that the case in question is justone of those in which a public officer like myself cannot proceed to actwithout thereby incurring a dangerous responsibility. The first thing necessaryto render an act valid is, that the notary should be thoroughly convinced thathe has faithfully interpreted the will and wishes of the person dictating theact. Now I cannot be sure of the approbation or disapprobation of a client whocannot speak, and as the object of his desire or his repugnance cannot beclearly proved to me, on account of his want of speech, my services here wouldbe quite useless, and cannot be legally exercised.”The notary then prepared to retire. An imperceptible smile of triumph wasexpressed on the lips of the procureur. Noirtier looked at Valentine with anexpression so full of grief, that she arrested the departure of the notary.“Sir,” said she, “the language which I speak with mygrandfather may be easily learnt, and I can teach you in a few minutes, tounderstand it almost as well as I can myself. Will you tell me what yourequire, in order to set your conscience quite at ease on the subject?”“In order to render an act valid, I must be certain of the approbation ordisapprobation of my client. Illness of body would not affect the validity ofthe deed, but sanity of mind is absolutely requisite.”“Well, sir, by the help of two signs, with which I will acquaint youpresently, you may ascertain with perfect certainty that my grandfather isstill in the full possession of all his mental faculties. M. Noirtier, beingdeprived of voice and motion, is accustomed to convey his meaning by closinghis eyes when he wishes to signify ‘yes,’ and to wink when he means‘no.’ You now know quite enough to enable you to converse with M.Noirtier;—try.”Noirtier gave Valentine such a look of tenderness and gratitude that it wascomprehended even by the notary himself.“You have heard and understood what your granddaughter has been saying,sir, have you?” asked the notary. Noirtier closed his eyes.“And you approve of what she said—that is to say, you declare thatthe signs which she mentioned are really those by means of which you areaccustomed to convey your thoughts?”“Yes.”“It was you who sent for me?”“Yes.”“To make your will?”“Yes.”“And you do not wish me to go away without fulfilling your originalintentions?” The old man winked violently.“Well, sir,” said the young girl, “do you understand now, andis your conscience perfectly at rest on the subject?”But before the notary could answer, Villefort had drawn him aside.“Sir,” said he, “do you suppose for a moment that a man cansustain a physical shock, such as M. Noirtier has received, without anydetriment to his mental faculties?”“It is not exactly that, sir,” said the notary, “which makesme uneasy, but the difficulty will be in wording his thoughts and intentions,so as to be able to get his answers.”“You must see that to be an utter impossibility,” said Villefort.Valentine and the old man heard this conversation, and Noirtier fixed his eyeso earnestly on Valentine that she felt bound to answer to the look.“Sir,” said she, “that need not make you uneasy, howeverdifficult it may at first sight appear to be. I can discover and explain to youmy grandfather’s thoughts, so as to put an end to all your doubts andfears on the subject. I have now been six years with M. Noirtier, and let himtell you if ever once, during that time, he has entertained a thought which hewas unable to make me understand.”“No,” signed the old man.“Let us try what we can do, then,” said the notary. “Youaccept this young lady as your interpreter, M. Noirtier?”“Yes.”“Well, sir, what do you require of me, and what document is it that youwish to be drawn up?”Valentine named all the letters of the alphabet until she came to W. At thisletter the eloquent eye of Noirtier gave her notice that she was to stop.“It is very evident that it is the letter W which M. Noirtierwants,” said the notary.“Wait,” said Valentine; and, turning to her grandfather, sherepeated, “Wa—We—Wi——” The old man stoppedher at the last syllable. Valentine then took the dictionary, and the notarywatched her while she turned over the pages.She passed her finger slowly down the columns, and when she came to the word“Will,” M. Noirtier’s eye bade her stop.“Will,” said the notary; “it is very evident that M. Noirtieris desirous of making his will.”“Yes, yes, yes,” motioned the invalid.“Really, sir, you must allow that this is most extraordinary,” saidthe astonished notary, turning to M. de Villefort.“Yes,” said the procureur, “and I think the will promises tobe yet more extraordinary, for I cannot see how it is to be drawn up withoutthe intervention of Valentine, and she may, perhaps, be considered as too muchinterested in its contents to allow of her being a suitable interpreter of theobscure and ill-defined wishes of her grandfather.”“No, no, no,” replied the eye of the paralytic.“What?” said Villefort, “do you mean to say that Valentine isnot interested in your will?”“No.”“Sir,” said the notary, whose interest had been greatly excited,and who had resolved on publishing far and wide the account of thisextraordinary and picturesque scene, “what appeared so impossible to mean hour ago, has now become quite easy and practicable, and this may be aperfectly valid will, provided it be read in the presence of seven witnesses,approved by the testator, and sealed by the notary in the presence of thewitnesses. As to the time, it will not require very much more than thegenerality of wills. There are certain forms necessary to be gone through, andwhich are always the same. As to the details, the greater part will befurnished afterwards by the state in which we find the affairs of the testator,and by yourself, who, having had the management of them, can doubtless givefull information on the subject. But besides all this, in order that theinstrument may not be contested, I am anxious to give it the greatest possibleauthenticity, therefore, one of my colleagues will help me, and, contrary tocustom, will assist in the dictation of the testament. Are you satisfied,sir?” continued the notary, addressing the old man.“Yes,” looked the invalid, his eye beaming with delight at theready interpretation of his meaning.“What is he going to do?” thought Villefort, whose positiondemanded much reserve, but who was longing to know what his father’sintentions were. He left the room to give orders for another notary to be sent,but Barrois, who had heard all that passed, had guessed his master’swishes, and had already gone to fetch one. The procureur then told his wife tocome up. In the course of a quarter of an hour everyone had assembled in thechamber of the paralytic; the second notary had also arrived.A few words sufficed for a mutual understanding between the two officers of thelaw. They read to Noirtier the formal copy of a will, in order to give him anidea of the terms in which such documents are generally couched; then, in orderto test the capacity of the testator, the first notary said, turning towardshim:“When an individual makes his will, it is generally in favor or inprejudice of some person.”“Yes.”“Have you an exact idea of the amount of your fortune?”“Yes.”“I will name to you several sums which will increase by gradation; youwill stop me when I reach the one representing the amount of your ownpossessions?”“Yes.”There was a kind of solemnity in this interrogation. Never had the strugglebetween mind and matter been more apparent than now, and if it was not asublime, it was, at least, a curious spectacle. They had formed a circle roundthe invalid; the second notary was sitting at a table, prepared for writing,and his colleague was standing before the testator in the act of interrogatinghim on the subject to which we have alluded.“Your fortune exceeds 300,000 francs, does it not?” asked he.Noirtier made a sign that it did.“Do you possess 400,000 francs?” inquired the notary.Noirtier’s eye remained immovable.“500,000?” The same expression continued.“600,000—700,000—800,000—900,000?”Noirtier stopped him at the last-named sum.“You are then in possession of 900,000 francs?” asked the notary.“Yes.”“In landed property?”“No.”“In stock?”“Yes.”“The stock is in your own hands?”The look which M. Noirtier cast on Barrois showed that there was somethingwanting which he knew where to find. The old servant left the room, andpresently returned, bringing with him a small casket.“Do you permit us to open this casket?” asked the notary. Noirtiergave his assent.They opened it, and found 900,000 francs in bank scrip. The first notary handedover each note, as he examined it, to his colleague.The total amount was found to be as M. Noirtier had stated.“It is all as he has said; it is very evident that the mind still retainsits full force and vigor.” Then, turning towards the paralytic, he said,“You possess, then, 900,000 francs of capital, which, according to themanner in which you have invested it, ought to bring in an income of about40,000 livres?”“Yes.”“To whom do you desire to leave this fortune?”“Oh!” said Madame de Villefort, “there is not much doubt onthat subject. M. Noirtier tenderly loves his granddaughter, Mademoiselle deVillefort; it is she who has nursed and tended him for six years, and has, byher devoted attention, fully secured the affection, I had almost said thegratitude, of her grandfather, and it is but just that she should reap thefruit of her devotion.”The eye of Noirtier clearly showed by its expression that he was not deceivedby the false assent given by Madame de Villefort’s words and manner tothe motives which she supposed him to entertain.“Is it, then, to Mademoiselle Valentine de Villefort that you leave these900,000 francs?” demanded the notary, thinking he had only to insert thisclause, but waiting first for the assent of Noirtier, which it was necessaryshould be given before all the witnesses of this singular scene.Valentine, when her name was made the subject of discussion, had stepped back,to escape unpleasant observation; her eyes were cast down, and she was crying.The old man looked at her for an instant with an expression of the deepesttenderness, then, turning towards the notary, he significantly winked his eyein token of dissent.“What,” said the notary, “do you not intend makingMademoiselle Valentine de Villefort your residuary legatee?”“No.”“You are not making any mistake, are you?” said the notary;“you really mean to declare that such is not your intention?”“No,” repeated Noirtier; “No.”Valentine raised her head, struck dumb with astonishment. It was not so muchthe conviction that she was disinherited that caused her grief, but her totalinability to account for the feelings which had provoked her grandfather tosuch an act. But Noirtier looked at her with so much affectionate tendernessthat she exclaimed:“Oh, grandpapa, I see now that it is only your fortune of which youdeprive me; you still leave me the love which I have always enjoyed.”“Ah, yes, most assuredly,” said the eyes of the paralytic, for heclosed them with an expression which Valentine could not mistake.“Thank you, thank you,” murmured she. The old man’sdeclaration that Valentine was not the destined inheritor of his fortune hadexcited the hopes of Madame de Villefort; she gradually approached the invalid,and said:“Then, doubtless, dear M. Noirtier, you intend leaving your fortune toyour grandson, Edward de Villefort?”The winking of the eyes which answered this speech was most decided andterrible, and expressed a feeling almost amounting to hatred.“No?” said the notary; “then, perhaps, it is to your son, M.de Villefort?”“No.” The two notaries looked at each other in mute astonishmentand inquiry as to what were the real intentions of the testator. Villefort andhis wife both grew red, one from shame, the other from anger.“What have we all done, then, dear grandpapa?” said Valentine;“you no longer seem to love any of us?”The old man’s eyes passed rapidly from Villefort and his wife, and restedon Valentine with a look of unutterable fondness.“Well,” said she; “if you love me, grandpapa, try and bringthat love to bear upon your actions at this present moment. You know me wellenough to be quite sure that I have never thought of your fortune; besides,they say I am already rich in right of my mother—too rich, even. Explainyourself, then.”Noirtier fixed his intelligent eyes on Valentine’s hand.“My hand?” said she.“Yes.”“Her hand!” exclaimed everyone.“Oh, gentlemen, you see it is all useless, and that my father’smind is really impaired,” said Villefort.“Ah,” cried Valentine suddenly, “I understand. It is mymarriage you mean, is it not, dear grandpapa?”“Yes, yes, yes,” signed the paralytic, casting on Valentine a lookof joyful gratitude for having guessed his meaning.“You are angry with us all on account of this marriage, are younot?”“Yes?”“Really, this is too absurd,” said Villefort.“Excuse me, sir,” replied the notary; “on the contrary, themeaning of M. Noirtier is quite evident to me, and I can quite easily connectthe train of ideas passing in his mind.”“You do not wish me to marry M. Franz d’Épinay?” observedValentine.“I do not wish it,” said the eye of her grandfather.“And you disinherit your granddaughter,” continued the notary,“because she has contracted an engagement contrary to your wishes?”“Yes.”“So that, but for this marriage, she would have been your heir?”“Yes.”There was a profound silence. The two notaries were holding a consultation asto the best means of proceeding with the affair. Valentine was looking at hergrandfather with a smile of intense gratitude, and Villefort was biting hislips with vexation, while Madame de Villefort could not succeed in repressingan inward feeling of joy, which, in spite of herself, appeared in her wholecountenance.“But,” said Villefort, who was the first to break the silence,“I consider that I am the best judge of the propriety of the marriage inquestion. I am the only person possessing the right to dispose of mydaughter’s hand. It is my wish that she should marry M. Franzd’Épinay—and she shall marry him.”Valentine sank weeping into a chair.“Sir,” said the notary, “how do you intend disposing of yourfortune in case Mademoiselle de Villefort still determines on marrying M.Franz?” The old man gave no answer.“You will, of course, dispose of it in some way or other?”“Yes.”“In favor of some member of your family?”“No.”“Do you intend devoting it to charitable purposes, then?” pursuedthe notary.“Yes.”“But,” said the notary, “you are aware that the law does notallow a son to be entirely deprived of his patrimony?”“Yes.”“You only intend, then, to dispose of that part of your fortune which thelaw allows you to subtract from the inheritance of your son?” Noirtiermade no answer.“Do you still wish to dispose of all?”“Yes.”“But they will contest the will after your death?”“No.”“My father knows me,” replied Villefort; “he is quite surethat his wishes will be held sacred by me; besides, he understands that in myposition I cannot plead against the poor.” The eye of Noirtier beamedwith triumph.“What do you decide on, sir?” asked the notary of Villefort.“Nothing, sir; it is a resolution which my father has taken and I know henever alters his mind. I am quite resigned. These 900,000 francs will go out ofthe family in order to enrich some hospital; but it is ridiculous thus to yieldto the caprices of an old man, and I shall, therefore, act according to myconscience.”Having said this, Villefort quitted the room with his wife, leaving his fatherat liberty to do as he pleased. The same day the will was made, the witnesseswere brought, it was approved by the old man, sealed in the presence of all andgiven in charge to M. Deschamps, the family notary. Chapter 60. TheTelegraphM. and Madame deVillefort found on their return that the Count of Monte Cristo, who had come tovisit them in their absence, had been ushered into the drawing-room, and wasstill awaiting them there. Madame de Villefort, who had not yet sufficientlyrecovered from her late emotion to allow of her entertaining visitors soimmediately, retired to her bedroom, while the procureur, who could betterdepend upon himself, proceeded at once to the salon.Although M. de Villefort flattered himself that, to all outward view, he hadcompletely masked the feelings which were passing in his mind, he did not knowthat the cloud was still lowering on his brow, so much so that the count, whosesmile was radiant, immediately noticed his sombre and thoughtful air.“Ma foi!” said Monte Cristo, after the first complimentswere over, “what is the matter with you, M. de Villefort? Have I arrivedat the moment when you were drawing up an indictment for a capitalcrime?”Villefort tried to smile.“No, count,” he replied, “I am the only victim in this case.It is I who lose my cause, and it is ill-luck, obstinacy, and folly which havecaused it to be decided against me.”“To what do you refer?” said Monte Cristo with well-feignedinterest. “Have you really met with some great misfortune?”“Oh, no, monsieur,” said Villefort with a bitter smile; “itis only a loss of money which I have sustained—nothing worth mentioning,I assure you.”“True,” said Monte Cristo, “the loss of a sum of moneybecomes almost immaterial with a fortune such as you possess, and to one ofyour philosophic spirit.”“It is not so much the loss of the money that vexes me,” saidVillefort, “though, after all, 900,000 francs are worth regretting; but Iam the more annoyed with this fate, chance, or whatever you please to call thepower which has destroyed my hopes and my fortune, and may blast the prospectsof my child also, as it is all occasioned by an old man relapsed into secondchildhood.”“What do you say?” said the count; “900,000 francs? It isindeed a sum which might be regretted even by a philosopher. And who is thecause of all this annoyance?”“My father, as I told you.”“M. Noirtier? But I thought you told me he had become entirely paralyzed,and that all his faculties were completely destroyed?”“Yes, his bodily faculties, for he can neither move nor speak,nevertheless he thinks, acts, and wills in the manner I have described. I lefthim about five minutes ago, and he is now occupied in dictating his will to twonotaries.”“But to do this he must have spoken?”“He has done better than that—he has made himselfunderstood.”“How was such a thing possible?”“By the help of his eyes, which are still full of life, and, as youperceive, possess the power of inflicting mortal injury.”“My dear,” said Madame de Villefort, who had just entered the room,“perhaps you exaggerate the evil.”“Good-morning, madame,” said the count, bowing.Madame de Villefort acknowledged the salutation with one of her most gracioussmiles.“What is this that M. de Villefort has been telling me?” demandedMonte Cristo “and what incomprehensible misfortune——”“Incomprehensible is the word!” interrupted the procureur,shrugging his shoulders. “It is an old man’s caprice!”“And is there no means of making him revoke his decision?”“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort; “and it is still entirely inthe power of my husband to cause the will, which is now in prejudice ofValentine, to be altered in her favor.”The count, who perceived that M. and Madame de Villefort were beginning tospeak in parables, appeared to pay no attention to the conversation, andfeigned to be busily engaged in watching Edward, who was mischievously pouringsome ink into the bird’s water-glass.“My dear,” said Villefort, in answer to his wife, “you know Ihave never been accustomed to play the patriarch in my family, nor have I everconsidered that the fate of a universe was to be decided by my nod.Nevertheless, it is necessary that my will should be respected in my family,and that the folly of an old man and the caprice of a child should not beallowed to overturn a project which I have entertained for so many years. TheBaron d’Épinay was my friend, as you know, and an alliance with his sonis the most suitable thing that could possibly be arranged.”“Do you think,” said Madame de Villefort, “that Valentine isin league with him? She has always been opposed to this marriage, and I shouldnot be at all surprised if what we have just seen and heard is nothing but theexecution of a plan concerted between them.”“Madame,” said Villefort, “believe me, a fortune of 900,000francs is not so easily renounced.”“She could, nevertheless, make up her mind to renounce the world, sir,since it is only about a year ago that she herself proposed entering aconvent.”“Never mind,” replied Villefort; “I say that this marriageshall be consummated.”“Notwithstanding your father’s wishes to the contrary?” saidMadame de Villefort, selecting a new point of attack. “That is a seriousthing.”Monte Cristo, who pretended not to be listening, heard however, every word thatwas said.“Madame,” replied Villefort “I can truly say that I havealways entertained a high respect for my father, because, to the naturalfeeling of relationship was added the consciousness of his moral superiority.The name of father is sacred in two senses; he should be reverenced as theauthor of our being and as a master whom we ought to obey. But, under thepresent circumstances, I am justified in doubting the wisdom of an old man who,because he hated the father, vents his anger on the son. It would be ridiculousin me to regulate my conduct by such caprices. I shall still continue topreserve the same respect toward M. Noirtier; I will suffer, without complaint,the pecuniary deprivation to which he has subjected me; but I shall remain firmin my determination, and the world shall see which party has reason on hisside. Consequently I shall marry my daughter to the Baron Franz d’Épinay,because I consider it would be a proper and eligible match for her to make,and, in short, because I choose to bestow my daughter’s hand on whomeverI please.”“What?” said the count, the approbation of whose eye Villefort hadfrequently solicited during this speech. “What? Do you say that M.Noirtier disinherits Mademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry M.le Baron Franz d’Épinay?”“Yes, sir, that is the reason,” said Villefort, shrugging hisshoulders.“The apparent reason, at least,” said Madame de Villefort.“The real reason, madame, I can assure you; I know myfather.”“But I want to know in what way M. d’Épinay can have displeasedyour father more than any other person?”“I believe I know M. Franz d’Épinay,” said the count;“is he not the son of General de Quesnel, who was created Barond’Épinay by Charles X.?”“The same,” said Villefort.“Well, but he is a charming young man, according to my ideas.”“He is, which makes me believe that it is only an excuse of M. Noirtierto prevent his granddaughter marrying; old men are always so selfish in theiraffection,” said Madame de Villefort.“But,” said Monte Cristo “do you not know any cause for thishatred?”“Ah, ma foi! who is to know?”“Perhaps it is some political difference?”“My father and the Baron d’Épinay lived in the stormy times ofwhich I only saw the ending,” said Villefort.“Was not your father a Bonapartist?” asked Monte Cristo; “Ithink I remember that you told me something of that kind.”“My father has been a Jacobin more than anything else,” saidVillefort, carried by his emotion beyond the bounds of prudence; “and thesenator’s robe, which Napoleon cast on his shoulders, only served todisguise the old man without in any degree changing him. When my fatherconspired, it was not for the emperor, it was against the Bourbons; for M.Noirtier possessed this peculiarity, he never projected any Utopian schemeswhich could never be realized, but strove for possibilities, and he applied tothe realization of these possibilities the terrible theories of TheMountain,—theories that never shrank from any means that were deemednecessary to bring about the desired result.”“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “it is just as I thought; it waspolitics which brought Noirtier and M. d’Épinay into personal contact.Although General d’Épinay served under Napoleon, did he not still retainroyalist sentiments? And was he not the person who was assassinated one eveningon leaving a Bonapartist meeting to which he had been invited on thesupposition that he favored the cause of the emperor?”Villefort looked at the count almost with terror.“Am I mistaken, then?” said Monte Cristo.“No, sir, the facts were precisely what you have stated,” saidMadame de Villefort; “and it was to prevent the renewal of old feuds thatM. de Villefort formed the idea of uniting in the bonds of affection the twochildren of these inveterate enemies.”“It was a sublime and charitable thought,” said Monte Cristo,“and the whole world should applaud it. It would be noble to seeMademoiselle Noirtier de Villefort assuming the title of Madame Franzd’Épinay.”Villefort shuddered and looked at Monte Cristo as if he wished to read in hiscountenance the real feelings which had dictated the words he had just uttered.But the count completely baffled the procureur, and prevented him fromdiscovering anything beneath the never-varying smile he was so constantly inthe habit of assuming.“Although,” said Villefort, “it will be a serious thing forValentine to lose her grandfather’s fortune, I do not think that M.d’Épinay will be frightened at this pecuniary loss. He will, perhaps,hold me in greater esteem than the money itself, seeing that I sacrificeeverything in order to keep my word with him. Besides, he knows that Valentineis rich in right of her mother, and that she will, in all probability, inheritthe fortune of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran, her mother’s parents, whoboth love her tenderly.”“And who are fully as well worth loving and tending as M.Noirtier,” said Madame de Villefort; “besides, they are to come toParis in about a month, and Valentine, after the affront she has received, neednot consider it necessary to continue to bury herself alive by being shut upwith M. Noirtier.”The count listened with satisfaction to this tale of wounded self-love anddefeated ambition.“But it seems to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and I must begin byasking your pardon for what I am about to say, that if M. Noirtier disinheritsMademoiselle de Villefort because she is going to marry a man whose father hedetested, he cannot have the same cause of complaint against this dearEdward.”“True,” said Madame de Villefort, with an intonation of voice whichit is impossible to describe; “is it not unjust—shamefully unjust?Poor Edward is as much M. Noirtier’s grandchild as Valentine, and yet, ifshe had not been going to marry M. Franz, M. Noirtier would have left her allhis money; and supposing Valentine to be disinherited by her grandfather, shewill still be three times richer than he.”The count listened and said no more.“Count,” said Villefort, “we will not entertain you anylonger with our family misfortunes. It is true that my patrimony will go toendow charitable institutions, and my father will have deprived me of my lawfulinheritance without any reason for doing so, but I shall have the satisfactionof knowing that I have acted like a man of sense and feeling. M.d’Épinay, to whom I had promised the interest of this sum, shall receiveit, even if I endure the most cruel privations.”“However,” said Madame de Villefort, returning to the one ideawhich incessantly occupied her mind, “perhaps it would be better toexplain this unlucky affair to M. d’Épinay, in order to give him theopportunity of himself renouncing his claim to the hand of Mademoiselle deVillefort.”“Ah, that would be a great pity,” said Villefort.“A great pity,” said Monte Cristo.“Undoubtedly,” said Villefort, moderating the tones of his voice,“a marriage once concerted and then broken off, throws a sort ofdiscredit on a young lady; then again, the old reports, which I was so anxiousto put an end to, will instantly gain ground. No, it will all go well; M.d’Épinay, if he is an honorable man, will consider himself more than everpledged to Mademoiselle de Villefort, unless he were actuated by a decidedfeeling of avarice, but that is impossible.”“I agree with M. de Villefort,” said Monte Cristo, fixing his eyeson Madame de Villefort; “and if I were sufficiently intimate with him toallow of giving my advice, I would persuade him, since I have been told M.d’Épinay is coming back, to settle this affair at once beyond allpossibility of revocation. I will answer for the success of a project whichwill reflect so much honor on M. de Villefort.”The procureur arose, delighted with the proposition, but his wife slightlychanged color.“Well, that is all that I wanted, and I will be guided by a counsellorsuch as you are,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo.“Therefore let everyone here look upon what has passed today as if it hadnot happened, and as though we had never thought of such a thing as a change inour original plans.”“Sir,” said the count, “the world, unjust as it is, will bepleased with your resolution; your friends will be proud of you, and M.d’Épinay, even if he took Mademoiselle de Villefort without any dowry,which he will not do, would be delighted with the idea of entering a familywhich could make such sacrifices in order to keep a promise and fulfil aduty.”At the conclusion of these words, the count rose to depart.“Are you going to leave us, count?” said Madame de Villefort.“I am sorry to say I must do so, madame, I only came to remind you ofyour promise for Saturday.”“Did you fear that we should forget it?”“You are very good, madame, but M. de Villefort has so many important andurgent occupations.”“My husband has given me his word, sir,” said Madame de Villefort;“you have just seen him resolve to keep it when he has everything tolose, and surely there is more reason for his doing so where he has everythingto gain.”“And,” said Villefort, “is it at your house in theChamps-Élysées that you receive your visitors?”“No,” said Monte Cristo, “which is precisely the reason whichrenders your kindness more meritorious,—it is in the country.”“In the country?”“Yes.”“Where is it, then? Near Paris, is it not?”“Very near, only half a league from the Barriers,—it is atAuteuil.”“At Auteuil?” said Villefort; “true, Madame de Villefort toldme you lived at Auteuil, since it was to your house that she was taken. And inwhat part of Auteuil do you reside?”“Rue de la Fontaine.”“Rue de la Fontaine!” exclaimed Villefort in an agitated tone;“at what number?”“No. 28.”“Then,” cried Villefort, “was it you who bought M. deSaint-Méran’s house!”“Did it belong to M. de Saint-Méran?” demanded Monte Cristo.“Yes,” replied Madame de Villefort; “and, would you believeit, count——”“Believe what?”“You think this house pretty, do you not?”“I think it charming.”“Well, my husband would never live in it.”“Indeed?” returned Monte Cristo, “that is a prejudice on yourpart, M. de Villefort, for which I am quite at a loss to account.”“I do not like Auteuil, sir,” said the procureur, making an evidenteffort to appear calm.“But I hope you will not carry your antipathy so far as to deprive me ofthe pleasure of your company, sir,” said Monte Cristo.“No, count,—I hope—I assure you I shall do my best,”stammered Villefort.“Oh,” said Monte Cristo, “I allow of no excuse. On Saturday,at six o’clock. I shall be expecting you, and if you fail to come, Ishall think—for how do I know to the contrary?—that this house,which has remained uninhabited for twenty years, must have some gloomytradition or dreadful legend connected with it.”“I will come, count,—I will be sure to come,” said Villeforteagerly.“Thank you,” said Monte Cristo; “now you must permit me totake my leave of you.”“You said before that you were obliged to leave us, monsieur,” saidMadame de Villefort, “and you were about to tell us why when yourattention was called to some other subject.”“Indeed madame,” said Monte Cristo: “I scarcely know if Idare tell you where I am going.”“Nonsense; say on.”“Well, then, it is to see a thing on which I have sometimes mused forhours together.”“What is it?”“A telegraph. So now I have told my secret.”“A telegraph?” repeated Madame de Villefort.“Yes, a telegraph. I had often seen one placed at the end of a road on ahillock, and in the light of the sun its black arms, bending in everydirection, always reminded me of the claws of an immense beetle, and I assureyou it was never without emotion that I gazed on it, for I could not helpthinking how wonderful it was that these various signs should be made to cleavethe air with such precision as to convey to the distance of three hundredleagues the ideas and wishes of a man sitting at a table at one end of the lineto another man similarly placed at the opposite extremity, and all thiseffected by a simple act of volition on the part of the sender of the message.I began to think of genii, sylphs, gnomes, in short, of all the ministers ofthe occult sciences, until I laughed aloud at the freaks of my own imagination.Now, it never occurred to me to wish for a nearer inspection of these largeinsects, with their long black claws, for I always feared to find under theirstone wings some little human genius fagged to death with cabals, factions, andgovernment intrigues. But one fine day I learned that the mover of thistelegraph was only a poor wretch, hired for twelve hundred francs a year, andemployed all day, not in studying the heavens like an astronomer, or in gazingon the water like an angler, or even in enjoying the privilege of observing thecountry around him, but all his monotonous life was passed in watching hiswhite-bellied, black-clawed fellow insect, four or five leagues distant fromhim. At length I felt a desire to study this living chrysalis more closely, andto endeavor to understand the secret part played by these insect-actors whenthey occupy themselves simply with pulling different pieces of string.”“And are you going there?”“I am.”“What telegraph do you intend visiting? that of the home department, orof the observatory?”“Oh, no; I should find there people who would force me to understandthings of which I would prefer to remain ignorant, and who would try to explainto me, in spite of myself, a mystery which even they do not understand. Mafoi! I should wish to keep my illusions concerning insects unimpaired; itis quite enough to have those dissipated which I had formed of myfellow-creatures. I shall, therefore, not visit either of these telegraphs, butone in the open country where I shall find a good-natured simpleton, who knowsno more than the machine he is employed to work.”“You are a singular man,” said Villefort.“What line would you advise me to study?”“The one that is most in use just at this time.”“The Spanish one, you mean, I suppose?”“Yes; should you like a letter to the minister that they might explain toyou——”“No,” said Monte Cristo; “since, as I told you before, I donot wish to comprehend it. The moment I understand it there will no longerexist a telegraph for me; it will be nothing more than a sign from M. Duchâtel,or from M. Montalivet, transmitted to the prefect of Bayonne, mystified by twoGreek words, têle, graphein. It is the insect with black claws,and the awful word which I wish to retain in my imagination in all its purityand all its importance.”“Go then; for in the course of two hours it will be dark, and you willnot be able to see anything.”“Ma foi! you frighten me. Which is the nearest way?Bayonne?”“Yes; the road to Bayonne.”“And afterwards the road to Châtillon?”“Yes.”“By the tower of Montlhéry, you mean?”“Yes.”“Thank you. Good-bye. On Saturday I will tell you my impressionsconcerning the telegraph.”At the door the count was met by the two notaries, who had just completed theact which was to disinherit Valentine, and who were leaving under theconviction of having done a thing which could not fail of redoundingconsiderably to their credit. Chapter 61. How a GardenerMay Get Rid of the Dormice that Eat His PeachesNot on the same night ashe had stated, but the next morning, the Count of Monte Cristo went out by theBarrière d’Enfer, taking the road to Orléans. Leaving the village ofLinas, without stopping at the telegraph, which flourished its great bony armsas he passed, the count reached the tower of Montlhéry, situated, as everyoneknows, upon the highest point of the plain of that name. At the foot of thehill the count dismounted and began to ascend by a little winding path, abouteighteen inches wide; when he reached the summit he found himself stopped by ahedge, upon which green fruit had succeeded to red and white flowers.Monte Cristo looked for the entrance to the enclosure, and was not long infinding a little wooden gate, working on willow hinges, and fastened with anail and string. The count soon mastered the mechanism, the gate opened, and hethen found himself in a little garden, about twenty feet long by twelve wide,bounded on one side by part of the hedge, which contained the ingeniouscontrivance we have called a gate, and on the other by the old tower, coveredwith ivy and studded with wall-flowers.No one would have thought in looking at this old, weather-beaten, floral-deckedtower (which might be likened to an elderly dame dressed up to receive hergrandchildren at a birthday feast) that it would have been capable of tellingstrange things, if,—in addition to the menacing ears which the proverbsays all walls are provided with,—it had also a voice.The garden was crossed by a path of red gravel, edged by a border of thick box,of many years’ growth, and of a tone and color that would have delightedthe heart of Delacroix, our modern Rubens. This path was formed in the shape ofthe figure of 8, thus, in its windings, making a walk of sixty feet in a gardenof only twenty.Never had Flora, the fresh and smiling goddess of gardeners, been honored witha purer or more scrupulous worship than that which was paid to her in thislittle enclosure. In fact, of the twenty rose-trees which formed theparterre, not one bore the mark of the slug, nor were there evidencesanywhere of the clustering aphis which is so destructive to plants growing in adamp soil. And yet it was not because the damp had been excluded from thegarden; the earth, black as soot, the thick foliage of the trees betrayed itspresence; besides, had natural humidity been wanting, it could have beenimmediately supplied by artificial means, thanks to a tank of water, sunk inone of the corners of the garden, and upon which were stationed a frog and atoad, who, from antipathy, no doubt, always remained on the two opposite sidesof the basin. There was not a blade of grass to be seen in the paths, or a weedin the flower-beds; no fine lady ever trained and watered her geraniums, hercacti, and her rhododendrons, in her porcelain jardinière with morepains than this hitherto unseen gardener bestowed upon his little enclosure.Monte Cristo stopped after having closed the gate and fastened the string tothe nail, and cast a look around.“The man at the telegraph,” said he, “must either engage agardener or devote himself passionately to agriculture.”Suddenly he struck against something crouching behind a wheelbarrow filled withleaves; the something rose, uttering an exclamation of astonishment, and MonteCristo found himself facing a man about fifty years old, who was pluckingstrawberries, which he was placing upon grape leaves. He had twelve leaves andabout as many strawberries, which, on rising suddenly, he let fall from hishand.“You are gathering your crop, sir?” said Monte Cristo, smiling.“Excuse me, sir,” replied the man, raising his hand to his cap;“I am not up there, I know, but I have only just come down.”“Do not let me interfere with you in anything, my friend,” said thecount; “gather your strawberries, if, indeed, there are any left.”“I have ten left,” said the man, “for here are eleven, and Ihad twenty-one, five more than last year. But I am not surprised; the springhas been warm this year, and strawberries require heat, sir. This is the reasonthat, instead of the sixteen I had last year, I have this year, you see,eleven, already plucked—twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen,seventeen, eighteen. Ah, I miss three, they were here last night, sir—Iam sure they were here—I counted them. It must be the son of Mère Simonwho has stolen them; I saw him strolling about here this morning. Ah, the youngrascal—stealing in a garden—he does not know where that may leadhim to.”“Certainly, it is wrong,” said Monte Cristo, “but you shouldtake into consideration the youth and greediness of the delinquent.”“Of course,” said the gardener, “but that does not make itthe less unpleasant. But, sir, once more I beg pardon; perhaps you are anofficer that I am detaining here.” And he glanced timidly at thecount’s blue coat.“Calm yourself, my friend,” said the count, with the smile which hemade at will either terrible or benevolent, and which now expressed only thekindliest feeling; “I am not an inspector, but a traveller, brought hereby a curiosity he half repents of, since he causes you to lose yourtime.”“Ah, my time is not valuable,” replied the man with a melancholysmile. “Still it belongs to government, and I ought not to waste it; but,having received the signal that I might rest for an hour” (here heglanced at the sun-dial, for there was everything in the enclosure ofMontlhéry, even a sun-dial), “and having ten minutes before me, and mystrawberries being ripe, when a day longer—by-the-by, sir, do you thinkdormice eat them?”“Indeed, I should think not,” replied Monte Cristo; “dormiceare bad neighbors for us who do not eat them preserved, as the Romansdid.”“What? Did the Romans eat them?” said the gardener—“atedormice?”“I have read so in Petronius,” said the count.“Really? They can’t be nice, though they do say ‘as fat as adormouse.’ It is not a wonder they are fat, sleeping all day, and onlywaking to eat all night. Listen. Last year I had four apricots—they stoleone, I had one nectarine, only one—well, sir, they ate half of it on thewall; a splendid nectarine—I never ate a better.”“You ate it?”“That is to say, the half that was left—you understand; it wasexquisite, sir. Ah, those gentlemen never choose the worst morsels; like MèreSimon’s son, who has not chosen the worst strawberries. But thisyear,” continued the horticulturist, “I’ll take care it shallnot happen, even if I should be forced to sit by the whole night to watch whenthe strawberries are ripe.”Monte Cristo had seen enough. Every man has a devouring passion in his heart,as every fruit has its worm; that of the telegraph man was horticulture. Hebegan gathering the grape-leaves which screened the sun from the grapes, andwon the heart of the gardener.“Did you come here, sir, to see the telegraph?” he said.“Yes, if it isn’t contrary to the rules.”“Oh, no,” said the gardener; “not in the least, since thereis no danger that anyone can possibly understand what we are saying.”“I have been told,” said the count, “that you do not alwaysyourselves understand the signals you repeat.”“That is true, sir, and that is what I like best,” said the man,smiling.“Why do you like that best?”“Because then I have no responsibility. I am a machine then, and nothingelse, and so long as I work, nothing more is required of me.”“Is it possible,” said Monte Cristo to himself, “that I canhave met with a man that has no ambition? That would spoil my plans.”“Sir,” said the gardener, glancing at the sun-dial, “the tenminutes are almost up; I must return to my post. Will you go up with me?”“I follow you.”Monte Cristo entered the tower, which was divided into three stories. The towercontained implements, such as spades, rakes, watering-pots, hung against thewall; this was all the furniture. The second was the man’s conventionalabode, or rather sleeping-place; it contained a few poor articles of householdfurniture—a bed, a table, two chairs, a stone pitcher—and some dryherbs, hung up to the ceiling, which the count recognized as sweet peas, and ofwhich the good man was preserving the seeds; he had labelled them with as muchcare as if he had been master botanist in the Jardin des Plantes.“Does it require much study to learn the art of telegraphing?”asked Monte Cristo.“The study does not take long; it was acting as a supernumerary that wasso tedious.”“And what is the pay?”“A thousand francs, sir.”“It is nothing.”“No; but then we are lodged, as you perceive.”Monte Cristo looked at the room. They passed to the third story; it was thetelegraph room. Monte Cristo looked in turn at the two iron handles by whichthe machine was worked. “It is very interesting,” he said,“but it must be very tedious for a lifetime.”“Yes. At first my neck was cramped with looking at it, but at the end ofa year I became used to it; and then we have our hours of recreation, and ourholidays.”“Holidays?”“Yes.”“When?”“When we have a fog.”“Ah, to be sure.”“Those are indeed holidays to me; I go into the garden, I plant, I prune,I trim, I kill the insects all day long.”“How long have you been here?”“Ten years, and five as a supernumerary make fifteen.”“You are——”“Fifty-five years old.”“How long must you have served to claim the pension?”“Oh, sir, twenty-five years.”“And how much is the pension?”“A hundred crowns.”“Poor humanity!” murmured Monte Cristo.“What did you say, sir?” asked the man.“I was saying it was very interesting.”“What was?”“All you were showing me. And you really understand none of thesesignals?”“None at all.”“And have you never tried to understand them?”“Never. Why should I?”“But still there are some signals only addressed to you.”“Certainly.”“And do you understand them?”“They are always the same.”“And they mean——”“‘Nothing new; You have an hour;’ or‘Tomorrow.’”“This is simple enough,” said the count; “but look, is notyour correspondent putting itself in motion?”“Ah, yes; thank you, sir.”“And what is it saying—anything you understand?”“Yes; it asks if I am ready.”“And you reply?”“By the same sign, which, at the same time, tells my right-handcorrespondent that I am ready, while it gives notice to my left-handcorrespondent to prepare in his turn.”“It is very ingenious,” said the count.“You will see,” said the man proudly; “in five minutes hewill speak.”“I have, then, five minutes,” said Monte Cristo to himself;“it is more time than I require. My dear sir, will you allow me to askyou a question?”“What is it, sir?”“You are fond of gardening?”“Passionately.”“And you would be pleased to have, instead of this terrace of twentyfeet, an enclosure of two acres?”“Sir, I should make a terrestrial paradise of it.”“You live badly on your thousand francs?”“Badly enough; but yet I do live.”“Yes; but you have a wretchedly small garden.”“True, the garden is not large.”“And, then, such as it is, it is filled with dormice, who eateverything.”“Ah, they are my scourges.”“Tell me, should you have the misfortune to turn your head while yourright-hand correspondent was telegraphing——”“I should not see him.”“Then what would happen?”“I could not repeat the signals.”“And then?”“Not having repeated them, through negligence, I should be fined.”“How much?”“A hundred francs.”“The tenth of your income—that would be fine work.”“Ah!” said the man.“Has it ever happened to you?” said Monte Cristo.“Once, sir, when I was grafting a rose-tree.”“Well, suppose you were to alter a signal, and substitute another?”“Ah, that is another case; I should be turned off, and lose mypension.”“Three hundred francs?”“A hundred crowns, yes, sir; so you see that I am not likely to do any ofthese things.”“Not even for fifteen years’ wages? Come, it is worth thinkingabout?”“For fifteen thousand francs?”“Yes.”“Sir, you alarm me.”“Nonsense.”“Sir, you are tempting me?”“Just so; fifteen thousand francs, do you understand?”“Sir, let me see my right-hand correspondent.”“On the contrary, do not look at him, but at this.”“What is it?”“What? Do you not know these bits of paper?”“Bank-notes!”“Exactly; there are fifteen of them.”“And whose are they?”“Yours, if you like.”“Mine?” exclaimed the man, half-suffocated.“Yes; yours—your own property.”“Sir, my right-hand correspondent is signalling.”“Let him signal.”“Sir, you have distracted me; I shall be fined.”“That will cost you a hundred francs; you see it is your interest to takemy bank-notes.”“Sir, my right-hand correspondent redoubles his signals; he isimpatient.”“Never mind—take these;” and the count placed the packet inthe man’s hands. “Now this is not all,” he said; “youcannot live upon your fifteen thousand francs.”“I shall still have my place.”“No, you will lose it, for you are going to alter yourcorrespondent’s message.”“Oh, sir, what are you proposing?”“A jest.”“Sir, unless you force me——”“I think I can effectually force you;” and Monte Cristo drewanother packet from his pocket. “Here are ten thousand morefrancs,” he said, “with the fifteen thousand already in yourpocket, they will make twenty-five thousand. With five thousand you can buy apretty little house with two acres of land; the remaining twenty thousand willbring you in a thousand francs a year.”“A garden with two acres of land!”“And a thousand francs a year.”“Oh, heavens!”“Come, take them,” and Monte Cristo forced the bank-notes into hishand.“What am I to do?”“Nothing very difficult.”“But what is it?”“To repeat these signs.” Monte Cristo took a paper from his pocket,upon which were drawn three signs, with numbers to indicate the order in whichthey were to be worked.“There, you see it will not take long.”“Yes; but——”“Do this, and you will have nectarines and all the rest.”The shot told; red with fever, while the large drops fell from his brow, theman executed, one after the other, the three signs given by the count, in spiteof the frightful contortions of the right-hand correspondent, who, notunderstanding the change, began to think the gardener had gone mad. As to theleft-hand one, he conscientiously repeated the same signals, which were finallytransmitted to the Minister of the Interior.“Now you are rich,” said Monte Cristo.“Yes,” replied the man, “but at what a price!”“Listen, friend,” said Monte Cristo. “I do not wish to causeyou any remorse; believe me, then, when I swear to you that you have wronged noman, but on the contrary have benefited mankind.”The man looked at the bank-notes, felt them, counted them, turned pale, thenred, then rushed into his room to drink a glass of water, but he had no time toreach the water-jug, and fainted in the midst of his dried herbs. Five minutesafter the new telegram reached the minister, Debray had the horses put to hiscarriage, and drove to Danglars’ house.“Has your husband any Spanish bonds?” he asked of the baroness.“I think so, indeed! He has six millions’ worth.”“He must sell them at whatever price.”“Why?”“Because Don Carlos has fled from Bourges, and has returned toSpain.”“How do you know?” Debray shrugged his shoulders.“The idea of asking how I hear the news,” he said.The baroness did not wait for a repetition; she ran to her husband, whoimmediately hastened to his agent, and ordered him to sell at any price. Whenit was seen that Danglars sold, the Spanish funds fell directly. Danglars lostfive hundred thousand francs; but he rid himself of all his Spanish shares. Thesame evening the following was read in Le Messager:“[By telegraph.] The king, Don Carlos, has escaped the vigilance of hisguardians at Bourges, and has returned to Spain by the Catalonian frontier.Barcelona has risen in his favor.”All that evening nothing was spoken of but the foresight of Danglars, who hadsold his shares, and of the luck of the stock-jobber, who only lost fivehundred thousand francs by such a blow. Those who had kept their shares, orbought those of Danglars, looked upon themselves as ruined, and passed a verybad night. Next morning Le Moniteur contained the following:“It was without any foundation that Le Messager yesterdayannounced the flight of Don Carlos and the revolt of Barcelona. The king (DonCarlos) has not left Bourges, and the peninsula is in the enjoyment of profoundpeace. A telegraphic signal, improperly interpreted, owing to the fog, was thecause of this error.”The funds rose one per cent higher than before they had fallen. This, reckoninghis loss, and what he had missed gaining, made the difference of a million toDanglars.“Good,” said Monte Cristo to Morrel, who was at his house when thenews arrived of the strange reverse of fortune of which Danglars had been thevictim, “I have just made a discovery for twenty-five thousand francs,for which I would have paid a hundred thousand.”“What have you discovered?” asked Morrel.“I have just discovered how a gardener may get rid of the dormice thateat his peaches.” Chapter 62. GhostsAt first sight, theexterior of the house at Auteuil gave no indications of splendor, nothing onewould expect from the destined residence of the magnificent Count of MonteCristo; but this simplicity was according to the will of its master, whopositively ordered nothing to be altered outside. The splendor was within.Indeed, almost before the door opened, the scene changed.M. Bertuccio had outdone himself in the taste displayed in furnishing, and inthe rapidity with which it was executed. It is told that the Duc d’Antinremoved in a single night a whole avenue of trees that annoyed Louis XIV.; inthree days M. Bertuccio planted an entirely bare court with poplars, largespreading sycamores to shade the different parts of the house, and in theforeground, instead of the usual paving-stones, half hidden by the grass, thereextended a lawn but that morning laid down, and upon which the water was yetglistening. For the rest, the orders had been issued by the count; he himselfhad given a plan to Bertuccio, marking the spot where each tree was to beplanted, and the shape and extent of the lawn which was to take the place ofthe paving-stones.Thus the house had become unrecognizable, and Bertuccio himself declared thathe scarcely knew it, encircled as it was by a framework of trees. The overseerwould not have objected, while he was about it, to have made some improvementsin the garden, but the count had positively forbidden it to be touched.Bertuccio made amends, however, by loading the antechambers, staircases, andmantle-pieces with flowers.What, above all, manifested the shrewdness of the steward, and the profoundscience of the master, the one in carrying out the ideas of the other, was thatthis house which appeared only the night before so sad and gloomy, impregnatedwith that sickly smell one can almost fancy to be the smell of time, had in asingle day acquired the aspect of life, was scented with its master’sfavorite perfumes, and had the very light regulated according to his wish. Whenthe count arrived, he had under his touch his books and arms, his eyes restedupon his favorite pictures; his dogs, whose caresses he loved, welcomed him inthe antechamber; the birds, whose songs delighted him, cheered him with theirmusic; and the house, awakened from its long sleep, like the sleeping beauty inthe wood, lived, sang, and bloomed like the houses we have long cherished, andin which, when we are forced to leave them, we leave a part of our souls.The servants passed gayly along the fine courtyard; some, belonging to thekitchens, gliding down the stairs, restored but the previous day, as if theyhad always inhabited the house; others filling the coach-houses, where theequipages, encased and numbered, appeared to have been installed for the lastfifty years; and in the stables the horses replied with neighs to the grooms,who spoke to them with much more respect than many servants pay their masters.The library was divided into two parts on either side of the wall, andcontained upwards of two thousand volumes; one division was entirely devoted tonovels, and even the volume which had been published but the day before was tobe seen in its place in all the dignity of its red and gold binding.On the other side of the house, to match with the library, was theconservatory, ornamented with rare flowers, that bloomed in china jars; and inthe midst of the greenhouse, marvellous alike to sight and smell, was abilliard-table which looked as if it had been abandoned during the past hour byplayers who had left the balls on the cloth.One chamber alone had been respected by the magnificent Bertuccio. Before thisroom, to which you could ascend by the grand, and go out by the back staircase,the servants passed with curiosity, and Bertuccio with terror.At five o’clock precisely, the count arrived before the house at Auteuil,followed by Ali. Bertuccio was awaiting this arrival with impatience, mingledwith uneasiness; he hoped for some compliments, while, at the same time, hefeared to have frowns. Monte Cristo descended into the courtyard, walked allover the house, without giving any sign of approbation or pleasure, until heentered his bedroom, situated on the opposite side to the closed room; then heapproached a little piece of furniture, made of rosewood, which he had noticedat a previous visit.“That can only be to hold gloves,” he said.“Will your excellency deign to open it?” said the delightedBertuccio, “and you will find gloves in it.”Elsewhere the count found everything he required—smelling-bottles,cigars, knick-knacks.“Good,” he said; and M. Bertuccio left enraptured, so great, sopowerful, and real was the influence exercised by this man over all whosurrounded him.At precisely six o’clock the clatter of horses’ hoofs was heard atthe entrance door; it was our captain of Spahis, who had arrived on Médéah.“I am sure I am the first,” cried Morrel; “I did it onpurpose to have you a minute to myself, before everyone came. Julie andEmmanuel have a thousand things to tell you. Ah, really this is magnificent!But tell me, count, will your people take care of my horse?”“Do not alarm yourself, my dear Maximilian—they understand.”“I mean, because he wants petting. If you had seen at what a pace hecame—like the wind!”“I should think so,—a horse that cost 5,000 francs!” saidMonte Cristo, in the tone which a father would use towards a son.“Do you regret them?” asked Morrel, with his open laugh.“I? Certainly not,” replied the count. “No; I should onlyregret if the horse had not proved good.”“It is so good, that I have distanced M. de Château-Renaud, one of thebest riders in France, and M. Debray, who both mount the minister’sArabians; and close on their heels are the horses of Madame Danglars, whoalways go at six leagues an hour.”“Then they follow you?” asked Monte Cristo.“See, they are here.” And at the same minute a carriage withsmoking horses, accompanied by two mounted gentlemen, arrived at the gate,which opened before them. The carriage drove round, and stopped at the steps,followed by the horsemen.The instant Debray had touched the ground, he was at the carriage-door. Heoffered his hand to the baroness, who, descending, took it with a peculiarityof manner imperceptible to everyone but Monte Cristo. But nothing escaped thecount’s notice, and he observed a little note, passed with the facilitythat indicates frequent practice, from the hand of Madame Danglars to that ofthe minister’s secretary.After his wife the banker descended, as pale as though he had issued from histomb instead of his carriage.Madame Danglars threw a rapid and inquiring glance which could only beinterpreted by Monte Cristo, around the courtyard, over the peristyle, andacross the front of the house, then, repressing a slight emotion, which musthave been seen on her countenance if she had not kept her color, she ascendedthe steps, saying to Morrel:“Sir, if you were a friend of mine, I should ask you if you would sellyour horse.”Morrel smiled with an expression very like a grimace, and then turned round toMonte Cristo, as if to ask him to extricate him from his embarrassment. Thecount understood him.“Ah, madame,” he said, “why did you not make that request ofme?”“With you, sir,” replied the baroness, “one can wish fornothing, one is so sure to obtain it. If it were so with M.Morrel——”“Unfortunately,” replied the count, “I am witness that M.Morrel cannot give up his horse, his honor being engaged in keeping it.”“How so?”“He laid a wager he would tame Médéah in the space of six months. Youunderstand now that if he were to get rid of the animal before the time named,he would not only lose his bet, but people would say he was afraid; and a bravecaptain of Spahis cannot risk this, even to gratify a pretty woman, which is,in my opinion, one of the most sacred obligations in the world.”“You see my position, madame,” said Morrel, bestowing a gratefulsmile on Monte Cristo.“It seems to me,” said Danglars, in his coarse tone, ill-concealedby a forced smile, “that you have already got horses enough.”Madame Danglars seldom allowed remarks of this kind to pass unnoticed, but, tothe surprise of the young people, she pretended not to hear it, and saidnothing. Monte Cristo smiled at her unusual humility, and showed her twoimmense porcelain jars, over which wound marine plants, of a size and delicacythat nature alone could produce. The baroness was astonished.“Why,” said she, “you could plant one of the chestnut-treesin the Tuileries inside! How can such enormous jars have beenmanufactured?”“Ah! madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “you must not ask of us,the manufacturers of fine porcelain, such a question. It is the work of anotherage, constructed by the genii of earth and water.”“How so?—at what period can that have been?”“I do not know; I have only heard that an emperor of China had an ovenbuilt expressly, and that in this oven twelve jars like this were successivelybaked. Two broke, from the heat of the fire; the other ten were sunk threehundred fathoms deep into the sea. The sea, knowing what was required of her,threw over them her weeds, encircled them with coral, and encrusted them withshells; the whole was cemented by two hundred years beneath these almostimpervious depths, for a revolution carried away the emperor who wished to makethe trial, and only left the documents proving the manufacture of the jars andtheir descent into the sea. At the end of two hundred years the documents werefound, and they thought of bringing up the jars. Divers descended in machines,made expressly on the discovery, into the bay where they were thrown; but often three only remained, the rest having been broken by the waves. I am fond ofthese jars, upon which, perhaps, misshapen, frightful monsters have fixed theircold, dull eyes, and in which myriads of small fish have slept, seeking arefuge from the pursuit of their enemies.”Meanwhile, Danglars, who had cared little for curiosities, was mechanicallytearing off the blossoms of a splendid orange-tree, one after another. When hehad finished with the orange-tree, he began at the cactus; but this, not beingso easily plucked as the orange-tree, pricked him dreadfully. He shuddered, andrubbed his eyes as though awaking from a dream.“Sir,” said Monte Cristo to him, “I do not recommend mypictures to you, who possess such splendid paintings; but, nevertheless, hereare two by Hobbema, a Paul Potter, a Mieris, two by Gerard Douw, a Raphael, aVan Dyck, a Zurbaran, and two or three by Murillo, worth looking at.”“Stay,” said Debray; “I recognize this Hobbema.”“Ah, indeed!”“Yes; it was proposed for the Museum.”“Which, I believe, does not contain one?” said Monte Cristo.“No; and yet they refused to buy it.”“Why?” said Château-Renaud.“You pretend not to know,—because government was not richenough.”“Ah, pardon me,” said Château-Renaud; “I have heard of thesethings every day during the last eight years, and I cannot understand themyet.”“You will, by and by,” said Debray.“I think not,” replied Château-Renaud.“Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and Count Andrea Cavalcanti,”announced Baptistin.A black satin stock, fresh from the maker’s hands, gray moustaches, abold eye, a major’s uniform, ornamented with three medals and fivecrosses—in fact, the thorough bearing of an old soldier—such wasthe appearance of Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, that tender father with whom weare already acquainted. Close to him, dressed in entirely new clothes, advancedsmilingly Count Andrea Cavalcanti, the dutiful son, whom we also know. Thethree young people were talking together. On the entrance of the new-comers,their eyes glanced from father to son, and then, naturally enough, rested onthe latter, whom they began criticising.“Cavalcanti!” said Debray.“A fine name,” said Morrel.“Yes,” said Château-Renaud, “these Italians are well namedand badly dressed.”“You are fastidious, Château-Renaud,” replied Debray; “thoseclothes are well cut and quite new.”“That is just what I find fault with. That gentleman appears to be welldressed for the first time in his life.”“Who are those gentlemen?” asked Danglars of Monte Cristo.“You heard—Cavalcanti.”“That tells me their name, and nothing else.”“Ah! true. You do not know the Italian nobility; the Cavalcanti are alldescended from princes.”“Have they any fortune?”“An enormous one.”“What do they do?”“Try to spend it all. They have some business with you, I think, fromwhat they told me the day before yesterday. I, indeed, invited them here todayon your account. I will introduce you to them.”“But they appear to speak French with a very pure accent,” saidDanglars.“The son has been educated in a college in the south; I believe nearMarseilles. You will find him quite enthusiastic.”“Upon what subject?” asked Madame Danglars.“The French ladies, madame. He has made up his mind to take a wife fromParis.”“A fine idea that of his,” said Danglars, shrugging his shoulders.Madame Danglars looked at her husband with an expression which, at any othertime, would have indicated a storm, but for the second time she controlledherself.“The baron appears thoughtful today,” said Monte Cristo to her;“are they going to put him in the ministry?”“Not yet, I think. More likely he has been speculating on the Bourse, andhas lost money.”“M. and Madame de Villefort,” cried Baptistin.They entered. M. de Villefort, notwithstanding his self-control, was visiblyaffected, and when Monte Cristo touched his hand, he felt it tremble.“Certainly, women alone know how to dissimulate,” said Monte Cristoto himself, glancing at Madame Danglars, who was smiling on the procureur, andembracing his wife.After a short time, the count saw Bertuccio, who, until then, had been occupiedon the other side of the house, glide into an adjoining room. He went to him.“What do you want, M. Bertuccio?” said he.“Your excellency has not stated the number of guests.”“Ah, true.”“How many covers?”“Count for yourself.”“Is everyone here, your excellency?”“Yes.”Bertuccio glanced through the door, which was ajar. The count watched him.“Good heavens!” he exclaimed.“What is the matter?” said the count.“That woman—that woman!”“Which?”“The one with a white dress and so many diamonds—the fairone.”“Madame Danglars?”“I do not know her name; but it is she, sir, it is she!”“Whom do you mean?”“The woman of the garden!—she that was enceinte—shewho was walking while she waited for——”Bertuccio stood at the open door, with his eyes starting and his hair on end.“Waiting for whom?” Bertuccio, without answering, pointed toVillefort with something of the gesture Macbeth uses to point out Banquo.“Oh, oh!” he at length muttered, “do you see?”“What? Who?”“Him!”“Him!—M. de Villefort, the king’s attorney? Certainly I seehim.”“Then I did not kill him?”“Really, I think you are going mad, good Bertuccio,” said thecount.“Then he is not dead?”“No; you see plainly he is not dead. Instead of striking between thesixth and seventh left ribs, as your countrymen do, you must have struck higheror lower, and life is very tenacious in these lawyers, or rather there is notruth in anything you have told me—it was a fright of the imagination, adream of your fancy. You went to sleep full of thoughts of vengeance; theyweighed heavily upon your stomach; you had the nightmare—that’sall. Come, calm yourself, and reckon them up—M. and Madame de Villefort,two; M. and Madame Danglars, four; M. de Château-Renaud, M. Debray, M. Morrel,seven; Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti, eight.”“Eight!” repeated Bertuccio.“Stop! You are in a shocking hurry to be off—you forget one of myguests. Lean a little to the left. Stay! look at M. Andrea Cavalcanti, theyoung man in a black coat, looking at Murillo’s ‘Madonna’;now he is turning.”This time Bertuccio would have uttered an exclamation, had not a look fromMonte Cristo silenced him.“Benedetto?” he muttered; “fatality!”“Half-past six o’clock has just struck, M. Bertuccio,” saidthe count severely; “I ordered dinner at that hour, and I do not like towait;” and he returned to his guests, while Bertuccio, leaning againstthe wall, succeeded in reaching the dining-room. Five minutes afterwards thedoors of the drawing-room were thrown open, and Bertuccio appearing said, witha violent effort, “The dinner waits.”The Count of Monte Cristo offered his arm to Madame de Villefort. “M. deVillefort,” he said, “will you conduct the BaronessDanglars?”Villefort complied, and they passed on to the dining-room. Chapter 63. The DinnerIt was evident that onesentiment affected all the guests on entering the dining-room. Each one askedwhat strange influence had brought them to this house, and yet astonished, evenuneasy though they were, they still felt that they would not like to be absent.The recent events, the solitary and eccentric position of the count, hisenormous, nay, almost incredible fortune, should have made men cautious, andhave altogether prevented ladies visiting a house where there was no one oftheir own sex to receive them; and yet curiosity had been enough to lead themto overleap the bounds of prudence and decorum.And all present, even including Cavalcanti and his son, notwithstanding thestiffness of the one and the carelessness of the other, were thoughtful, onfinding themselves assembled at the house of this incomprehensible man. MadameDanglars had started when Villefort, on the count’s invitation, offeredhis arm; and Villefort felt that his glance was uneasy beneath his goldspectacles, when he felt the arm of the baroness press upon his own. None ofthis had escaped the count, and even by this mere contact of individuals thescene had already acquired considerable interest for an observer.M. de Villefort had on the right hand Madame Danglars, on his left Morrel. Thecount was seated between Madame de Villefort and Danglars; the other seats werefilled by Debray, who was placed between the two Cavalcanti, and byChâteau-Renaud, seated between Madame de Villefort and Morrel.The repast was magnificent; Monte Cristo had endeavored completely to overturnthe Parisian ideas, and to feed the curiosity as much as the appetite of hisguests. It was an Oriental feast that he offered to them, but of such a kind asthe Arabian fairies might be supposed to prepare. Every delicious fruit thatthe four quarters of the globe could provide was heaped in vases from China andjars from Japan. Rare birds, retaining their most brilliant plumage, enormousfish, spread upon massive silver dishes, together with every wine produced inthe Archipelago, Asia Minor, or the Cape, sparkling in bottles, whose grotesqueshape seemed to give an additional flavor to the draught,—all these, likeone of the displays with which Apicius of old gratified his guests, passed inreview before the eyes of the astonished Parisians, who understood that it waspossible to expend a thousand louis upon a dinner for ten persons, but only onthe condition of eating pearls, like Cleopatra, or drinking refined gold, likeLorenzo de’ Medici.Monte Cristo noticed the general astonishment, and began laughing and jokingabout it.“Gentlemen,” he said, “you will admit that, when arrived at acertain degree of fortune, the superfluities of life are all that can bedesired; and the ladies will allow that, after having risen to a certaineminence of position, the ideal alone can be more exalted. Now, to follow outthis reasoning, what is the marvellous?—that which we do not understand.What is it that we really desire?—that which we cannot obtain. Now, tosee things which I cannot understand, to procure impossibilities, these are thestudy of my life. I gratify my wishes by two means—my will and my money.I take as much interest in the pursuit of some whim as you do, M. Danglars, inpromoting a new railway line; you, M. de Villefort, in condemning a culprit todeath; you, M. Debray, in pacifying a kingdom; you, M. de Château-Renaud, inpleasing a woman; and you, Morrel, in breaking a horse that no one can ride.For example, you see these two fish; one brought from fifty leagues beyond St.Petersburg, the other five leagues from Naples. Is it not amusing to see themboth on the same table?”“What are the two fish?” asked Danglars.“M. Château-Renaud, who has lived in Russia, will tell you the name ofone, and Major Cavalcanti, who is an Italian, will tell you the name of theother.”“This one is, I think, a sterlet,” said Château-Renaud.“And that one, if I mistake not, a lamprey.”“Just so. Now, M. Danglars, ask these gentlemen where they arecaught.”“Sterlets,” said Château-Renaud, “are only found in theVolga.”“And,” said Cavalcanti, “I know that Lake Fusaro alonesupplies lampreys of that size.”“Exactly; one comes from the Volga, and the other from LakeFusaro.”“Impossible!” cried all the guests simultaneously.“Well, this is just what amuses me,” said Monte Cristo. “I amlike Nero—cupitor impossibilium; and that is what is amusing youat this moment. This fish, which seems so exquisite to you, is very likely nobetter than perch or salmon; but it seemed impossible to procure it, and hereit is.”“But how could you have these fish brought to France?”“Oh, nothing more easy. Each fish was brought over in a cask—onefilled with river herbs and weeds, the other with rushes and lake plants; theywere placed in a wagon built on purpose, and thus the sterlet lived twelvedays, the lamprey eight, and both were alive when my cook seized them, killingone with milk and the other with wine. You do not believe me, M.Danglars!”“I cannot help doubting,” answered Danglars with his stupid smile.“Baptistin,” said the count, “have the other fish broughtin—the sterlet and the lamprey which came in the other casks, and whichare yet alive.”Danglars opened his bewildered eyes; the company clapped their hands. Fourservants carried in two casks covered with aquatic plants, and in each of whichwas breathing a fish similar to those on the table.“But why have two of each sort?” asked Danglars.“Merely because one might have died,” carelessly answered MonteCristo.“You are certainly an extraordinary man,” said Danglars; “andphilosophers may well say it is a fine thing to be rich.”“And to have ideas,” added Madame Danglars.“Oh, do not give me credit for this, madame; it was done by the Romans,who much esteemed them, and Pliny relates that they sent slaves from Ostia toRome, who carried on their heads fish which he calls the mulus, andwhich, from the description, must probably be the goldfish. It was alsoconsidered a luxury to have them alive, it being an amusing sight to see themdie, for, when dying, they change color three or four times, and like therainbow when it disappears, pass through all the prismatic shades, after whichthey were sent to the kitchen. Their agony formed part of their merit—ifthey were not seen alive, they were despised when dead.”“Yes,” said Debray, “but then Ostia is only a few leaguesfrom Rome.”“True,” said Monte Cristo; “but what would be the use ofliving eighteen hundred years after Lucullus, if we can do no better than hecould?”The two Cavalcanti opened their enormous eyes, but had the good sense not tosay anything.“All this is very extraordinary,” said Château-Renaud;“still, what I admire the most, I confess, is the marvellous promptitudewith which your orders are executed. Is it not true that you only bought thishouse five or six days ago?”“Certainly not longer.”“Well, I am sure it is quite transformed since last week. If I rememberrightly, it had another entrance, and the courtyard was paved and empty; whiletoday we have a splendid lawn, bordered by trees which appear to be a hundredyears old.”“Why not? I am fond of grass and shade,” said Monte Cristo.“Yes,” said Madame de Villefort, “the door was towards theroad before, and on the day of my miraculous escape you brought me into thehouse from the road, I remember.”“Yes, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “but I preferred having anentrance which would allow me to see the Bois de Boulogne over my gate.”“In four days,” said Morrel; “it is extraordinary!”“Indeed,” said Château-Renaud, “it seems quite miraculous tomake a new house out of an old one; for it was very old, and dull too. Irecollect coming for my mother to look at it when M. de Saint-Méran advertisedit for sale two or three years ago.”“M. de Saint-Méran?” said Madame de Villefort; “then thishouse belonged to M. de Saint-Méran before you bought it?”“It appears so,” replied Monte Cristo.“Is it possible that you do not know of whom you purchased it?”“Quite so; my steward transacts all this business for me.”“It is certainly ten years since the house had been occupied,” saidChâteau-Renaud, “and it was quite melancholy to look at it, with theblinds closed, the doors locked, and the weeds in the court. Really, if thehouse had not belonged to the father-in-law of the procureur, one might havethought it some accursed place where a horrible crime had beencommitted.”Villefort, who had hitherto not tasted the three or four glasses of rare winewhich were placed before him, here took one, and drank it off. Monte Cristoallowed a short time to elapse, and then said:“It is singular, baron, but the same idea came across me the first time Icame here; it looked so gloomy I should never have bought it if my steward hadnot taken the matter into his own hands. Perhaps the fellow had been bribed bythe notary.”“It is probable,” stammered out Villefort, trying to smile;“but I can assure you that I had nothing to do with any such proceeding.This house is part of Valentine’s marriage-portion, and M. de Saint-Méranwished to sell it; for if it had remained another year or two uninhabited itwould have fallen to ruin.”It was Morrel’s turn to become pale.“There was, above all, one room,” continued Monte Cristo,“very plain in appearance, hung with red damask, which, I know not why,appeared to me quite dramatic.”“Why so?” said Danglars; “why dramatic?”“Can we account for instinct?” said Monte Cristo. “Are therenot some places where we seem to breathe sadness?—why, we cannot tell. Itis a chain of recollections—an idea which carries you back to othertimes, to other places—which, very likely, have no connection with thepresent time and place. And there is something in this room which reminds meforcibly of the chamber of the Marquise deGanges[10]or Desdemona. Stay, since we have finished dinner, I will show it to you, andthen we will take coffee in the garden. After dinner, the play.”Monte Cristo looked inquiringly at his guests. Madame de Villefort rose, MonteCristo did the same, and the rest followed their example. Villefort and MadameDanglars remained for a moment, as if rooted to their seats; they questionedeach other with vague and stupid glances.“Did you hear?” said Madame Danglars.“We must go,” replied Villefort, offering his arm.The others, attracted by curiosity, were already scattered in different partsof the house; for they thought the visit would not be limited to the one room,and that, at the same time, they would obtain a view of the rest of thebuilding, of which Monte Cristo had created a palace. Each one went out by theopen doors. Monte Cristo waited for the two who remained; then, when they hadpassed, he brought up the rear, and on his face was a smile, which, if theycould have understood it, would have alarmed them much more than a visit to theroom they were about to enter. They began by walking through the apartments,many of which were fitted up in the Eastern style, with cushions and divansinstead of beds, and pipes instead of furniture. The drawing-rooms weredecorated with the rarest pictures by the old masters, the boudoirs hung withdraperies from China, of fanciful colors, fantastic design, and wonderfultexture. At length they arrived at the famous room. There was nothingparticular about it, excepting that, although daylight had disappeared, it wasnot lighted, and everything in it was old-fashioned, while the rest of therooms had been redecorated. These two causes were enough to give it a gloomyaspect.“Oh.” cried Madame de Villefort, “it is reallyfrightful.”Madame Danglars tried to utter a few words, but was not heard. Manyobservations were made, the import of which was a unanimous opinion that therewas something sinister about the room.“Is it not so?” asked Monte Cristo. “Look at that largeclumsy bed, hung with such gloomy, blood-colored drapery! And those two crayonportraits, that have faded from the dampness; do they not seem to say, withtheir pale lips and staring eyes, ‘We have seen’?”Villefort became livid; Madame Danglars fell into a long seat placed near thechimney.“Oh,” said Madame de Villefort, smiling, “are you courageousenough to sit down upon the very seat perhaps upon which the crime wascommitted?”Madame Danglars rose suddenly.“And then,” said Monte Cristo, “this is not all.”“What is there more?” said Debray, who had not failed to notice theagitation of Madame Danglars.“Ah, what else is there?” said Danglars; “for, at present, Icannot say that I have seen anything extraordinary. What do you say, M.Cavalcanti?”“Ah,” said he, “we have at Pisa, Ugolino’s tower; atFerrara, Tasso’s prison; at Rimini, the room of Francesca andPaolo.”“Yes, but you have not this little staircase,” said Monte Cristo,opening a door concealed by the drapery. “Look at it, and tell me whatyou think of it.”“What a wicked-looking, crooked staircase,” said Château-Renaudwith a smile.“I do not know whether the wine of Chios produces melancholy, butcertainly everything appears to me black in this house,” said Debray.Ever since Valentine’s dowry had been mentioned, Morrel had been silentand sad.“Can you imagine,” said Monte Cristo, “some Othello or Abbéde Ganges, one stormy, dark night, descending these stairs step by step,carrying a load, which he wishes to hide from the sight of man, if not fromGod?”Madame Danglars half fainted on the arm of Villefort, who was obliged tosupport himself against the wall.“Ah, madame,” cried Debray, “what is the matter with you? howpale you look!”“It is very evident what is the matter with her,” said Madame deVillefort; “M. de Monte Cristo is relating horrible stories to us,doubtless intending to frighten us to death.”“Yes,” said Villefort, “really, count, you frighten theladies.”“What is the matter?” asked Debray, in a whisper, of MadameDanglars.“Nothing,” she replied with a violent effort. “I want air,that is all.”“Will you come into the garden?” said Debray, advancing towards theback staircase.“No, no,” she answered, “I would rather remain here.”“Are you really frightened, madame?” said Monte Cristo.“Oh, no, sir,” said Madame Danglars; “but you suppose scenesin a manner which gives them the appearance of reality.”“Ah, yes,” said Monte Cristo smiling; “it is all a matter ofimagination. Why should we not imagine this the apartment of an honest mother?And this bed with red hangings, a bed visited by the goddess Lucina? And thatmysterious staircase, the passage through which, not to disturb their sleep,the doctor and nurse pass, or even the father carrying the sleepingchild?”Here Madame Danglars, instead of being calmed by the soft picture, uttered agroan and fainted.“Madame Danglars is ill,” said Villefort; “it would be betterto take her to her carriage.”“Oh, mon Dieu!” said Monte Cristo, “and I haveforgotten my smelling-bottle!”“I have mine,” said Madame de Villefort; and she passed over toMonte Cristo a bottle full of the same kind of red liquid whose good propertiesthe count had tested on Edward.“Ah,” said Monte Cristo, taking it from her hand.“Yes,” she said, “at your advice I have made thetrial.”“And have you succeeded?”“I think so.”Madame Danglars was carried into the adjoining room; Monte Cristo dropped avery small portion of the red liquid upon her lips; she returned toconsciousness.“Ah,” she cried, “what a frightful dream!”Villefort pressed her hand to let her know it was not a dream. They looked forM. Danglars, but, as he was not especially interested in poetical ideas, he hadgone into the garden, and was talking with Major Cavalcanti on the projectedrailway from Leghorn to Florence. Monte Cristo seemed in despair. He took thearm of Madame Danglars, and conducted her into the garden, where they foundDanglars taking coffee between the Cavalcanti.“Really, madame,” he said, “did I alarm you much?”“Oh, no, sir,” she answered; “but you know, things impress usdifferently, according to the mood of our minds.” Villefort forced alaugh.“And then, you know,” he said, “an idea, a supposition, issufficient.”“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you may believe me if you like,but it is my opinion that a crime has been committed in this house.”“Take care,” said Madame de Villefort, “the king’sattorney is here.”“Ah,” replied Monte Cristo, “since that is the case, I willtake advantage of his presence to make my declaration.”“Your declaration?” said Villefort.“Yes, before witnesses.”“Oh, this is very interesting,” said Debray; “if there reallyhas been a crime, we will investigate it.”“There has been a crime,” said Monte Cristo. “Come this way,gentlemen; come, M. Villefort, for a declaration to be available, should bemade before the competent authorities.”He then took Villefort’s arm, and, at the same time, holding that ofMadame Danglars under his own, he dragged the procureur to the plantain-tree,where the shade was thickest. All the other guests followed.“Stay,” said Monte Cristo, “here, in this very spot”(and he stamped upon the ground), “I had the earth dug up and fresh mouldput in, to refresh these old trees; well, my man, digging, found a box, orrather, the iron-work of a box, in the midst of which was the skeleton of anewly born infant.”Monte Cristo felt the arm of Madame Danglars stiffen, while that of Villeforttrembled.“A newly born infant,” repeated Debray; “this affair becomesserious!”“Well,” said Château-Renaud, “I was not wrong just now then,when I said that houses had souls and faces like men, and that their exteriorscarried the impress of their characters. This house was gloomy because it wasremorseful: it was remorseful because it concealed a crime.”“Who said it was a crime?” asked Villefort, with a last effort.“How? is it not a crime to bury a living child in a garden?” criedMonte Cristo. “And pray what do you call such an action?”“But who said it was buried alive?”“Why bury it there if it were dead? This garden has never been acemetery.”“What is done to infanticides in this country?” asked MajorCavalcanti innocently.“Oh, their heads are soon cut off,” said Danglars.“Ah, indeed?” said Cavalcanti.“I think so; am I not right, M. de Villefort?” asked Monte Cristo.“Yes, count,” replied Villefort, in a voice now scarcely human.Monte Cristo, seeing that the two persons for whom he had prepared this scenecould scarcely endure it, and not wishing to carry it too far, said:“Come, gentlemen,—some coffee, we seem to have forgotten it,”and he conducted the guests back to the table on the lawn.“Indeed, count,” said Madame Danglars, “I am ashamed to ownit, but all your frightful stories have so upset me, that I must beg you to letme sit down;” and she fell into a chair.Monte Cristo bowed, and went to Madame de Villefort.“I think Madame Danglars again requires your bottle,” he said. Butbefore Madame de Villefort could reach her friend, the procureur had found timeto whisper to Madame Danglars, “I must speak to you.”“When?”“Tomorrow.”“Where?”“In my office, or in the court, if you like,—that is the surestplace.”“I will be there.”At this moment Madame de Villefort approached.“Thanks, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, trying to smile;“it is over now, and I am much better.” Chapter 64. The BeggarThe evening passed on;Madame de Villefort expressed a desire to return to Paris, which MadameDanglars had not dared to do, notwithstanding the uneasiness she experienced.On his wife’s request, M. de Villefort was the first to give the signalof departure. He offered a seat in his landau to Madame Danglars, that shemight be under the care of his wife. As for M. Danglars, absorbed in aninteresting conversation with M. Cavalcanti, he paid no attention to anythingthat was passing. While Monte Cristo had begged the smelling-bottle of Madamede Villefort, he had noticed the approach of Villefort to Madame Danglars, andhe soon guessed all that had passed between them, though the words had beenuttered in so low a voice as hardly to be heard by Madame Danglars. Withoutopposing their arrangements, he allowed Morrel, Château-Renaud, and Debray toleave on horseback, and the ladies in M. de Villefort’s carriage.Danglars, more and more delighted with Major Cavalcanti, had offered him a seatin his carriage. Andrea Cavalcanti found his tilbury waiting at the door; thegroom, in every respect a caricature of the English fashion, was standing ontiptoe to hold a large iron-gray horse.Andrea had spoken very little during dinner; he was an intelligent lad, and hefeared to utter some absurdity before so many grand people, amongst whom, withdilating eyes, he saw the king’s attorney. Then he had been seized uponby Danglars, who, with a rapid glance at the stiff-necked old major and hismodest son, and taking into consideration the hospitality of the count, made uphis mind that he was in the society of some nabob come to Paris to finish theworldly education of his heir. He contemplated with unspeakable delight thelarge diamond which shone on the major’s little finger; for the major,like a prudent man, in case of any accident happening to his bank-notes, hadimmediately converted them into an available asset. Then, after dinner, on thepretext of business, he questioned the father and son upon their mode ofliving; and the father and son, previously informed that it was throughDanglars the one was to receive his 48,000 francs and the other 50,000 livresannually, were so full of affability that they would have shaken hands evenwith the banker’s servants, so much did their gratitude need an object toexpend itself upon.One thing above all the rest heightened the respect, nay almost the veneration,of Danglars for Cavalcanti. The latter, faithful to the principle of Horace,nil admirari, had contented himself with showing his knowledge bydeclaring in what lake the best lampreys were caught. Then he had eaten somewithout saying a word more; Danglars, therefore, concluded that such luxurieswere common at the table of the illustrious descendant of the Cavalcanti, whomost likely in Lucca fed upon trout brought from Switzerland, and lobsters sentfrom England, by the same means used by the count to bring the lampreys fromLake Fusaro, and the sterlet from the Volga. Thus it was with much politenessof manner that he heard Cavalcanti pronounce these words:“Tomorrow, sir, I shall have the honor of waiting upon you onbusiness.”“And I, sir,” said Danglars, “shall be most happy to receiveyou.”Upon which he offered to take Cavalcanti in his carriage to the Hôtel desPrinces, if it would not be depriving him of the company of his son. To thisCavalcanti replied by saying that for some time past his son had livedindependently of him, that he had his own horses and carriages, and that nothaving come together, it would not be difficult for them to leave separately.The major seated himself, therefore, by the side of Danglars, who was more andmore charmed with the ideas of order and economy which ruled this man, and yetwho, being able to allow his son 60,000 francs a year, might be supposed topossess a fortune of 500,000 or 600,000 livres.As for Andrea, he began, by way of showing off, to scold his groom, who,instead of bringing the tilbury to the steps of the house, had taken it to theouter door, thus giving him the trouble of walking thirty steps to reach it.The groom heard him with humility, took the bit of the impatient animal withhis left hand, and with the right held out the reins to Andrea, who, takingthem from him, rested his polished boot lightly on the step.At that moment a hand touched his shoulder. The young man turned round,thinking that Danglars or Monte Cristo had forgotten something they wished totell him, and had returned just as they were starting. But instead of either ofthese, he saw nothing but a strange face, sunburnt, and encircled by a beard,with eyes brilliant as carbuncles, and a smile upon the mouth which displayed aperfect set of white teeth, pointed and sharp as the wolf’s orjackal’s. A red handkerchief encircled his gray head; torn and filthygarments covered his large bony limbs, which seemed as though, like those of askeleton, they would rattle as he walked; and the hand with which he leanedupon the young man’s shoulder, and which was the first thing Andrea saw,seemed of gigantic size.Did the young man recognize that face by the light of the lantern in histilbury, or was he merely struck with the horrible appearance of hisinterrogator? We cannot say; but only relate the fact that he shuddered andstepped back suddenly.“What do you want of me?” he asked.“Pardon me, my friend, if I disturb you,” said the man with the redhandkerchief, “but I want to speak to you.”“You have no right to beg at night,” said the groom, endeavoring torid his master of the troublesome intruder.“I am not begging, my fine fellow,” said the unknown to theservant, with so ironical an expression of the eye, and so frightful a smile,that he withdrew; “I only wish to say two or three words to your master,who gave me a commission to execute about a fortnight ago.”“Come,” said Andrea, with sufficient nerve for his servant not toperceive his agitation, “what do you want? Speak quickly, friend.”The man said, in a low voice: “I wish—I wish you to spare me thewalk back to Paris. I am very tired, and as I have not eaten so good a dinneras you, I can scarcely stand.”The young man shuddered at this strange familiarity.“Tell me,” he said—“tell me what you want?”“Well, then, I want you to take me up in your fine carriage, and carry meback.” Andrea turned pale, but said nothing.“Yes,” said the man, thrusting his hands into his pockets, andlooking impudently at the youth; “I have taken the whim into my head; doyou understand, Master Benedetto?”At this name, no doubt, the young man reflected a little, for he went towardshis groom, saying:“This man is right; I did indeed charge him with a commission, the resultof which he must tell me; walk to the barrier, there take a cab, that you maynot be too late.”The surprised groom retired.“Let me at least reach a shady spot,” said Andrea.“Oh, as for that, I’ll take you to a splendid place,” saidthe man with the handkerchief; and taking the horse’s bit he led thetilbury where it was certainly impossible for anyone to witness the honor thatAndrea conferred upon him.“Don’t think I want the glory of riding in your finecarriage,” said he; “oh, no, it’s only because I am tired,and also because I have a little business to talk over with you.”“Come, step in,” said the young man. It was a pity this scene hadnot occurred in daylight, for it was curious to see this rascal throwinghimself heavily down on the cushion beside the young and elegant driver of thetilbury. Andrea drove past the last house in the village without saying a wordto his companion, who smiled complacently, as though well-pleased to findhimself travelling in so comfortable a vehicle. Once out of Auteuil, Andrealooked around, in order to assure himself that he could neither be seen norheard, and then, stopping the horse and crossing his arms before the man, heasked:“Now, tell me why you come to disturb my tranquillity?”“Let me ask you why you deceived me?”“How have I deceived you?”“‘How,’ do you ask? When we parted at the Pont du Var, youtold me you were going to travel through Piedmont and Tuscany; but instead ofthat, you come to Paris.”“How does that annoy you?”“It does not; on the contrary, I think it will answer my purpose.”“So,” said Andrea, “you are speculating upon me?”“What fine words he uses!”“I warn you, Master Caderousse, that you are mistaken.”“Well, well, don’t be angry, my boy; you know well enough what itis to be unfortunate; and misfortunes make us jealous. I thought you wereearning a living in Tuscany or Piedmont by acting as facchino orcicerone, and I pitied you sincerely, as I would a child of my own. Youknow I always did call you my child.”“Come, come, what then?”“Patience—patience!”“I am patient, but go on.”“All at once I see you pass through the barrier with a groom, a tilbury,and fine new clothes. You must have discovered a mine, or else become astockbroker.”“So that, as you confess, you are jealous?”“No, I am pleased—so pleased that I wished to congratulate you; butas I am not quite properly dressed, I chose my opportunity, that I might notcompromise you.”“Yes, and a fine opportunity you have chosen!” exclaimed Andrea;“you speak to me before my servant.”“How can I help that, my boy? I speak to you when I can catch you. Youhave a quick horse, a light tilbury, you are naturally as slippery as an eel;if I had missed you tonight, I might not have had another chance.”“You see, I do not conceal myself.”“You are lucky; I wish I could say as much, for I do conceal myself; andthen I was afraid you would not recognize me, but you did,” addedCaderousse with his unpleasant smile. “It was very polite of you.”“Come,” said Andrea, “what do you want?”“You do not speak affectionately to me, Benedetto, my old friend, that isnot right—take care, or I may become troublesome.”This menace smothered the young man’s passion. He urged the horse againinto a trot.“You should not speak so to an old friend like me, Caderousse, as yousaid just now; you are a native of Marseilles, I am——”“Do you know then now what you are?”“No, but I was brought up in Corsica; you are old and obstinate, I amyoung and wilful. Between people like us threats are out of place, everythingshould be amicably arranged. Is it my fault if fortune, which has frowned onyou, has been kind to me?”“Fortune has been kind to you, then? Your tilbury, your groom, yourclothes, are not then hired? Good, so much the better,” said Caderousse,his eyes sparkling with avarice.“Oh, you knew that well enough before speaking to me,” said Andrea,becoming more and more excited. “If I had been wearing a handkerchieflike yours on my head, rags on my back, and worn-out shoes on my feet, youwould not have known me.”“You wrong me, my boy; now I have found you, nothing prevents my being aswell-dressed as anyone, knowing, as I do, the goodness of your heart. If youhave two coats you will give me one of them. I used to divide my soup and beanswith you when you were hungry.”“True,” said Andrea.“What an appetite you used to have! Is it as good now?”“Oh, yes,” replied Andrea, laughing.“How did you come to be dining with that prince whose house you have justleft?”“He is not a prince; simply a count.”“A count, and a rich one too, eh?”“Yes; but you had better not have anything to say to him, for he is not avery good-tempered gentleman.”“Oh, be easy! I have no design upon your count, and you shall have himall to yourself. But,” said Caderousse, again smiling with thedisagreeable expression he had before assumed, “you must pay forit—you understand?”“Well, what do you want?”“I think that with a hundred francs a month——”“Well?”“I could live——”“Upon a hundred francs!”“Come—you understand me; but that with——”“With?”“With a hundred and fifty francs I should be quite happy.”“Here are two hundred,” said Andrea; and he placed ten gold louisin the hand of Caderousse.“Good!” said Caderousse.“Apply to the steward on the first day of every month, and you willreceive the same sum.”“There now, again you degrade me.”“How so?”“By making me apply to the servants, when I want to transact businesswith you alone.”“Well, be it so, then. Take it from me then, and so long at least as Ireceive my income, you shall be paid yours.”“Come, come; I always said you were a fine fellow, and it is a blessingwhen good fortune happens to such as you. But tell me all about it?”“Why do you wish to know?” asked Cavalcanti.“What? do you again defy me?”“No; the fact is, I have found my father.”“What? a real father?”“Yes, so long as he pays me——”“You’ll honor and believe him—that’s right. What is hisname?”“Major Cavalcanti.”“Is he pleased with you?”“So far I have appeared to answer his purpose.”“And who found this father for you?”“The Count of Monte Cristo.”“The man whose house you have just left?”“Yes.”“I wish you would try and find me a situation with him as grandfather,since he holds the money-chest!”“Well, I will mention you to him. Meanwhile, what are you going todo?”“I?”“Yes, you.”“It is very kind of you to trouble yourself about me.”“Since you interest yourself in my affairs, I think it is now my turn toask you some questions.”“Ah, true. Well; I shall rent a room in some respectable house, wear adecent coat, shave every day, and go and read the papers in a café. Then, inthe evening, I shall go to the theatre; I shall look like some retired baker.That is what I want.”“Come, if you will only put this scheme into execution, and be steady,nothing could be better.”“Do you think so, M. Bossuet? And you—what will you become? A peerof France?”“Ah,” said Andrea, “who knows?”“Major Cavalcanti is already one, perhaps; but then, hereditary rank isabolished.”“No politics, Caderousse. And now that you have all you want, and that weunderstand each other, jump down from the tilbury and disappear.”“Not at all, my good friend.”“How? Not at all?”“Why, just think for a moment; with this red handkerchief on my head,with scarcely any shoes, no papers, and ten gold napoleons in my pocket,without reckoning what was there before—making in all about two hundredfrancs,—why, I should certainly be arrested at the barriers. Then, tojustify myself, I should say that you gave me the money; this would causeinquiries, it would be found that I left Toulon without giving due notice, andI should then be escorted back to the shores of the Mediterranean. Then Ishould become simply No. 106, and good-bye to my dream of resembling theretired baker! No, no, my boy; I prefer remaining honorably in thecapital.”Andrea scowled. Certainly, as he had himself owned, the reputed son of MajorCavalcanti was a wilful fellow. He drew up for a minute, threw a rapid glancearound him, and then his hand fell instantly into his pocket, where it beganplaying with a pistol. But, meanwhile, Caderousse, who had never taken his eyesoff his companion, passed his hand behind his back, and opened a long Spanishknife, which he always carried with him, to be ready in case of need. The twofriends, as we see, were worthy of and understood one another. Andrea’shand left his pocket inoffensively, and was carried up to the red moustache,which it played with for some time.“Good Caderousse,” he said, “how happy you will be.”“I will do my best,” said the innkeeper of the Pont du Gard,shutting up his knife.“Well, then, we will go into Paris. But how will you pass through thebarrier without exciting suspicion? It seems to me that you are in more dangerriding than on foot.”“Wait,” said Caderousse, “we shall see.” He then tookthe greatcoat with the large collar, which the groom had left behind in thetilbury, and put it on his back; then he took off Cavalcanti’s hat, whichhe placed upon his own head, and finally he assumed the careless attitude of aservant whose master drives himself.“But, tell me,” said Andrea, “am I to remainbareheaded?”“Pooh,” said Caderousse; “it is so windy that your hat caneasily appear to have blown off.”“Come, come; enough of this,” said Cavalcanti.“What are you waiting for?” said Caderousse. “I hope I am notthe cause.”“Hush,” said Andrea. They passed the barrier without accident. Atthe first cross street Andrea stopped his horse, and Caderousse leaped out.“Well!” said Andrea,—“my servant’s coat and myhat?”“Ah,” said Caderousse, “you would not like me to risk takingcold?”“But what am I to do?”“You? Oh, you are young while I am beginning to get old. Aurevoir, Benedetto;” and running into a court, he disappeared.“Alas,” said Andrea, sighing, “one cannot be completely happyin this world!” Chapter 65. A ConjugalSceneAt the Place Louis XV.the three young people separated—that is to say, Morrel went to theBoulevards, Château-Renaud to the Pont de la Révolution, and Debray to theQuai. Most probably Morrel and Château-Renaud returned to their “domestichearths,” as they say in the gallery of the Chamber in well-turnedspeeches, and in the theatre of the Rue Richelieu in well-written pieces; butit was not the case with Debray. When he reached the wicket of the Louvre, heturned to the left, galloped across the Carrousel, passed through the RueSaint-Roch, and, issuing from the Rue de la Michodière, he arrived at M.Danglars’ door just at the same time that Villefort’s landau, afterhaving deposited him and his wife at the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, stopped toleave the baroness at her own house.Debray, with the air of a man familiar with the house, entered first into thecourt, threw his bridle into the hands of a footman, and returned to the doorto receive Madame Danglars, to whom he offered his arm, to conduct her to herapartments. The gate once closed, and Debray and the baroness alone in thecourt, he asked:“What was the matter with you, Hermine? and why were you so affected atthat story, or rather fable, which the count related?”“Because I have been in such shocking spirits all the evening, myfriend,” said the baroness.“No, Hermine,” replied Debray; “you cannot make me believethat; on the contrary, you were in excellent spirits when you arrived at thecount’s. M. Danglars was disagreeable, certainly, but I know how much youcare for his ill-humor. Someone has vexed you; I will allow no one to annoyyou.”“You are deceived, Lucien, I assure you,” replied Madame Danglars;“and what I have told you is really the case, added to the ill-humor youremarked, but which I did not think it worth while to allude to.”It was evident that Madame Danglars was suffering from that nervousirritability which women frequently cannot account for even to themselves; orthat, as Debray had guessed, she had experienced some secret agitation that shewould not acknowledge to anyone. Being a man who knew that the former of thesesymptoms was one of the inherent penalties of womanhood, he did not then presshis inquiries, but waited for a more appropriate opportunity when he shouldagain interrogate her, or receive an avowal proprio motu.At the door of her apartment the baroness met Mademoiselle Cornélie, herconfidential maid.“What is my daughter doing?” asked Madame Danglars.“She practiced all the evening, and then went to bed,” repliedMademoiselle Cornélie.“Yet I think I hear her piano.”“It is Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who is playing whileMademoiselle Danglars is in bed.”“Well,” said Madame Danglars, “come and undress me.”They entered the bedroom. Debray stretched himself upon a large couch, andMadame Danglars passed into her dressing-room with Mademoiselle Cornélie.“My dear M. Lucien,” said Madame Danglars through the door,“you are always complaining that Eugénie will not address a word toyou.”“Madame,” said Lucien, playing with a little dog, who, recognizinghim as a friend of the house, expected to be caressed, “I am not the onlyone who makes similar complaints, I think I heard Morcerf say that he could notextract a word from his betrothed.”“True,” said Madame Danglars; “yet I think this will all passoff, and that you will one day see her enter your study.”“My study?”“At least that of the minister.”“Why so!”“To ask for an engagement at the Opera. Really, I never saw such aninfatuation for music; it is quite ridiculous for a young lady offashion.”Debray smiled. “Well,” said he, “let her come, with yourconsent and that of the baron, and we will try and give her an engagement,though we are very poor to pay such talent as hers.”“Go, Cornélie,” said Madame Danglars, “I do not require youany longer.”Cornélie obeyed, and the next minute Madame Danglars left her room in acharming loose dress, and came and sat down close to Debray. Then she beganthoughtfully to caress the little spaniel. Lucien looked at her for a moment insilence.“Come, Hermine,” he said, after a short time, “answercandidly,—something vexes you—is it not so?”“Nothing,” answered the baroness.And yet, as she could scarcely breathe, she rose and went towards alooking-glass. “I am frightful tonight,” she said. Debray rose,smiling, and was about to contradict the baroness upon this latter point, whenthe door opened suddenly. M. Danglars appeared; Debray reseated himself. At thenoise of the door Madame Danglars turned round, and looked upon her husbandwith an astonishment she took no trouble to conceal.“Good-evening, madame,” said the banker; “good-evening, M.Debray.”Probably the baroness thought this unexpected visit signified a desire to makeup for the sharp words he had uttered during the day. Assuming a dignified air,she turned round to Debray, without answering her husband.“Read me something, M. Debray,” she said. Debray, who was slightlydisturbed at this visit, recovered himself when he saw the calmness of thebaroness, and took up a book marked by a mother-of-pearl knife inlaid withgold.“Excuse me,” said the banker, “but you will tire yourself,baroness, by such late hours, and M. Debray lives some distance fromhere.”Debray was petrified, not only to hear Danglars speak so calmly and politely,but because it was apparent that beneath outward politeness there really lurkeda determined spirit of opposition to anything his wife might wish to do. Thebaroness was also surprised, and showed her astonishment by a look which woulddoubtless have had some effect upon her husband if he had not been intentlyoccupied with the paper, where he was looking to see the closing stockquotations. The result was, that the proud look entirely failed of its purpose.“M. Lucien,” said the baroness, “I assure you I have nodesire to sleep, and that I have a thousand things to tell you this evening,which you must listen to, even though you slept while hearing me.”“I am at your service, madame,” replied Lucien coldly.“My dear M. Debray,” said the banker, “do not kill yourselftonight listening to the follies of Madame Danglars, for you can hear them aswell tomorrow; but I claim tonight and will devote it, if you will allow me, totalk over some serious matters with my wife.”This time the blow was so well aimed, and hit so directly, that Lucien and thebaroness were staggered, and they interrogated each other with their eyes, asif to seek help against this aggression, but the irresistible will of themaster of the house prevailed, and the husband was victorious.“Do not think I wish to turn you out, my dear Debray,” continuedDanglars; “oh, no, not at all. An unexpected occurrence forces me to askmy wife to have a little conversation with me; it is so rarely I make such arequest, I am sure you cannot grudge it to me.”Debray muttered something, bowed and went out, knocking himself against theedge of the door, like Nathan in Athalie.“It is extraordinary,” he said, when the door was closed behindhim, “how easily these husbands, whom we ridicule, gain an advantage overus.”Lucien having left, Danglars took his place on the sofa, closed the open book,and placing himself in a dreadfully dictatorial attitude, he began playing withthe dog; but the animal, not liking him as well as Debray, and attempting tobite him, Danglars seized him by the skin of his neck and threw him upon acouch on the other side of the room. The animal uttered a cry during thetransit, but, arrived at its destination, it crouched behind the cushions, andstupefied at such unusual treatment remained silent and motionless.“Do you know, sir,” asked the baroness, “that you areimproving? Generally you are only rude, but tonight you are brutal.”“It is because I am in a worse humor than usual,” replied Danglars.Hermine looked at the banker with supreme disdain. These glances frequentlyexasperated the pride of Danglars, but this evening he took no notice of them.“And what have I to do with your ill-humor?” said the baroness,irritated at the impassibility of her husband; “do these things concernme? Keep your ill-humor at home in your money boxes, or, since you have clerkswhom you pay, vent it upon them.”“Not so,” replied Danglars; “your advice is wrong, so I shallnot follow it. My money boxes are my Pactolus, as, I think, M. Demoustier says,and I will not retard its course, or disturb its calm. My clerks are honestmen, who earn my fortune, whom I pay much below their deserts, if I may valuethem according to what they bring in; therefore I shall not get into a passionwith them; those with whom I will be in a passion are those who eat my dinners,mount my horses, and exhaust my fortune.”“And pray who are the persons who exhaust your fortune? Explain yourselfmore clearly, I beg, sir.”“Oh, make yourself easy!—I am not speaking riddles, and you willsoon know what I mean. The people who exhaust my fortune are those who draw out700,000 francs in the course of an hour.”“I do not understand you, sir,” said the baroness, trying todisguise the agitation of her voice and the flush of her face.“You understand me perfectly, on the contrary,” said Danglars:“but, if you will persist, I will tell you that I have just lost 700,000francs upon the Spanish loan.”“And pray,” asked the baroness, “am I responsible for thisloss?”“Why not?”“Is it my fault you have lost 700,000 francs?”“Certainly it is not mine.”“Once for all, sir,” replied the baroness sharply, “I tellyou I will not hear cash named; it is a style of language I never heard in thehouse of my parents or in that of my first husband.”“Oh, I can well believe that, for neither of them was worth apenny.”“The better reason for my not being conversant with the slang of thebank, which is here dinning in my ears from morning to night; that noise ofjingling crowns, which are constantly being counted and re-counted, is odiousto me. I only know one thing I dislike more, which is the sound of yourvoice.”“Really?” said Danglars. “Well, this surprises me, for Ithought you took the liveliest interest in all my affairs!”“I? What could put such an idea into your head?”“Yourself.”“Ah?—what next?”“Most assuredly.”“I should like to know upon what occasion?”“Oh, mon Dieu! that is very easily done. Last February you werethe first who told me of the Haitian funds. You had dreamed that a ship hadentered the harbor at Le Havre, that this ship brought news that a payment wehad looked upon as lost was going to be made. I know how clear-sighted yourdreams are; I therefore purchased immediately as many shares as I could of theHaitian debt, and I gained 400,000 francs by it, of which 100,000 have beenhonestly paid to you. You spent it as you pleased; that was your business. InMarch there was a question about a grant to a railway. Three companiespresented themselves, each offering equal securities. You told me that yourinstinct,—and although you pretend to know nothing about speculations, Ithink on the contrary, that your comprehension is very clear upon certainaffairs,—well, you told me that your instinct led you to believe thegrant would be given to the company called the Southern. I bought two thirds ofthe shares of that company; as you had foreseen, the shares trebled in value,and I picked up a million, from which 250,000 francs were paid to you forpin-money. How have you spent this 250,000 francs?—it is no business ofmine.”“When are you coming to the point?” cried the baroness, shiveringwith anger and impatience.“Patience, madame, I am coming to it.”“That’s fortunate.”“In April you went to dine at the minister’s. You heard a privateconversation respecting Spanish affairs—on the expulsion of Don Carlos. Ibought some Spanish shares. The expulsion took place and I pocketed 600,000francs the day Charles V. repassed the Bidassoa. Of these 600,000 francs youtook 50,000 crowns. They were yours, you disposed of them according to yourfancy, and I asked no questions; but it is not the less true that you have thisyear received 500,000 livres.”“Well, sir, and what then?”“Ah, yes, it was just after this that you spoiled everything.”“Really, your manner of speaking——”“It expresses my meaning, and that is all I want. Well, three days afterthat you talked politics with M. Debray, and you fancied from his words thatDon Carlos had returned to Spain. Well, I sold my shares, the news got out, andI no longer sold—I gave them away, next day I find the news was false,and by this false report I have lost 700,000 francs.”“Well?”“Well, since I gave you a fourth of my gains, I think you owe me a fourthof my losses; the fourth of 700,000 francs is 175,000 francs.”“What you say is absurd, and I cannot see why M. Debray’s name ismixed up in this affair.”“Because if you do not possess the 175,000 francs I reclaim, you musthave lent them to your friends, and M. Debray is one of your friends.”“For shame!” exclaimed the baroness.“Oh, let us have no gestures, no screams, no modern drama, or you willoblige me to tell you that I see Debray leave here, pocketing the whole of the500,000 livres you have handed over to him this year, while he smiles tohimself, saying that he has found what the most skilful players have neverdiscovered—that is, a roulette where he wins without playing, and is noloser when he loses.”The baroness became enraged.“Wretch!” she cried, “will you dare to tell me you did notknow what you now reproach me with?”“I do not say that I did know it, and I do not say that I did not knowit. I merely tell you to look into my conduct during the last four years thatwe have ceased to be husband and wife, and see whether it has not always beenconsistent. Some time after our rupture, you wished to study music, under thecelebrated baritone who made such a successful appearance at the ThéâtreItalien; at the same time I felt inclined to learn dancing of thedanseuse who acquired such a reputation in London. This cost me, on youraccount and mine, 100,000 francs. I said nothing, for we must have peace in thehouse; and 100,000 francs for a lady and gentleman to be properly instructed inmusic and dancing are not too much. Well, you soon become tired of singing, andyou take a fancy to study diplomacy with the minister’s secretary. Youunderstand, it signifies nothing to me so long as you pay for your lessons outof your own cash box. But today I find you are drawing on mine, and that yourapprenticeship may cost me 700,000 francs per month. Stop there, madame, forthis cannot last. Either the diplomatist must give his lessons gratis, and Iwill tolerate him, or he must never set his foot again in my house;—doyou understand, madame?”“Oh, this is too much,” cried Hermine, choking, “you areworse than despicable.”“But,” continued Danglars, “I find you did not even pausethere——”“Insults!”“You are right; let us leave these facts alone, and reason coolly. I havenever interfered in your affairs excepting for your good; treat me in the sameway. You say you have nothing to do with my cash box. Be it so. Do as you likewith your own, but do not fill or empty mine. Besides, how do I know that thiswas not a political trick, that the minister enraged at seeing me in theopposition, and jealous of the popular sympathy I excite, has not concertedwith M. Debray to ruin me?”“A probable thing!”“Why not? Who ever heard of such an occurrence as this?—a falsetelegraphic despatch—it is almost impossible for wrong signals to be madeas they were in the last two telegrams. It was done on purpose for me—Iam sure of it.”“Sir,” said the baroness humbly, “are you not aware that theman employed there was dismissed, that they talked of going to law with him,that orders were issued to arrest him and that this order would have been putinto execution if he had not escaped by flight, which proves that he was eithermad or guilty? It was a mistake.”“Yes, which made fools laugh, which caused the minister to have asleepless night, which has caused the minister’s secretaries to blackenseveral sheets of paper, but which has cost me 700,000 francs.”“But, sir,” said Hermine suddenly, “if all this is, as yousay, caused by M. Debray, why, instead of going direct to him, do you come andtell me of it? Why, to accuse the man, do you address the woman?”“Do I know M. Debray?—do I wish to know him?—do I wish toknow that he gives advice?—do I wish to follow it?—do I speculate?No; you do all this, not I.”“Still it seems to me, that as you profit by it——”Danglars shrugged his shoulders. “Foolish creature,” he exclaimed.“Women fancy they have talent because they have managed two or threeintrigues without being the talk of Paris! But know that if you had even hiddenyour irregularities from your husband, who has but the commencement of theart—for generally husbands will not see—you would then havebeen but a faint imitation of most of your friends among the women of theworld. But it has not been so with me,—I see, and always have seen,during the last sixteen years. You may, perhaps, have hidden a thought; but nota step, not an action, not a fault, has escaped me, while you flatteredyourself upon your address, and firmly believed you had deceived me. What hasbeen the result?—that, thanks to my pretended ignorance, there is none ofyour friends, from M. de Villefort to M. Debray, who has not trembled beforeme. There is not one who has not treated me as the master of thehouse,—the only title I desire with respect to you; there is not one, infact, who would have dared to speak of me as I have spoken of them this day. Iwill allow you to make me hateful, but I will prevent your rendering meridiculous, and, above all, I forbid you to ruin me.”The baroness had been tolerably composed until the name of Villefort had beenpronounced; but then she became pale, and, rising, as if touched by a spring,she stretched out her hands as though conjuring an apparition; she then tooktwo or three steps towards her husband, as though to tear the secret from him,of which he was ignorant, or which he withheld from some odiouscalculation,—odious, as all his calculations were.“M. de Villefort!—What do you mean?”“I mean that M. de Nargonne, your first husband, being neither aphilosopher nor a banker, or perhaps being both, and seeing there was nothingto be got out of a king’s attorney, died of grief or anger at finding,after an absence of nine months, that you had been enceinte six. I ambrutal,—I not only allow it, but boast of it; it is one of the reasons ofmy success in commercial business. Why did he kill himself instead of you?Because he had no cash to save. My life belongs to my cash. M. Debray has mademe lose 700,000 francs; let him bear his share of the loss, and we will go onas before; if not, let him become bankrupt for the 250,000 livres, and do asall bankrupts do—disappear. He is a charming fellow, I allow, when hisnews is correct; but when it is not, there are fifty others in the world whowould do better than he.”Madame Danglars was rooted to the spot; she made a violent effort to reply tothis last attack, but she fell upon a chair thinking of Villefort, of thedinner scene, of the strange series of misfortunes which had taken place in herhouse during the last few days, and changed the usual calm of her establishmentto a scene of scandalous debate.Danglars did not even look at her, though she did her best to faint. He shutthe bedroom door after him, without adding another word, and returned to hisapartments; and when Madame Danglars recovered from her half-faintingcondition, she could almost believe that she had had a disagreeable dream. Chapter 66. MatrimonialProjectsThe day following thisscene, at the hour Debray usually chose to pay a visit to Madame Danglars onhis way to his office, his coupé did not appear. At this time, that is,about half-past twelve, Madame Danglars ordered her carriage, and went out.Danglars, hidden behind a curtain, watched the departure he had been waitingfor. He gave orders that he should be informed as soon as Madame Danglarsappeared; but at two o’clock she had not returned. He then called for hishorses, drove to the Chamber, and inscribed his name to speak against thebudget. From twelve to two o’clock Danglars had remained in his study,unsealing his dispatches, and becoming more and more sad every minute, heapingfigure upon figure, and receiving, among other visits, one from MajorCavalcanti, who, as stiff and exact as ever, presented himself precisely at thehour named the night before, to terminate his business with the banker.On leaving the Chamber, Danglars, who had shown violent marks of agitationduring the sitting, and been more bitter than ever against the ministry,re-entered his carriage, and told the coachman to drive to the Avenue desChamps-Élysées, No. 30.Monte Cristo was at home; only he was engaged with someone and begged Danglarsto wait for a moment in the drawing-room. While the banker was waiting in theanteroom, the door opened, and a man dressed as an abbé and doubtless morefamiliar with the house than he was, came in and instead of waiting, merelybowed, passed on to the farther apartments, and disappeared.A minute after the door by which the priest had entered reopened, and MonteCristo appeared.“Pardon me,” said he, “my dear baron, but one of my friends,the Abbé Busoni, whom you perhaps saw pass by, has just arrived in Paris; nothaving seen him for a long time, I could not make up my mind to leave himsooner, so I hope this will be sufficient reason for my having made youwait.”“Nay,” said Danglars, “it is my fault; I have chosen my visitat a wrong time, and will retire.”“Not at all; on the contrary, be seated; but what is the matter with you?You look careworn; really, you alarm me. Melancholy in a capitalist, like theappearance of a comet, presages some misfortune to the world.”“I have been in ill-luck for several days,” said Danglars,“and I have heard nothing but bad news.”“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo. “Have you had another fallat the Bourse?”“No; I am safe for a few days at least. I am only annoyed about abankrupt of Trieste.”“Really? Does it happen to be Jacopo Manfredi?”“Exactly so. Imagine a man who has transacted business with me for Idon’t know how long, to the amount of 800,000 or 900,000 francs duringthe year. Never a mistake or delay—a fellow who paid like a prince. Well,I was a million in advance with him, and now my fine Jacopo Manfredi suspendspayment!”“Really?”“It is an unheard-of fatality. I draw upon him for 600,000 francs, mybills are returned unpaid, and, more than that, I hold bills of exchange signedby him to the value of 400,000 francs, payable at his correspondent’s inParis at the end of this month. Today is the 30th. I present them; but mycorrespondent has disappeared. This, with my Spanish affairs, made a pretty endto the month.”“Then you really lost by that affair in Spain?”“Yes; only 700,000 francs out of my cash box—nothing more!”“Why, how could you make such a mistake—such an old stager?”“Oh, it is all my wife’s fault. She dreamed Don Carlos had returnedto Spain; she believes in dreams. It is magnetism, she says, and when shedreams a thing it is sure to happen, she assures me. On this conviction I allowher to speculate, she having her bank and her stockbroker; she speculated andlost. It is true she speculates with her own money, not mine; nevertheless, youcan understand that when 700,000 francs leave the wife’s pocket, thehusband always finds it out. But do you mean to say you have not heard of this?Why, the thing has made a tremendous noise.”“Yes, I heard it spoken of, but I did not know the details, and then noone can be more ignorant than I am of the affairs in the Bourse.”“Then you do not speculate?”“I?—How could I speculate when I already have so much trouble inregulating my income? I should be obliged, besides my steward, to keep a clerkand a boy. But touching these Spanish affairs, I think that the baroness didnot dream the whole of the Don Carlos matter. The papers said something aboutit, did they not?”“Then you believe the papers?”“I?—not the least in the world; only I fancied that the honestMessager was an exception to the rule, and that it only announcedtelegraphic despatches.”“Well, that’s what puzzles me,” replied Danglars; “thenews of the return of Don Carlos was brought by telegraph.”“So that,” said Monte Cristo, “you have lost nearly 1,700,000francs this month.”“Not nearly, indeed; that is exactly my loss.”“Diable!” said Monte Cristo compassionately, “it is ahard blow for a third-rate fortune.”“Third-rate,” said Danglars, rather humble, “what do you meanby that?”“Certainly,” continued Monte Cristo, “I make threeassortments in fortune—first-rate, second-rate, and third-rate fortunes.I call those first-rate which are composed of treasures one possesses underone’s hand, such as mines, lands, and funded property, in such states asFrance, Austria, and England, provided these treasures and property form atotal of about a hundred millions; I call those second-rate fortunes, that aregained by manufacturing enterprises, joint-stock companies, viceroyalties, andprincipalities, not drawing more than 1,500,000 francs, the whole forming acapital of about fifty millions; finally, I call those third-rate fortunes,which are composed of a fluctuating capital, dependent upon the will of others,or upon chances which a bankruptcy involves or a false telegram shakes, such asbanks, speculations of the day—in fact, all operations under theinfluence of greater or less mischances, the whole bringing in a real orfictitious capital of about fifteen millions. I think this is about yourposition, is it not?”“Confound it, yes!” replied Danglars.“The result, then, of six more such months as this would be to reduce thethird-rate house to despair.”“Oh,” said Danglars, becoming very pale, how you are runningon!”“Let us imagine seven such months,” continued Monte Cristo, in thesame tone. “Tell me, have you ever thought that seven times 1,700,000francs make nearly twelve millions? No, you have not;—well, you areright, for if you indulged in such reflections, you would never risk yourprincipal, which is to the speculator what the skin is to civilized man. Wehave our clothes, some more splendid than others,—this is our credit; butwhen a man dies he has only his skin; in the same way, on retiring frombusiness, you have nothing but your real principal of about five or sixmillions, at the most; for third-rate fortunes are never more than a fourth ofwhat they appear to be, like the locomotive on a railway, the size of which ismagnified by the smoke and steam surrounding it. Well, out of the five or sixmillions which form your real capital, you have just lost nearly two millions,which must, of course, in the same degree diminish your credit and fictitiousfortune; to follow out my simile, your skin has been opened by bleeding, andthis if repeated three or four times will cause death—so pay attention toit, my dear Monsieur Danglars. Do you want money? Do you wish me to lend yousome?”“What a bad calculator you are!” exclaimed Danglars, calling to hisassistance all his philosophy and dissimulation. “I have made money atthe same time by speculations which have succeeded. I have made up the loss ofblood by nutrition. I lost a battle in Spain, I have been defeated in Trieste,but my naval army in India will have taken some galleons, and my Mexicanpioneers will have discovered some mine.”“Very good, very good! But the wound remains and will reopen at the firstloss.”“No, for I am only embarked in certainties,” replied Danglars, withthe air of a mountebank sounding his own praises; “to involve me, threegovernments must crumble to dust.”“Well, such things have been.”“That there should be a famine!”“Recollect the seven fat and the seven lean kine.”“Or, that the sea should become dry, as in the days of Pharaoh, and eventhen my vessels would become caravans.”“So much the better. I congratulate you, my dear M. Danglars,” saidMonte Cristo; “I see I was deceived, and that you belong to the class ofsecond-rate fortunes.”“I think I may aspire to that honor,” said Danglars with a smile,which reminded Monte Cristo of the sickly moons which bad artists are so fondof daubing into their pictures of ruins. “But, while we are speaking ofbusiness,” Danglars added, pleased to find an opportunity of changing thesubject, “tell me what I am to do for M. Cavalcanti.”“Give him money, if he is recommended to you, and the recommendationseems good.”“Excellent; he presented himself this morning with a bond of 40,000francs, payable at sight, on you, signed by Busoni, and returned by you to me,with your endorsement—of course, I immediately counted him over the fortybank-notes.”Monte Cristo nodded his head in token of assent.“But that is not all,” continued Danglars; “he has opened anaccount with my house for his son.”“May I ask how much he allows the young man?”“Five thousand francs per month.”“Sixty thousand francs per year. I thought I was right in believing thatCavalcanti to be a stingy fellow. How can a young man live upon 5,000 francs amonth?”“But you understand that if the young man should want a few thousandsmore——”“Do not advance it; the father will never repay it. You do not know theseultramontane millionaires; they are regular misers. And by whom were theyrecommended to you?”“Oh, by the house of Fenzi, one of the best in Florence.”“I do not mean to say you will lose, but, nevertheless, mind you hold tothe terms of the agreement.”“Would you not trust the Cavalcanti?”“I? oh, I would advance ten millions on his signature. I was onlyspeaking in reference to the second-rate fortunes we were mentioning justnow.”“And with all this, how unassuming he is! I should never have taken himfor anything more than a mere major.”“And you would have flattered him, for certainly, as you say, he has nomanner. The first time I saw him he appeared to me like an old lieutenant whohad grown mouldy under his epaulets. But all the Italians are the same; theyare like old Jews when they are not glittering in Oriental splendor.”“The young man is better,” said Danglars.“Yes; a little nervous, perhaps, but, upon the whole, he appearedtolerable. I was uneasy about him.”“Why?”“Because you met him at my house, just after his introduction into theworld, as they told me. He has been travelling with a very severe tutor, andhad never been to Paris before.”“Ah, I believe noblemen marry amongst themselves, do they not?”asked Danglars carelessly; “they like to unite their fortunes.”“It is usual, certainly; but Cavalcanti is an original who does nothinglike other people. I cannot help thinking that he has brought his son to Franceto choose a wife.”“Do you think so?”“I am sure of it.”“And you have heard his fortune mentioned?”“Nothing else was talked of; only some said he was worth millions, andothers that he did not possess a farthing.”“And what is your opinion?”“I ought not to influence you, because it is only my own personalimpression.”“Well, and it is that——”“My opinion is, that all these old podestàs, these ancientcondottieri,—for the Cavalcanti have commanded armies and governedprovinces,—my opinion, I say, is, that they have buried their millions incorners, the secret of which they have transmitted only to their eldest sons,who have done the same from generation to generation; and the proof of this isseen in their yellow and dry appearance, like the florins of the republic,which, from being constantly gazed upon, have become reflected in them.”“Certainly,” said Danglars, “and this is further supported bythe fact of their not possessing an inch of land.”“Very little, at least; I know of none which Cavalcanti possesses,excepting his palace in Lucca.”“Ah, he has a palace?” said Danglars, laughing; “come, thatis something.”“Yes; and more than that, he lets it to the Minister of Finance while helives in a simple house. Oh, as I told you before, I think the old fellow isvery close.”“Come, you do not flatter him.”“I scarcely know him; I think I have seen him three times in my life; allI know relating to him is through Busoni and himself. He was telling me thismorning that, tired of letting his property lie dormant in Italy, which is adead nation, he wished to find a method, either in France or England, ofmultiplying his millions, but remember, that though I place great confidence inBusoni, I am not responsible for this.”“Never mind; accept my thanks for the client you have sent me. It is afine name to inscribe on my ledgers, and my cashier was quite proud of it whenI explained to him who the Cavalcanti were. By the way, this is merely a simplequestion, when this sort of people marry their sons, do they give them anyfortune?”“Oh, that depends upon circumstances. I know an Italian prince, rich as agold mine, one of the noblest families in Tuscany, who, when his sons marriedaccording to his wish, gave them millions; and when they married against hisconsent, merely allowed them thirty crowns a month. Should Andrea marryaccording to his father’s views, he will, perhaps, give him one, two, orthree millions. For example, supposing it were the daughter of a banker, hemight take an interest in the house of the father-in-law of his son; thenagain, if he disliked his choice, the major takes the key, double-locks hiscoffer, and Master Andrea would be obliged to live like the sons of a Parisianfamily, by shuffling cards or rattling the dice.”“Ah, that boy will find out some Bavarian or Peruvian princess; he willwant a crown, an El Dorado, and Potosí.”“No; these grand lords on the other side of the Alps frequently marryinto plain families; like Jupiter, they like to cross the race. But do you wishto marry Andrea, my dear M. Danglars, that you are asking so manyquestions?”“Ma foi,” said Danglars, “it would not be a badspeculation, I fancy, and you know I am a speculator.”“You are not thinking of Mademoiselle Danglars, I hope; you would notlike poor Andrea to have his throat cut by Albert?”“Albert,” repeated Danglars, shrugging his shoulders; “ah,well; he would care very little about it, I think.”“But he is betrothed to your daughter, I believe?”“Well, M. de Morcerf and I have talked about this marriage, but Madame deMorcerf and Albert——”“You do not mean to say that it would not be a good match?”“Indeed, I imagine that Mademoiselle Danglars is as good as M. deMorcerf.”“Mademoiselle Danglars’ fortune will be great, no doubt, especiallyif the telegraph should not make any more mistakes.”“Oh, I do not mean her fortune only; but tell me——”“What?”“Why did you not invite M. and Madame de Morcerf to your dinner?”“I did so, but he excused himself on account of Madame de Morcerf beingobliged to go to Dieppe for the benefit of sea air.”“Yes, yes,” said Danglars, laughing, “it would do her a greatdeal of good.”“Why so?”“Because it is the air she always breathed in her youth.”Monte Cristo took no notice of this ill-natured remark.“But still, if Albert be not so rich as Mademoiselle Danglars,”said the count, “you must allow that he has a fine name?”“So he has; but I like mine as well.”“Certainly; your name is popular, and does honor to the title they haveadorned it with; but you are too intelligent not to know that according to aprejudice, too firmly rooted to be exterminated, a nobility which dates backfive centuries is worth more than one that can only reckon twenty years.”“And for this very reason,” said Danglars with a smile, which hetried to make sardonic, “I prefer M. Andrea Cavalcanti to M. Albert deMorcerf.”“Still, I should not think the Morcerfs would yield to theCavalcanti?”“The Morcerfs!—Stay, my dear count,” said Danglars;“you are a man of the world, are you not?”“I think so.”“And you understand heraldry?”“A little.”“Well, look at my coat-of-arms, it is worth more thanMorcerf’s.”“Why so?”“Because, though I am not a baron by birth, my real name is, at least,Danglars.”“Well, what then?”“While his name is not Morcerf.”“How?—not Morcerf?”“Not the least in the world.”“Go on.”“I have been made a baron, so that I actually am one; he made himself acount, so that he is not one at all.”“Impossible!”“Listen my dear count; M. de Morcerf has been my friend, or rather myacquaintance, during the last thirty years. You know I have made the most of myarms, though I never forgot my origin.”“A proof of great humility or great pride,” said Monte Cristo.“Well, when I was a clerk, Morcerf was a mere fisherman.”“And then he was called——”“Fernand.”“Only Fernand?”“Fernand Mondego.”“You are sure?”“Pardieu! I have bought enough fish of him to know hisname.”“Then, why did you think of giving your daughter to him?”“Because Fernand and Danglars, being both parvenus, both having becomenoble, both rich, are about equal in worth, excepting that there have beencertain things mentioned of him that were never said of me.”“What?”“Oh, nothing!”“Ah, yes; what you tell me recalls to mind something about the name ofFernand Mondego. I have heard that name in Greece.”“In conjunction with the affairs of Ali Pasha?”“Exactly so.”“This is the mystery,” said Danglars. “I acknowledge I wouldhave given anything to find it out.”“It would be very easy if you much wished it?”“How so?”“Probably you have some correspondent in Greece?”“I should think so.”“At Yanina?”“Everywhere.”“Well, write to your correspondent in Yanina, and ask him what part wasplayed by a Frenchman named Fernand Mondego in the catastrophe of AliTepelini.”“You are right,” exclaimed Danglars, rising quickly, “I willwrite today.”“Do so.”“I will.”“And if you should hear of anything very scandalous——”“I will communicate it to you.”“You will oblige me.”Danglars rushed out of the room, and made but one leap into his coupé. Chapter 67. The Office ofthe King’s AttorneyLet us leave the bankerdriving his horses at their fullest speed, and follow Madame Danglars in hermorning excursion. We have said that at half-past twelve o’clock MadameDanglars had ordered her horses, and had left home in the carriage. Shedirected her course towards the Faubourg Saint Germain, went down the RueMazarine, and stopped at the Passage du Pont-Neuf. She descended, and wentthrough the passage. She was very plainly dressed, as would be the case with awoman of taste walking in the morning. At the Rue Guénégaud she called a cab,and directed the driver to go to the Rue de Harlay. As soon as she was seatedin the vehicle, she drew from her pocket a very thick black veil, which shetied on to her straw bonnet. She then replaced the bonnet, and saw withpleasure, in a little pocket-mirror, that her white complexion and brillianteyes were alone visible. The cab crossed the Pont-Neuf and entered the Rue deHarlay by the Place Dauphine; the driver was paid as the door opened, andstepping lightly up the stairs Madame Danglars soon reached the Salle desPas-Perdus.There was a great deal going on that morning, and many business-like persons atthe Palais; business-like persons pay very little attention to women, andMadame Danglars crossed the hall without exciting any more attention than anyother woman calling upon her lawyer.There was a great press of people in M. de Villefort’s antechamber, butMadame Danglars had no occasion even to pronounce her name. The instant sheappeared the door-keeper rose, came to her, and asked her whether she was notthe person with whom the procureur had made an appointment; and on heraffirmative answer being given, he conducted her by a private passage to M. deVillefort’s office.The magistrate was seated in an armchair, writing, with his back towards thedoor; he did not move as he heard it open, and the door-keeper pronounce thewords, “Walk in, madame,” and then reclose it; but no sooner hadthe man’s footsteps ceased, than he started up, drew the bolts, closedthe curtains, and examined every corner of the room. Then, when he had assuredhimself that he could neither be seen nor heard, and was consequently relievedof doubts, he said:“Thanks, madame,—thanks for your punctuality;” and he offereda chair to Madame Danglars, which she accepted, for her heart beat so violentlythat she felt nearly suffocated.“It is a long time, madame,” said the procureur, describing ahalf-circle with his chair, so as to place himself exactly opposite to MadameDanglars,—“it is a long time since I had the pleasure of speakingalone with you, and I regret that we have only now met to enter upon a painfulconversation.”“Nevertheless, sir, you see I have answered your first appeal, althoughcertainly the conversation must be much more painful for me than foryou.” Villefort smiled bitterly.“It is true, then,” he said, rather uttering his thoughts aloudthan addressing his companion,—“it is true, then, that all ouractions leave their traces—some sad, others bright—on our paths; itis true that every step in our lives is like the course of an insect on thesands;—it leaves its track! Alas, to many the path is traced bytears.”“Sir,” said Madame Danglars, “you can feel for my emotion,can you not? Spare me, then, I beseech you. When I look at thisroom,—whence so many guilty creatures have departed, trembling andashamed, when I look at that chair before which I now sit trembling andashamed,—oh, it requires all my reason to convince me that I am not avery guilty woman and you a menacing judge.”Villefort dropped his head and sighed.“And I,” he said, “I feel that my place is not in thejudge’s seat, but on the prisoner’s bench.”“You?” said Madame Danglars.“Yes, I.”“I think, sir, you exaggerate your situation,” said MadameDanglars, whose beautiful eyes sparkled for a moment. “The paths of whichyou were just speaking have been traced by all young men of ardentimaginations. Besides the pleasure, there is always remorse from the indulgenceof our passions, and, after all, what have you men to fear from all this? theworld excuses, and notoriety ennobles you.”“Madame,” replied Villefort, “you know that I am nohypocrite, or, at least, that I never deceive without a reason. If my brow besevere, it is because many misfortunes have clouded it; if my heart bepetrified, it is that it might sustain the blows it has received. I was not soin my youth, I was not so on the night of the betrothal, when we were allseated around a table in the Rue du Cours at Marseilles. But since theneverything has changed in and about me; I am accustomed to brave difficulties,and, in the conflict to crush those who, by their own free will, or by chance,voluntarily or involuntarily, interfere with me in my career. It is generallythe case that what we most ardently desire is as ardently withheld from us bythose who wish to obtain it, or from whom we attempt to snatch it. Thus, thegreater number of a man’s errors come before him disguised under thespecious form of necessity; then, after error has been committed in a moment ofexcitement, of delirium, or of fear, we see that we might have avoided andescaped it. The means we might have used, which we in our blindness could notsee, then seem simple and easy, and we say, ‘Why did I not do this,instead of that?’ Women, on the contrary, are rarely tormented withremorse; for the decision does not come from you,—your misfortunes aregenerally imposed upon you, and your faults the results of others’crimes.”“In any case, sir, you will allow,” replied Madame Danglars,“that, even if the fault were alone mine, I last night received a severepunishment for it.”“Poor thing,” said Villefort, pressing her hand, “it was toosevere for your strength, for you were twice overwhelmed, andyet——”“Well?”“Well, I must tell you. Collect all your courage, for you have not yetheard all.”“Ah,” exclaimed Madame Danglars, alarmed, “what is there moreto hear?”“You only look back to the past, and it is, indeed, bad enough. Well,picture to yourself a future more gloomy still—certainly frightful,perhaps sanguinary!”The baroness knew how calm Villefort naturally was, and his present excitementfrightened her so much that she opened her mouth to scream, but the sound diedin her throat.“How has this terrible past been recalled?” cried Villefort;“how is it that it has escaped from the depths of the tomb and therecesses of our hearts, where it was buried, to visit us now, like a phantom,whitening our cheeks and flushing our brows with shame?”“Alas,” said Hermine, “doubtless it is chance.”“Chance?” replied Villefort; “No, no, madame, there is nosuch thing as chance.”“Oh, yes; has not a fatal chance revealed all this? Was it not by chancethe Count of Monte Cristo bought that house? Was it not by chance he caused theearth to be dug up? Is it not by chance that the unfortunate child wasdisinterred under the trees?—that poor innocent offspring of mine, whichI never even kissed, but for whom I wept many, many tears. Ah, my heart clungto the count when he mentioned the dear spoil found beneath the flowers.”“Well, no, madame,—this is the terrible news I have to tellyou,” said Villefort in a hollow voice—“no, nothing was foundbeneath the flowers; there was no child disinterred—no. You must notweep, no, you must not groan, you must tremble!”“What can you mean?” asked Madame Danglars, shuddering.“I mean that M. de Monte Cristo, digging underneath these trees, foundneither skeleton nor chest, because neither of them was there!”“Neither of them there?” repeated Madame Danglars, her staring,wide-open eyes expressing her alarm. “Neither of them there!” sheagain said, as though striving to impress herself with the meaning of the wordswhich escaped her.“No,” said Villefort, burying his face in his hands, “no, ahundred times no!”“Then you did not bury the poor child there, sir? Why did you deceive me?Where did you place it? tell me—where?”“There! But listen to me—listen—and you will pity me who hasfor twenty years alone borne the heavy burden of grief I am about to reveal,without casting the least portion upon you.”“Oh, you frighten me! But speak; I will listen.”“You recollect that sad night, when you were half-expiring on that bed inthe red damask room, while I, scarcely less agitated than you, awaited yourdelivery. The child was born, was given to me—motionless, breathless,voiceless; we thought it dead.”Madame Danglars moved rapidly, as though she would spring from her chair, butVillefort stopped, and clasped his hands as if to implore her attention.“We thought it dead,” he repeated; “I placed it in the chest,which was to take the place of a coffin; I descended to the garden, I dug ahole, and then flung it down in haste. Scarcely had I covered it with earth,when the arm of the Corsican was stretched towards me; I saw a shadow rise,and, at the same time, a flash of light. I felt pain; I wished to cry out, butan icy shiver ran through my veins and stifled my voice; I fell lifeless, andfancied myself killed. Never shall I forget your sublime courage, when, havingreturned to consciousness, I dragged myself to the foot of the stairs, and you,almost dying yourself, came to meet me. We were obliged to keep silent upon thedreadful catastrophe. You had the fortitude to regain the house, assisted byyour nurse. A duel was the pretext for my wound. Though we scarcely expectedit, our secret remained in our own keeping alone. I was taken to Versailles;for three months I struggled with death; at last, as I seemed to cling to life,I was ordered to the South. Four men carried me from Paris to Châlons, walkingsix leagues a day; Madame de Villefort followed the litter in her carriage. AtChâlons I was put upon the Saône, thence I passed on to the Rhône, whence Idescended, merely with the current, to Arles; at Arles I was again placed on mylitter, and continued my journey to Marseilles. My recovery lasted six months.I never heard you mentioned, and I did not dare inquire for you. When Ireturned to Paris, I learned that you, the widow of M. de Nargonne, had marriedM. Danglars.“What was the subject of my thoughts from the time consciousness returnedto me? Always the same—always the child’s corpse, coming everynight in my dreams, rising from the earth, and hovering over the grave withmenacing look and gesture. I inquired immediately on my return to Paris; thehouse had not been inhabited since we left it, but it had just been let fornine years. I found the tenant. I pretended that I disliked the idea that ahouse belonging to my wife’s father and mother should pass into the handsof strangers. I offered to pay them for cancelling the lease; they demanded6,000 francs. I would have given 10,000—I would have given 20,000. I hadthe money with me; I made the tenant sign the deed of resilition, and when Ihad obtained what I so much wanted, I galloped to Auteuil. No one had enteredthe house since I had left it.“It was five o’clock in the afternoon; I ascended into the redroom, and waited for night. There all the thoughts which had disturbed meduring my year of constant agony came back with double force. The Corsican, whohad declared the vendetta against me, who had followed me from Nîmes to Paris,who had hid himself in the garden, who had struck me, had seen me dig thegrave, had seen me inter the child,—he might become acquainted with yourperson,—nay, he might even then have known it. Would he not one day makeyou pay for keeping this terrible secret? Would it not be a sweet revenge forhim when he found that I had not died from the blow of his dagger? It wastherefore necessary, before everything else, and at all risks, that I shouldcause all traces of the past to disappear—that I should destroy everymaterial vestige; too much reality would always remain in my recollection. Itwas for this I had annulled the lease—it was for this I had come—itwas for this I was waiting.“Night arrived; I allowed it to become quite dark. I was without a lightin that room; when the wind shook all the doors, behind which I continuallyexpected to see some spy concealed, I trembled. I seemed everywhere to hearyour moans behind me in the bed, and I dared not turn around. My heart beat soviolently that I feared my wound would open. At length, one by one, all thenoises in the neighborhood ceased. I understood that I had nothing to fear,that I should neither be seen nor heard, so I decided upon descending to thegarden.“Listen, Hermine; I consider myself as brave as most men, but when I drewfrom my breast the little key of the staircase, which I had found in mycoat—that little key we both used to cherish so much, which you wished tohave fastened to a golden ring—when I opened the door, and saw the palemoon shedding a long stream of white light on the spiral staircase like aspectre, I leaned against the wall, and nearly shrieked. I seemed to be goingmad. At last I mastered my agitation. I descended the staircase step by step;the only thing I could not conquer was a strange trembling in my knees. Igrasped the railings; if I had relaxed my hold for a moment, I should havefallen. I reached the lower door. Outside this door a spade was placed againstthe wall; I took it, and advanced towards the thicket. I had provided myselfwith a dark lantern. In the middle of the lawn I stopped to light it, then Icontinued my path.“It was the end of November, all the verdure of the garden haddisappeared, the trees were nothing more than skeletons with their long bonyarms, and the dead leaves sounded on the gravel under my feet. My terrorovercame me to such a degree as I approached the thicket, that I took a pistolfrom my pocket and armed myself. I fancied continually that I saw the figure ofthe Corsican between the branches. I examined the thicket with my dark lantern;it was empty. I looked carefully around; I was indeed alone,—no noisedisturbed the silence but the owl, whose piercing cry seemed to be calling upthe phantoms of the night. I tied my lantern to a forked branch I had noticed ayear before at the precise spot where I stopped to dig the hole.“The grass had grown very thickly there during the summer, and whenautumn arrived no one had been there to mow it. Still one place where the grasswas thin attracted my attention; it evidently was there I had turned up theground. I went to work. The hour, then, for which I had been waiting during thelast year had at length arrived. How I worked, how I hoped, how I struck everypiece of turf, thinking to find some resistance to my spade! But no, I foundnothing, though I had made a hole twice as large as the first. I thought I hadbeen deceived—had mistaken the spot. I turned around, I looked at thetrees, I tried to recall the details which had struck me at the time. A cold,sharp wind whistled through the leafless branches, and yet the drops fell frommy forehead. I recollected that I was stabbed just as I was trampling theground to fill up the hole; while doing so I had leaned against a laburnum;behind me was an artificial rockery, intended to serve as a resting-place forpersons walking in the garden; in falling, my hand, relaxing its hold of thelaburnum, felt the coldness of the stone. On my right I saw the tree, behind methe rock. I stood in the same attitude, and threw myself down. I rose, andagain began digging and enlarging the hole; still I found nothing,nothing—the chest was no longer there!”“The chest no longer there?” murmured Madame Danglars, choking withfear.“Think not I contented myself with this one effort,” continuedVillefort. “No; I searched the whole thicket. I thought the assassin,having discovered the chest, and supposing it to be a treasure, had intendedcarrying it off, but, perceiving his error, had dug another hole, and depositedit there; but I could find nothing. Then the idea struck me that he had nottaken these precautions, and had simply thrown it in a corner. In the last caseI must wait for daylight to renew my search. I remained in the room andwaited.”“Oh, Heaven!”When daylight dawned I went down again. My first visit was to the thicket. Ihoped to find some traces which had escaped me in the darkness. I had turned upthe earth over a surface of more than twenty feet square, and a depth of twofeet. A laborer would not have done in a day what occupied me an hour. But Icould find nothing—absolutely nothing. Then I renewed the search.Supposing it had been thrown aside, it would probably be on the path which ledto the little gate; but this examination was as useless as the first, and witha bursting heart I returned to the thicket, which now contained no hope forme.”“Oh,” cried Madame Danglars, “it was enough to drive youmad!”“I hoped for a moment that it might,” said Villefort; “butthat happiness was denied me. However, recovering my strength and my ideas,‘Why,’ said I, ‘should that man have carried away thecorpse?’”“But you said,” replied Madame Danglars, “he would require itas a proof.”“Ah, no, madame, that could not be. Dead bodies are not kept a year; theyare shown to a magistrate, and the evidence is taken. Now, nothing of the kindhas happened.”“What then?” asked Hermine, trembling violently.“Something more terrible, more fatal, more alarming for us—thechild was, perhaps, alive, and the assassin may have saved it!”Madame Danglars uttered a piercing cry, and, seizing Villefort’s hands,exclaimed, “My child was alive?” said she; “you buried mychild alive? You were not certain my child was dead, and you buried it?Ah——”Madame Danglars had risen, and stood before the procureur, whose hands shewrung in her feeble grasp.“I know not; I merely suppose so, as I might suppose anythingelse,” replied Villefort with a look so fixed, it indicated that hispowerful mind was on the verge of despair and madness.“Ah, my child, my poor child!” cried the baroness, falling on herchair, and stifling her sobs in her handkerchief. Villefort, becoming somewhatreassured, perceived that to avert the maternal storm gathering over his head,he must inspire Madame Danglars with the terror he felt.“You understand, then, that if it were so,” said he, rising in histurn, and approaching the baroness, to speak to her in a lower tone, “weare lost. This child lives, and someone knows it lives—someone is inpossession of our secret; and since Monte Cristo speaks before us of a childdisinterred, when that child could not be found, it is he who is in possessionof our secret.”“Just God, avenging God!” murmured Madame Danglars.Villefort’s only answer was a stifled groan.“But the child—the child, sir?” repeated the agitated mother.“How I have searched for him,” replied Villefort, wringing hishands; “how I have called him in my long sleepless nights; how I havelonged for royal wealth to purchase a million of secrets from a million of men,and to find mine among them! At last, one day, when for the hundredth time Itook up my spade, I asked myself again and again what the Corsican could havedone with the child. A child encumbers a fugitive; perhaps, on perceiving itwas still alive, he had thrown it into the river.”“Impossible!” cried Madame Danglars: “a man may murderanother out of revenge, but he would not deliberately drown a child.”“Perhaps,” continued Villefort, “he had put it in thefoundling hospital.”“Oh, yes, yes,” cried the baroness; “my child isthere!”“I ran to the hospital, and learned that the same night—the nightof the 20th of September—a child had been brought there, wrapped in partof a fine linen napkin, purposely torn in half. This portion of the napkin wasmarked with half a baron’s crown, and the letter H.”“Truly, truly,” said Madame Danglars, “all my linen is markedthus; Monsieur de Nargonne was a baron, and my name is Hermine. Thank God, mychild was not then dead!”“No, it was not dead.”“And you can tell me so without fearing to make me die of joy? Where isthe child?”Villefort shrugged his shoulders.“Do I know?” said he; “and do you believe that if I knew Iwould relate to you all its trials and all its adventures as would a dramatistor a novel writer? Alas, no, I know not. A woman, about six months after, cameto claim it with the other half of the napkin. This woman gave all therequisite particulars, and it was intrusted to her.”“But you should have inquired for the woman; you should have tracedher.”“And what do you think I did? I feigned a criminal process, and employedall the most acute bloodhounds and skilful agents in search of her. They tracedher to Châlons, and there they lost her.”“They lost her?”“Yes, forever.”Madame Danglars had listened to this recital with a sigh, a tear, or a shriekfor every detail. “And this is all?” said she; “and youstopped there?”“Oh, no,” said Villefort; “I never ceased to search and toinquire. However, the last two or three years I had allowed myself somerespite. But now I will begin with more perseverance and fury than ever, sincefear urges me, not my conscience.”“But,” replied Madame Danglars, “the Count of Monte Cristocan know nothing, or he would not seek our society as he does.”“Oh, the wickedness of man is very great,” said Villefort,“since it surpasses the goodness of God. Did you observe that man’seyes while he was speaking to us?”“No.”“But have you ever watched him carefully?”“Doubtless he is capricious, but that is all; one thing alone struckme,—of all the exquisite things he placed before us, he touched nothing.I might have suspected he was poisoning us.”“And you see you would have been deceived.”“Yes, doubtless.”“But believe me, that man has other projects. For that reason I wished tosee you, to speak to you, to warn you against everyone, but especially againsthim. Tell me,” cried Villefort, fixing his eyes more steadfastly on herthan he had ever done before, “did you ever reveal to anyone ourconnection?”“Never, to anyone.”“You understand me,” replied Villefort, affectionately; “whenI say anyone,—pardon my urgency,—to anyone living I mean?”“Yes, yes, I understand very well,” ejaculated the baroness;“never, I swear to you.”“Were you ever in the habit of writing in the evening what had transpiredin the morning? Do you keep a journal?”“No, my life has been passed in frivolity; I wish to forget itmyself.”“Do you talk in your sleep?”“I sleep soundly, like a child; do you not remember?”The color mounted to the baroness’s face, and Villefort turned awfullypale.“It is true,” said he, in so low a tone that he could hardly beheard.“Well?” said the baroness.“Well, I understand what I now have to do,” replied Villefort.“In less than one week from this time I will ascertain who this M. deMonte Cristo is, whence he comes, where he goes, and why he speaks in ourpresence of children that have been disinterred in a garden.”Villefort pronounced these words with an accent which would have made the countshudder had he heard him. Then he pressed the hand the baroness reluctantlygave him, and led her respectfully back to the door. Madame Danglars returnedin another cab to the passage, on the other side of which she found hercarriage, and her coachman sleeping peacefully on his box while waiting forher. Chapter 68. A SummerBallThe same day during theinterview between Madame Danglars and the procureur, a travelling-carriageentered the Rue du Helder, passed through the gateway of No. 27, and stopped inthe yard. In a moment the door was opened, and Madame de Morcerf alighted,leaning on her son’s arm. Albert soon left her, ordered his horses, andhaving arranged his toilet, drove to the Champs-Élysées, to the house of MonteCristo.The count received him with his habitual smile. It was a strange thing that noone ever appeared to advance a step in that man’s favor. Those who would,as it were, force a passage to his heart, found an impassable barrier. Morcerf,who ran towards him with open arms, was chilled as he drew near, in spite ofthe friendly smile, and simply held out his hand. Monte Cristo shook it coldly,according to his invariable practice.“Here I am, dear count.”“Welcome home again.”“I arrived an hour since.”“From Dieppe?”“No, from Tréport.”“Indeed?”“And I have come at once to see you.”“That is extremely kind of you,” said Monte Cristo with a tone ofperfect indifference.“And what is the news?”“You should not ask a stranger, a foreigner, for news.”“I know it, but in asking for news, I mean, have you done anything forme?”“Had you commissioned me?” said Monte Cristo, feigning uneasiness.“Come, come,” said Albert, “do not assume so muchindifference. It is said, sympathy travels rapidly, and when at Tréport, I feltthe electric shock; you have either been working for me or thinking ofme.”“Possibly,” said Monte Cristo, “I have indeed thought of you,but the magnetic wire I was guiding acted, indeed, without my knowledge.”“Indeed! Pray tell me how it happened.”“Willingly. M. Danglars dined with me.”“I know it; to avoid meeting him, my mother and I left town.”“But he met here M. Andrea Cavalcanti.”“Your Italian prince?”“Not so fast; M. Andrea only calls himself count.”“Calls himself, do you say?”“Yes, calls himself.”“Is he not a count?”“What can I know of him? He calls himself so. I, of course, give him thesame title, and everyone else does likewise.”“What a strange man you are! What next? You say M. Danglars dinedhere?”“Yes, with Count Cavalcanti, the marquis his father, Madame Danglars, M.and Madame de Villefort,—charming people,—M. Debray, MaximilianMorrel, and M. de Château-Renaud.”“Did they speak of me?”“Not a word.”“So much the worse.”“Why so? I thought you wished them to forget you?”“If they did not speak of me, I am sure they thought about me, and I amin despair.”“How will that affect you, since Mademoiselle Danglars was not among thenumber here who thought of you? Truly, she might have thought of you athome.”“I have no fear of that; or, if she did, it was only in the same way inwhich I think of her.”“Touching sympathy! So you hate each other?” said the count.“Listen,” said Morcerf—“if Mademoiselle Danglars weredisposed to take pity on my supposed martyrdom on her account, and woulddispense with all matrimonial formalities between our two families, I am readyto agree to the arrangement. In a word, Mademoiselle Danglars would make acharming mistress—but a wife—diable!”“And this,” said Monte Cristo, “is your opinion of yourintended spouse?”“Yes; it is rather unkind, I acknowledge, but it is true. But as thisdream cannot be realized, since Mademoiselle Danglars must become my lawfulwife, live perpetually with me, sing to me, compose verses and music within tenpaces of me, and that for my whole life, it frightens me. One may forsake amistress, but a wife,—good heavens! There she must always be; and tomarry Mademoiselle Danglars would be awful.”“You are difficult to please, viscount.”“Yes, for I often wish for what is impossible.”“What is that?”“To find such a wife as my father found.”Monte Cristo turned pale, and looked at Albert, while playing with somemagnificent pistols.“Your father was fortunate, then?” said he.“You know my opinion of my mother, count; look at her,—stillbeautiful, witty, more charming than ever. For any other son to have stayedwith his mother for four days at Tréport, it would have been a condescension ora martyrdom, while I return, more contented, more peaceful—shall I saymore poetic!—than if I had taken Queen Mab or Titania as mycompanion.”“That is an overwhelming demonstration, and you would make everyone vowto live a single life.”“Such are my reasons for not liking to marry Mademoiselle Danglars. Haveyou ever noticed how much a thing is heightened in value when we obtainpossession of it? The diamond which glittered in the window at Marlé’s orFossin’s shines with more splendor when it is our own; but if we arecompelled to acknowledge the superiority of another, and still must retain theone that is inferior, do you not know what we have to endure?”“Worldling,” murmured the count.“Thus I shall rejoice when Mademoiselle Eugénie perceives I am but apitiful atom, with scarcely as many hundred thousand francs as she hasmillions.” Monte Cristo smiled. “One plan occurred to me,”continued Albert; “Franz likes all that is eccentric; I tried to make himfall in love with Mademoiselle Danglars; but in spite of four letters, writtenin the most alluring style, he invariably answered: ‘My eccentricity maybe great, but it will not make me break my promise.’”“That is what I call devoted friendship, to recommend to another one whomyou would not marry yourself.” Albert smiled.“Apropos,” continued he, “Franz is coming soon, but it willnot interest you; you dislike him, I think?”“I?” said Monte Cristo; “my dear viscount, how have youdiscovered that I did not like M. Franz! I like everyone.”“And you include me in the expression everyone—many thanks!”“Let us not mistake,” said Monte Cristo; “I love everyone asGod commands us to love our neighbor, as Christians; but I thoroughly hate buta few. Let us return to M. Franz d’Épinay. Did you say he wascoming?”“Yes; summoned by M. de Villefort, who is apparently as anxious to getMademoiselle Valentine married as M. Danglars is to see Mademoiselle Eugéniesettled. It must be a very irksome office to be the father of a grown-updaughter; it seems to make one feverish, and to raise one’s pulse toninety beats a minute until the deed is done.”“But M. d’Épinay, unlike you, bears his misfortunepatiently.”“Still more, he talks seriously about the matter, puts on a white tie,and speaks of his family. He entertains a very high opinion of M. and Madame deVillefort.”“Which they deserve, do they not?”“I believe they do. M. de Villefort has always passed for a severe but ajust man.”“There is, then, one,” said Monte Cristo, “whom you do notcondemn like poor Danglars?”“Because I am not compelled to marry his daughter perhaps,” repliedAlbert, laughing.“Indeed, my dear sir,” said Monte Cristo, “you arerevoltingly foppish.”“I foppish? how do you mean?”“Yes; pray take a cigar, and cease to defend yourself, and to struggle toescape marrying Mademoiselle Danglars. Let things take their course; perhapsyou may not have to retract.”“Bah!” said Albert, staring.“Doubtless, my dear viscount, you will not be taken by force; andseriously, do you wish to break off your engagement?”“I would give a hundred thousand francs to be able to do so.”“Then make yourself quite easy. M. Danglars would give double that sum toattain the same end.”“Am I, indeed, so happy?” said Albert, who still could not preventan almost imperceptible cloud passing across his brow. “But, my dearcount, has M. Danglars any reason?”“Ah! there is your proud and selfish nature. You would expose theself-love of another with a hatchet, but you shrink if your own is attackedwith a needle.”“But yet, M. Danglars appeared——”“Delighted with you, was he not? Well, he is a man of bad taste, and isstill more enchanted with another. I know not whom; look and judge foryourself.”“Thank you, I understand. But my mother—no, not my mother; Imistake—my father intends giving a ball.”“A ball at this season?”“Summer balls are fashionable.”“If they were not, the countess has only to wish it, and they wouldbecome so.”“You are right; You know they are select affairs; those who remain inParis in July must be true Parisians. Will you take charge of our invitation toMessieurs Cavalcanti?”“When will it take place?”“On Saturday.”“M. Cavalcanti’s father will be gone.”“But the son will be here; will you invite young M. Cavalcanti?”“I do not know him, viscount.”“You do not know him?”“No, I never saw him until a few days since, and am not responsible forhim.”“But you receive him at your house?”“That is another thing: he was recommended to me by a good abbé, who maybe deceived. Give him a direct invitation, but do not ask me to present him. Ifhe were afterwards to marry Mademoiselle Danglars, you would accuse me ofintrigue, and would be challenging me,—besides, I may not be theremyself.”“Where?”“At your ball.”“Why should you not be there?”“Because you have not yet invited me.”“But I come expressly for that purpose.”“You are very kind, but I may be prevented.”“If I tell you one thing, you will be so amiable as to set aside allimpediments.”“Tell me what it is.”“My mother begs you to come.”“The Comtesse de Morcerf?” said Monte Cristo, starting.“Ah, count,” said Albert, “I assure you Madame de Morcerfspeaks freely to me, and if you have not felt those sympathetic fibres of whichI spoke just now thrill within you, you must be entirely devoid of them, forduring the last four days we have spoken of no one else.”“You have talked of me?”“Yes, that is the penalty of being a living puzzle!”“Then I am also a puzzle to your mother? I should have thought her tooreasonable to be led by imagination.”“A problem, my dear count, for everyone—for my mother as well asothers; much studied, but not solved, you still remain an enigma, do not fear.My mother is only astonished that you remain so long unsolved. I believe, whilethe Countess G—— takes you for Lord Ruthven, my mother imagines youto be Cagliostro or the Count Saint-Germain. The first opportunity you have,confirm her in her opinion; it will be easy for you, as you have the philosophyof the one and the wit of the other.”“I thank you for the warning,” said the count; “I shallendeavor to be prepared for all suppositions.”“You will, then, come on Saturday?”“Yes, since Madame de Morcerf invites me.”“You are very kind.”“Will M. Danglars be there?”“He has already been invited by my father. We shall try to persuade thegreat d’Aguesseau,[11]M. de Villefort, to come, but have not much hope of seeing him.”“‘Never despair of anything,’ says the proverb.”“Do you dance, count?”“I dance?”“Yes, you; it would not be astonishing.”“That is very well before one is over forty. No, I do not dance, but Ilike to see others do so. Does Madame de Morcerf dance?”“Never; you can talk to her, she so delights in your conversation.”“Indeed?”“Yes, truly; and I assure you. You are the only man of whom I have heardher speak with interest.” Albert rose and took his hat; the countconducted him to the door.“I have one thing to reproach myself with,” said he, stoppingAlbert on the steps. “What is it?”“I have spoken to you indiscreetly about Danglars.”“On the contrary, speak to me always in the same strain about him.”“I am glad to be reassured on that point. Apropos, when do you aspect M.d’Épinay?”“Five or six days hence at the latest.”“And when is he to be married?”“Immediately on the arrival of M. and Madame de Saint-Méran.”“Bring him to see me. Although you say I do not like him, I assure you Ishall be happy to see him.”“I will obey your orders, my lord.”“Good-bye.”“Until Saturday, when I may expect you, may I not?”“Yes, I promised you.” The Count watched Albert, waving his hand tohim. When he had mounted his phaeton, Monte Cristo turned, and seeingBertuccio, “What news?” said he.“She went to the Palais,” replied the steward.“Did she stay long there?”“An hour and a half.”“Did she return home?”“Directly.”“Well, my dear Bertuccio,” said the count, “I now advise youto go in quest of the little estate I spoke to you of in Normandy.”Bertuccio bowed, and as his wishes were in perfect harmony with the order hehad received, he started the same evening. Chapter 69. TheInquiryM. de Villefort kept thepromise he had made to Madame Danglars, to endeavor to find out how the Countof Monte Cristo had discovered the history of the house at Auteuil. He wrotethe same day for the required information to M. de Boville, who, from havingbeen an inspector of prisons, was promoted to a high office in the police; andthe latter begged for two days time to ascertain exactly who would be mostlikely to give him full particulars. At the end of the second day M. deVillefort received the following note:“The person called the Count of Monte Cristo is an intimate acquaintanceof Lord Wilmore, a rich foreigner, who is sometimes seen in Paris and who isthere at this moment; he is also known to the Abbé Busoni, a Sicilian priest,of high repute in the East, where he has done much good.”M. de Villefort replied by ordering the strictest inquiries to be maderespecting these two persons; his orders were executed, and the followingevening he received these details:“The abbé, who was in Paris only for a month, inhabited a smalltwo-storied house behind Saint-Sulpice; there were two rooms on each floor andhe was the only tenant. The two lower rooms consisted of a dining-room, with atable, chairs, and side-board of walnut, and a wainscoted parlor, withoutornaments, carpet, or timepiece. It was evident that the abbé limited himselfto objects of strict necessity. He preferred to use the sitting-room upstairs,which was more library than parlor, and was furnished with theological booksand parchments, in which he delighted to bury himself for months at a time,according to his valet de chambre. His valet looked at the visitors through asort of wicket; and if their faces were unknown to him or displeased him, hereplied that the abbé was not in Paris, an answer which satisfied most persons,because the abbé was known to be a great traveller. Besides, whether at home ornot, whether in Paris or Cairo, the abbé always left something to give away,which the valet distributed through this wicket in his master’s name. Theother room near the library was a bedroom. A bed without curtains, fourarmchairs, and a couch, covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, composed, with aprie-Dieu, all its furniture.“Lord Wilmore resided in Rue Fontaine-Saint-Georges. He was one of thoseEnglish tourists who consume a large fortune in travelling. He hired theapartment in which he lived furnished, passed only a few hours in the daythere, and rarely slept there. One of his peculiarities was never to speak aword of French, which he however wrote with great facility.”The day after this important information had been given to the king’sattorney, a man alighted from a carriage at the corner of the Rue Férou, andrapping at an olive-green door, asked if the Abbé Busoni were within.“No, he went out early this morning,” replied the valet.“I might not always be content with that answer,” replied thevisitor, “for I come from one to whom everyone must be at home. But havethe kindness to give the Abbé Busoni——”“I told you he was not at home,” repeated the valet.“Then on his return give him that card and this sealed paper. Will he beat home at eight o’clock this evening?”“Doubtless, unless he is at work, which is the same as if he wereout.”“I will come again at that time,” replied the visitor, who thenretired.At the appointed hour the same man returned in the same carriage, which,instead of stopping this time at the end of the Rue Férou, drove up to thegreen door. He knocked, and it opened immediately to admit him. From the signsof respect the valet paid him, he saw that his note had produced a good effect.“Is the abbé at home?” asked he.“Yes; he is at work in his library, but he expects you, sir,”replied the valet. The stranger ascended a rough staircase, and before a table,illumined by a lamp whose light was concentrated by a large shade while therest of the apartment was in partial darkness, he perceived the abbé in amonk’s dress, with a cowl on his head such as was used by learned men ofthe Middle Ages.“Have I the honor of addressing the Abbé Busoni?” asked thevisitor.“Yes, sir,” replied the abbé; “and you are the person whom M.de Boville, formerly an inspector of prisons, sends to me from the prefect ofpolice?”“Exactly, sir.”“One of the agents appointed to secure the safety of Paris?”“Yes, sir” replied the stranger with a slight hesitation, andblushing.The abbé replaced the large spectacles, which covered not only his eyes but histemples, and sitting down motioned to his visitor to do the same. “I amat your service, sir,” said the abbé, with a marked Italian accent.“The mission with which I am charged, sir,” replied the visitor,speaking with hesitation, “is a confidential one on the part of him whofulfils it, and him by whom he is employed.” The abbé bowed. “Yourprobity,” replied the stranger, “is so well known to the prefectthat he wishes as a magistrate to ascertain from you some particulars connectedwith the public safety, to ascertain which I am deputed to see you. It is hopedthat no ties of friendship or humane consideration will induce you to concealthe truth.”“Provided, sir, the particulars you wish for do not interfere with myscruples or my conscience. I am a priest, sir, and the secrets of confession,for instance, must remain between me and God, and not between me and humanjustice.”“Do not alarm yourself, monsieur, we will duly respect yourconscience.”At this moment the abbé pressed down his side of the shade and so raised it onthe other, throwing a bright light on the stranger’s face, while his ownremained obscured.“Excuse me, abbé,” said the envoy of the prefect of the police,“but the light tries my eyes very much.” The abbé lowered theshade.“Now, sir, I am listening—go on.”“I will come at once to the point. Do you know the Count of MonteCristo?”“You mean Monsieur Zaccone, I presume?”“Zaccone?—is not his name Monte Cristo?”“Monte Cristo is the name of an estate, or, rather, of a rock, and not afamily name.”“Well, be it so—let us not dispute about words; and since M. deMonte Cristo and M. Zaccone are the same——”“Absolutely the same.”“Let us speak of M. Zaccone.”“Agreed.”“I asked you if you knew him?”“Extremely well.”“Who is he?”“The son of a rich shipbuilder in Malta.”“I know that is the report; but, as you are aware, the police does notcontent itself with vague reports.”“However,” replied the abbé, with an affable smile, “whenthat report is in accordance with the truth, everybody must believe it, thepolice as well as all the rest.”“Are you sure of what you assert?”“What do you mean by that question?”“Understand, sir, I do not in the least suspect your veracity; I ask ifyou are certain of it?”“I knew his father, M. Zaccone.”“Ah, indeed?”“And when a child I often played with the son in the timber-yards.”“But whence does he derive the title of count?”“You are aware that may be bought.”“In Italy?”“Everywhere.”“And his immense riches, whence does he procure them?”“They may not be so very great.”“How much do you suppose he possesses?”“From one hundred and fifty to two hundred thousand livres perannum.”“That is reasonable,” said the visitor; “I have heard he hadthree or four millions.”“Two hundred thousand per annum would make four millions ofcapital.”“But I was told he had four millions per annum.”“That is not probable.”“Do you know this Island of Monte Cristo?”“Certainly, everyone who has come from Palermo, Naples, or Rome to Franceby sea must know it, since he has passed close to it and must have seenit.”“I am told it is a delightful place?”“It is a rock.”“And why has the count bought a rock?”“For the sake of being a count. In Italy one must have territorialpossessions to be a count.”“You have, doubtless, heard the adventures of M. Zaccone’syouth?”“The father’s?”“No, the son’s.”“I know nothing certain; at that period of his life, I lost sight of myyoung comrade.”“Was he in the wars?”“I think he entered the service.”“In what branch?”“In the navy.”“Are you not his confessor?”“No, sir; I believe he is a Lutheran.”“A Lutheran?”“I say, I believe such is the case, I do not affirm it; besides, libertyof conscience is established in France.”“Doubtless, and we are not now inquiring into his creed, but his actions;in the name of the prefect of police, I ask you what you know of him.“He passes for a very charitable man. Our holy father, the pope, has madehim a knight of Jesus Christ for the services he rendered to the Christians inthe East; he has five or six rings as testimonials from Eastern monarchs of hisservices.”“Does he wear them?”“No, but he is proud of them; he is better pleased with rewards given tothe benefactors of man than to his destroyers.”“He is a Quaker then?”“Exactly, he is a Quaker, with the exception of the peculiardress.”“Has he any friends?”“Yes, everyone who knows him is his friend.”“But has he any enemies?”“One only.”“What is his name?”“Lord Wilmore.”“Where is he?”“He is in Paris just now.”“Can he give me any particulars?”“Important ones; he was in India with Zaccone.”“Do you know his abode?”“It’s somewhere in the Chaussée d’Antin; but I know neitherthe street nor the number.”“Are you at variance with the Englishman?”“I love Zaccone, and he hates him; we are consequently notfriends.”“Do you think the Count of Monte Cristo had ever been in France before hemade this visit to Paris?”“To that question I can answer positively; no, sir, he had not, becausehe applied to me six months ago for the particulars he required, and as I didnot know when I might again come to Paris, I recommended M. Cavalcanti tohim.”“Andrea?”“No, Bartolomeo, his father.”“Now, sir, I have but one question more to ask, and I charge you, in thename of honor, of humanity, and of religion, to answer me candidly.”“What is it, sir?”“Do you know with what design M. de Monte Cristo purchased a house atAuteuil?”“Certainly, for he told me.”“What is it, sir?”“To make a lunatic asylum of it, similar to that founded by the Count ofPisani at Palermo. Do you know about that institution?”“I have heard of it.”“It is a magnificent charity.” Having said this, the abbé bowed toimply he wished to pursue his studies.The visitor either understood the abbé’s meaning, or had no morequestions to ask; he arose, and the abbé accompanied him to the door.“You are a great almsgiver,” said the visitor, “and althoughyou are said to be rich, I will venture to offer you something for your poorpeople; will you accept my offering?”“I thank you, sir; I am only jealous in one thing, and that is that therelief I give should be entirely from my own resources.”“However——”“My resolution, sir, is unchangeable, but you have only to search foryourself and you will find, alas, but too many objects upon whom to exerciseyour benevolence.”The abbé once more bowed as he opened the door, the stranger bowed and took hisleave, and the carriage conveyed him straight to the house of M. de Villefort.An hour afterwards the carriage was again ordered, and this time it went to theRue Fontaine-Saint-Georges, and stopped at No. 5, where Lord Wilmore lived. Thestranger had written to Lord Wilmore, requesting an interview, which the latterhad fixed for ten o’clock. As the envoy of the prefect of police arrivedten minutes before ten, he was told that Lord Wilmore, who was precision andpunctuality personified, was not yet come in, but that he would be sure toreturn as the clock struck.The visitor was introduced into the drawing-room, which was like all otherfurnished drawing-rooms. A mantle-piece, with two modern Sèvres vases, atimepiece representing Cupid with his bent bow, a mirror with an engraving oneach side—one representing Homer carrying his guide, the other,Belisarius begging—a grayish paper; red and black tapestry—such wasthe appearance of Lord Wilmore’s drawing-room.It was illuminated by lamps with ground-glass shades which gave only a feeblelight, as if out of consideration for the envoy’s weak sight. After tenminutes’ expectation the clock struck ten; at the fifth stroke the dooropened and Lord Wilmore appeared. He was rather above the middle height, withthin reddish whiskers, light complexion and light hair, turning rather gray. Hewas dressed with all the English peculiarity, namely, in a blue coat, with giltbuttons and high collar, in the fashion of 1811, a white kerseymere waistcoat,and nankeen pantaloons, three inches too short, but which were prevented bystraps from slipping up to the knee. His first remark on entering was:“You know, sir, I do not speak French?”“I know you do not like to converse in our language,” replied theenvoy.“But you may use it,” replied Lord Wilmore; “I understandit.”“And I,” replied the visitor, changing his idiom, “knowenough of English to keep up the conversation. Do not put yourself to theslightest inconvenience.”“Aw?” said Lord Wilmore, with that tone which is only known tonatives of Great Britain.The envoy presented his letter of introduction, which the latter read withEnglish coolness, and having finished:“I understand,” said he, “perfectly.”Then began the questions, which were similar to those which had been addressedto the Abbé Busoni. But as Lord Wilmore, in the character of the count’senemy, was less restrained in his answers, they were more numerous; hedescribed the youth of Monte Cristo, who he said, at ten years of age, enteredthe service of one of the petty sovereigns of India who make war on theEnglish. It was there Wilmore had first met him and fought against him; and inthat war Zaccone had been taken prisoner, sent to England, and consigned to thehulks, whence he had escaped by swimming. Then began his travels, his duels,his caprices; then the insurrection in Greece broke out, and he had served inthe Grecian ranks. While in that service he had discovered a silver mine in themountains of Thessaly, but he had been careful to conceal it from everyone.After the battle of Navarino, when the Greek government was consolidated, heasked of King Otho a mining grant for that district, which was given him. Hencethat immense fortune, which, in Lord Wilmore’s opinion, possibly amountedto one or two millions per annum,—a precarious fortune, which might bemomentarily lost by the failure of the mine.“But,” asked the visitor, “do you know why he came toFrance?”“He is speculating in railways,” said Lord Wilmore, “and ashe is an expert chemist and physicist, he has invented a new system oftelegraphy, which he is seeking to bring to perfection.”“How much does he spend yearly?” asked the prefect.“Not more than five or six hundred thousand francs,” said LordWilmore; “he is a miser.” Hatred evidently inspired the Englishman,who, knowing no other reproach to bring on the count, accused him of avarice.“Do you know his house at Auteuil?”“Certainly.”“What do you know respecting it?”“Do you wish to know why he bought it?”“Yes.”“The count is a speculator, who will certainly ruin himself inexperiments. He supposes there is in the neighborhood of the house he hasbought a mineral spring equal to those at Bagnères, Luchon, and Cauterets. Heis going to turn his house into a Badhaus, as the Germans term it. Hehas already dug up all the garden two or three times to find the famous spring,and, being unsuccessful, he will soon purchase all the contiguous houses. Now,as I dislike him, and hope his railway, his electric telegraph, or his searchfor baths, will ruin him, I am watching for his discomfiture, which must soontake place.”“What was the cause of your quarrel?”“When he was in England he seduced the wife of one of my friends.”“Why do you not seek revenge?”“I have already fought three duels with him,” said the Englishman,“the first with the pistol, the second with the sword, and the third withthe sabre.”“And what was the result of those duels?”“The first time, he broke my arm; the second, he wounded me in thebreast; and the third time, made this large wound.” The Englishman turneddown his shirt-collar, and showed a scar, whose redness proved it to be arecent one. “So that, you see, there is a deadly feud between us.”“But,” said the envoy, “you do not go about it in the rightway to kill him, if I understand you correctly.”“Aw?” said the Englishman, “I practice shooting every day,and every other day Grisier comes to my house.”This was all the visitor wished to ascertain, or, rather, all the Englishmanappeared to know. The agent arose, and having bowed to Lord Wilmore, whoreturned his salutation with the stiff politeness of the English, he retired.Lord Wilmore, having heard the door close after him, returned to his bedroom,where with one hand he pulled off his light hair, his red whiskers, his falsejaw, and his wound, to resume the black hair, dark complexion, and pearly teethof the Count of Monte Cristo.It was M. de Villefort, and not the prefect, who returned to the house of M. deVillefort. The procureur felt more at ease, although he had learned nothingreally satisfactory, and, for the first time since the dinner-party at Auteuil,he slept soundly. Chapter 70. The BallIt was in the warmestdays of July, when in due course of time the Saturday arrived upon which theball was to take place at M. de Morcerf’s. It was ten o’clock atnight; the branches of the great trees in the garden of the count’s housestood out boldly against the azure canopy of heaven, which was studded withgolden stars, but where the last fleeting clouds of a vanishing storm yetlingered.From the apartments on the ground floor might be heard the sound of music, withthe whirl of the waltz and galop, while brilliant streams of light shonethrough the openings of the Venetian blinds. At this moment the garden was onlyoccupied by about ten servants, who had just received orders from theirmistress to prepare the supper, the serenity of the weather continuing toincrease. Until now, it had been undecided whether the supper should take placein the dining-room, or under a long tent erected on the lawn, but the beautifulblue sky, studded with stars, had settled the question in favor of the lawn.The gardens were illuminated with colored lanterns, according to the Italiancustom, and, as is usual in countries where the luxuries of the table—therarest of all luxuries in their complete form—are well understood, thesupper-table was loaded with wax-lights and flowers.At the time the Countess of Morcerf returned to the rooms, after giving herorders, many guests were arriving, more attracted by the charming hospitalityof the countess than by the distinguished position of the count; for, owing tothe good taste of Mercédès, one was sure of finding some devices at herentertainment worthy of describing, or even copying in case of need.Madame Danglars, in whom the events we have related had caused deep anxiety,had hesitated about going to Madame de Morcerf’s, when during the morningher carriage happened to meet that of Villefort. The latter made a sign, andwhen the carriages had drawn close together, said:“You are going to Madame de Morcerf’s, are you not?”“No,” replied Madame Danglars, “I am too ill.”“You are wrong,” replied Villefort, significantly; “it isimportant that you should be seen there.”“Do you think so?” asked the baroness.“I do.”“In that case I will go.”And the two carriages passed on towards their different destinations. MadameDanglars therefore came, not only beautiful in person, but radiant withsplendor; she entered by one door at the time when Mercédès appeared at thedoor. The countess took Albert to meet Madame Danglars. He approached, paid hersome well merited compliments on her toilet, and offered his arm to conduct herto a seat. Albert looked around him.“You are looking for my daughter?” said the baroness, smiling.“I confess it,” replied Albert. “Could you have been so cruelas not to bring her?”“Calm yourself. She has met Mademoiselle de Villefort, and has taken herarm; see, they are following us, both in white dresses, one with a bouquet ofcamellias, the other with one of myosotis. But tell me——”“Well, what do you wish to know?”“Will not the Count of Monte Cristo be here tonight?”“Seventeen!” replied Albert.“What do you mean?”“I only mean that the count seems the rage,” replied the viscount,smiling, “and that you are the seventeenth person that has asked me thesame question. The count is in fashion; I congratulate him upon it.”“And have you replied to everyone as you have to me?”“Ah, to be sure, I have not answered you; be satisfied, we shall havethis ‘lion’; we are among the privileged ones.”“Were you at the Opera yesterday?”“No.”“He was there.”“Ah, indeed? And did the eccentric person commit any neworiginality?”“Can he be seen without doing so? Elssler was dancing in Le Diableboiteux; the Greek princess was in ecstasies. After the cachucha he placeda magnificent ring on the stem of a bouquet, and threw it to the charmingdanseuse, who, in the third act, to do honor to the gift, reappeared with it onher finger. And the Greek princess,—will she be here?”“No, you will be deprived of that pleasure; her position in thecount’s establishment is not sufficiently understood.”“Wait; leave me here, and go and speak to Madame de Villefort, who istrying to attract your attention.”Albert bowed to Madame Danglars, and advanced towards Madame de Villefort,whose lips opened as he approached.“I wager anything,” said Albert, interrupting her, “that Iknow what you were about to say.”“Well, what is it?”“If I guess rightly, will you confess it?”“Yes.”“On your honor?”“On my honor.”“You were going to ask me if the Count of Monte Cristo had arrived, orwas expected.”“Not at all. It is not of him that I am now thinking. I was going to askyou if you had received any news of Monsieur Franz.”“Yes,—yesterday.”“What did he tell you?”“That he was leaving at the same time as his letter.”“Well, now then, the count?”“The count will come, of that you may be satisfied.”“You know that he has another name besides Monte Cristo?”“No, I did not know it.”“Monte Cristo is the name of an island, and he has a family name.”“I never heard it.”“Well, then, I am better informed than you; his name is Zaccone.”“It is possible.”“He is a Maltese.”“That is also possible.“The son of a shipowner.”“Really, you should relate all this aloud, you would have the greatestsuccess.”“He served in India, discovered a mine in Thessaly, and comes to Paris toestablish a mineral water-cure at Auteuil.”“Well, I’m sure,” said Morcerf, “this is indeed news!Am I allowed to repeat it?”“Yes, but cautiously, tell one thing at a time, and do not say I toldyou.”“Why so?”“Because it is a secret just discovered.”“By whom?”“The police.”“Then the news originated——”“At the prefect’s last night. Paris, you can understand, isastonished at the sight of such unusual splendor, and the police have madeinquiries.”“Well, well! Nothing more is wanting than to arrest the count as avagabond, on the pretext of his being too rich.”“Indeed, that doubtless would have happened if his credentials had notbeen so favorable.”“Poor count! And is he aware of the danger he has been in?”“I think not.”“Then it will be but charitable to inform him. When he arrives, I willnot fail to do so.”Just then, a handsome young man, with bright eyes, black hair, and glossymoustache, respectfully bowed to Madame de Villefort. Albert extended his hand.“Madame,” said Albert, “allow me to present to you M.Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis, one of our best, and, above all, of ourbravest officers.”“I have already had the pleasure of meeting this gentleman at Auteuil, atthe house of the Count of Monte Cristo,” replied Madame de Villefort,turning away with marked coldness of manner.This answer, and especially the tone in which it was uttered, chilled the heartof poor Morrel. But a recompense was in store for him; turning around, he sawnear the door a beautiful fair face, whose large blue eyes were, without anymarked expression, fixed upon him, while the bouquet of myosotis was gentlyraised to her lips.The salutation was so well understood that Morrel, with the same expression inhis eyes, placed his handkerchief to his mouth; and these two living statues,whose hearts beat so violently under their marble aspect, separated from eachother by the whole length of the room, forgot themselves for a moment, orrather forgot the world in their mutual contemplation. They might have remainedmuch longer lost in one another, without anyone noticing their abstraction. TheCount of Monte Cristo had just entered.We have already said that there was something in the count which attracteduniversal attention wherever he appeared. It was not the coat, unexceptional inits cut, though simple and unornamented; it was not the plain white waistcoat;it was not the trousers, that displayed the foot so perfectly formed—itwas none of these things that attracted the attention,—it was his palecomplexion, his waving black hair, his calm and serene expression, his dark andmelancholy eye, his mouth, chiselled with such marvellous delicacy, which soeasily expressed such high disdain,—these were what fixed the attentionof all upon him.Many men might have been handsomer, but certainly there could be none whoseappearance was more significant, if the expression may be used.Everything about the count seemed to have its meaning, for the constant habitof thought which he had acquired had given an ease and vigor to the expressionof his face, and even to the most trifling gesture, scarcely to be understood.Yet the Parisian world is so strange, that even all this might not have wonattention had there not been connected with it a mysterious story gilded by animmense fortune.Meanwhile he advanced through the assemblage of guests under a battery ofcurious glances towards Madame de Morcerf, who, standing before a mantle-pieceornamented with flowers, had seen his entrance in a looking-glass placedopposite the door, and was prepared to receive him. She turned towards him witha serene smile just at the moment he was bowing to her. No doubt she fanciedthe count would speak to her, while on his side the count thought she was aboutto address him; but both remained silent, and after a mere bow, Monte Cristodirected his steps to Albert, who received him cordially.“Have you seen my mother?” asked Albert.“I have just had the pleasure,” replied the count; “but Ihave not seen your father.”“See, he is down there, talking politics with that little group of greatgeniuses.”“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “and so those gentlemen downthere are men of great talent. I should not have guessed it. And for what kindof talent are they celebrated? You know there are different sorts.”“That tall, harsh-looking man is very learned, he discovered, in theneighborhood of Rome, a kind of lizard with a vertebra more than lizardsusually have, and he immediately laid his discovery before the Institute. Thething was discussed for a long time, but finally decided in his favor. I canassure you the vertebra made a great noise in the learned world, and thegentleman, who was only a knight of the Legion of Honor, was made anofficer.”“Come,” said Monte Cristo, “this cross seems to me to bewisely awarded. I suppose, had he found another additional vertebra, they wouldhave made him a commander.”“Very likely,” said Albert.“And who can that person be who has taken it into his head to wraphimself up in a blue coat embroidered with green?”“Oh, that coat is not his own idea; it is the Republic’s, whichdeputed David[12]to devise a uniform for the Academicians.”“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo; “so this gentleman is anAcademician?”“Within the last week he has been made one of the learnedassembly.”“And what is his especial talent?”“His talent? I believe he thrusts pins through the heads of rabbits, hemakes fowls eat madder, and punches the spinal marrow out of dogs withwhalebone.”“And he is made a member of the Academy of Sciences for this?”“No; of the French Academy.”“But what has the French Academy to do with all this?”“I was going to tell you. It seems——”“That his experiments have very considerably advanced the cause ofscience, doubtless?”“No; that his style of writing is very good.”“This must be very flattering to the feelings of the rabbits into whoseheads he has thrust pins, to the fowls whose bones he has dyed red, and to thedogs whose spinal marrow he has punched out?”Albert laughed.“And the other one?” demanded the count.“That one?”“Yes, the third.”“The one in the dark blue coat?”“Yes.”“He is a colleague of the count, and one of the most active opponents tothe idea of providing the Chamber of Peers with a uniform. He was verysuccessful upon that question. He stood badly with the Liberal papers, but hisnoble opposition to the wishes of the court is now getting him into favor withthe journalists. They talk of making him an ambassador.”“And what are his claims to the peerage?”“He has composed two or three comic operas, written four or five articlesin the Siècle, and voted five or six years on the ministerialside.”“Bravo, viscount,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “you are adelightful cicerone. And now you will do me a favor, will younot?”“What is it?”“Do not introduce me to any of these gentlemen; and should they wish it,you will warn me.” Just then the count felt his arm pressed. He turnedround; it was Danglars.“Ah! is it you, baron?” said he.“Why do you call me baron?” said Danglars; “you know that Icare nothing for my title. I am not like you, viscount; you like your title, doyou not?”“Certainly,” replied Albert, “seeing that without my title Ishould be nothing; while you, sacrificing the baron, would still remain themillionaire.”“Which seems to me the finest title under the royalty of July,”replied Danglars.“Unfortunately,” said Monte Cristo, “one’s title to amillionaire does not last for life, like that of baron, peer of France, oracademician; for example, the millionaires Franck & Poulmann, of Frankfurt,who have just become bankrupts.”“Indeed?” said Danglars, becoming pale.“Yes; I received the news this evening by a courier. I had about amillion in their hands, but, warned in time, I withdrew it a month ago.”“Ah, mon Dieu!” exclaimed Danglars, “they have drawnon me for 200,000 francs!”“Well, you can throw out the draft; their signature is worth five percent.”“Yes, but it is too late,” said Danglars, “I have honoredtheir bills.”“Then,” said Monte Cristo, “here are 200,000 francs goneafter——”“Hush, do not mention these things,” said Danglars; then,approaching Monte Cristo, he added, “especially before young M.Cavalcanti;” after which he smiled, and turned towards the young man inquestion.Albert had left the count to speak to his mother, Danglars to converse withyoung Cavalcanti; Monte Cristo was for an instant alone. Meanwhile the heatbecame excessive. The footmen were hastening through the rooms with waitersloaded with ices. Monte Cristo wiped the perspiration from his forehead, butdrew back when the waiter was presented to him; he took no refreshment. Madamede Morcerf did not lose sight of Monte Cristo; she saw that he took nothing,and even noticed his gesture of refusal.“Albert,” she asked, “did you notice that?”“What, mother?”“That the count has never been willing to partake of food under the roofof M. de Morcerf.”“Yes; but then he breakfasted with me—indeed, he made his firstappearance in the world on that occasion.”“But your house is not M. de Morcerf’s,” murmured Mercédès;“and since he has been here I have watched him.”“Well?”“Well, he has taken nothing yet.”“The count is very temperate.”Mercédès smiled sadly.“Approach him,” said she, “and when the next waiter passes,insist upon his taking something.”“But why, mother?”“Just to please me, Albert,” said Mercédès. Albert kissed hismother’s hand, and drew near the count. Another salver passed, loadedlike the preceding ones; she saw Albert attempt to persuade the count, but heobstinately refused. Albert rejoined his mother; she was very pale.“Well,” said she, “you see he refuses?”“Yes; but why need this annoy you?”“You know, Albert, women are singular creatures. I should like to haveseen the count take something in my house, if only an ice. Perhaps he cannotreconcile himself to the French style of living, and might prefer somethingelse.”“Oh, no; I have seen him eat of everything in Italy; no doubt he does notfeel inclined this evening.”“And besides,” said the countess, “accustomed as he is toburning climates, possibly he does not feel the heat as we do.”“I do not think that, for he has complained of feeling almost suffocated,and asked why the Venetian blinds were not opened as well as thewindows.”“In a word,” said Mercédès, “it was a way of assuring me thathis abstinence was intended.”And she left the room.A minute afterwards the blinds were thrown open, and through the jessamine andclematis that overhung the window one could see the garden ornamented withlanterns, and the supper laid under the tent. Dancers, players, talkers, alluttered an exclamation of joy—everyone inhaled with delight the breezethat floated in. At the same time Mercédès reappeared, paler than before, butwith that imperturbable expression of countenance which she sometimes wore. Shewent straight to the group of which her husband formed the centre.“Do not detain those gentlemen here, count,” she said; “theywould prefer, I should think, to breathe in the garden rather than suffocatehere, since they are not playing.”“Ah,” said a gallant old general, who, in 1809, had sung Partantpour la Syrie,—“we will not go alone to the garden.”“Then,” said Mercédès, “I will lead the way.”Turning towards Monte Cristo, she added, “count, will you oblige me withyour arm?”The count almost staggered at these simple words; then he fixed his eyes onMercédès. It was only a momentary glance, but it seemed to the countess to havelasted for a century, so much was expressed in that one look. He offered hisarm to the countess; she took it, or rather just touched it with her littlehand, and they together descended the steps, lined with rhododendrons andcamellias. Behind them, by another outlet, a group of about twenty personsrushed into the garden with loud exclamations of delight. Chapter 71. Bread andSaltMadame de Morcerfentered an archway of trees with her companion. It led through a grove oflindens to a conservatory.“It was too warm in the room, was it not, count?” she asked.“Yes, madame; and it was an excellent idea of yours to open the doors andthe blinds.” As he ceased speaking, the count felt the hand of Mercédèstremble. “But you,” he said, “with that light dress, andwithout anything to cover you but that gauze scarf, perhaps you feelcold?”“Do you know where I am leading you?” said the countess, withoutreplying to the question.“No, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “but you see I make noresistance.”“We are going to the greenhouse that you see at the other end of thegrove.”The count looked at Mercédès as if to interrogate her, but she continued towalk on in silence, and he refrained from speaking. They reached the building,ornamented with magnificent fruits, which ripen at the beginning of July in theartificial temperature which takes the place of the sun, so frequently absentin our climate. The countess left the arm of Monte Cristo, and gathered a bunchof Muscatel grapes.“See, count,” she said, with a smile so sad in its expression thatone could almost detect the tears on her eyelids—“see, our Frenchgrapes are not to be compared, I know, with yours of Sicily and Cyprus, but youwill make allowance for our northern sun.” The count bowed, but steppedback.“Do you refuse?” said Mercédès, in a tremulous voice.“Pray excuse me, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “but I nevereat Muscatel grapes.”Mercédès let them fall, and sighed. A magnificent peach was hanging against anadjoining wall, ripened by the same artificial heat. Mercédès drew near, andplucked the fruit.“Take this peach, then,” she said. The count again refused.“What, again?” she exclaimed, in so plaintive an accent that itseemed to stifle a sob; “really, you pain me.”A long silence followed; the peach, like the grapes, fell to the ground.“Count,” added Mercédès with a supplicating glance, “there isa beautiful Arabian custom, which makes eternal friends of those who havetogether eaten bread and salt under the same roof.”“I know it, madame,” replied the count; “but we are inFrance, and not in Arabia, and in France eternal friendships are as rare as thecustom of dividing bread and salt with one another.”“But,” said the countess, breathlessly, with her eyes fixed onMonte Cristo, whose arm she convulsively pressed with both hands, “we arefriends, are we not?”The count became pale as death, the blood rushed to his heart, and then againrising, dyed his cheeks with crimson; his eyes swam like those of a mansuddenly dazzled.“Certainly, we are friends,” he replied; “why should we notbe?”The answer was so little like the one Mercédès desired, that she turned away togive vent to a sigh, which sounded more like a groan. “Thank you,”she said. And they walked on again. They went the whole length of the gardenwithout uttering a word.“Sir,” suddenly exclaimed the countess, after their walk hadcontinued ten minutes in silence, “is it true that you have seen so much,travelled so far, and suffered so deeply?”“I have suffered deeply, madame,” answered Monte Cristo.“But now you are happy?”“Doubtless,” replied the count, “since no one hears mecomplain.”“And your present happiness, has it softened your heart?”“My present happiness equals my past misery,” said the count.“Are you not married?” asked the countess.“I, married?” exclaimed Monte Cristo, shuddering; “who couldhave told you so?”“No one told me you were, but you have frequently been seen at the Operawith a young and lovely woman.”“She is a slave whom I bought at Constantinople, madame, the daughter ofa prince. I have adopted her as my daughter, having no one else to love in theworld.”“You live alone, then?”“I do.”“You have no sister—no son—no father?”“I have no one.”“How can you exist thus without anyone to attach you to life?”“It is not my fault, madame. At Malta, I loved a young girl, was on thepoint of marrying her, when war came and carried me away. I thought she lovedme well enough to wait for me, and even to remain faithful to my memory. When Ireturned she was married. This is the history of most men who have passedtwenty years of age. Perhaps my heart was weaker than the hearts of most men,and I suffered more than they would have done in my place; that is all.”The countess stopped for a moment, as if gasping for breath. “Yes,”she said, “and you have still preserved this love in your heart—onecan only love once—and did you ever see her again?”“Never.”“Never?”“I never returned to the country where she lived.”“To Malta?”“Yes; Malta.”“She is, then, now at Malta?”“I think so.”“And have you forgiven her for all she has made you suffer?”“Her,—yes.”“But only her; do you then still hate those who separated you?”“I hate them? Not at all; why should I?” The countess placedherself before Monte Cristo, still holding in her hand a portion of theperfumed grapes.“Take some,” she said.“Madame, I never eat Muscatel grapes,” replied Monte Cristo, as ifthe subject had not been mentioned before. The countess dashed the grapes intothe nearest thicket, with a gesture of despair.“Inflexible man!” she murmured. Monte Cristo remained as unmoved asif the reproach had not been addressed to him.Albert at this moment ran in. “Oh, mother,” he exclaimed,“such a misfortune has happened!”“What? What has happened?” asked the countess, as though awakeningfrom a sleep to the realities of life; “did you say a misfortune? Indeed,I should expect misfortunes.”“M. de Villefort is here.”“Well?”“He comes to fetch his wife and daughter.”“Why so?”“Because Madame de Saint-Méran is just arrived in Paris, bringing thenews of M. de Saint-Méran’s death, which took place on the first stageafter he left Marseilles. Madame de Villefort, who was in very good spirits,would neither believe nor think of the misfortune, but Mademoiselle Valentine,at the first words, guessed the whole truth, notwithstanding all theprecautions of her father; the blow struck her like a thunderbolt, and she fellsenseless.”“And how was M. de Saint-Méran related to Mademoiselle deVillefort?” said the count.“He was her grandfather on the mother’s side. He was coming here tohasten her marriage with Franz.”“Ah, indeed!”“So Franz must wait. Why was not M. de Saint-Méran also grandfather toMademoiselle Danglars?”“Albert, Albert,” said Madame de Morcerf, in a tone of mildreproof, “what are you saying? Ah, count, he esteems you so highly, tellhim that he has spoken amiss.”And she took two or three steps forward. Monte Cristo watched her with an airso thoughtful, and so full of affectionate admiration, that she turned back andgrasped his hand; at the same time she seized that of her son, and joined themtogether.“We are friends; are we not?” she asked.“Oh, madame, I do not presume to call myself your friend, but at alltimes I am your most respectful servant.” The countess left with anindescribable pang in her heart, and before she had taken ten steps the countsaw her raise her handkerchief to her eyes.“Do not my mother and you agree?” asked Albert, astonished.“On the contrary,” replied the count, “did you not hear herdeclare that we were friends?”They re-entered the drawing-room, which Valentine and Madame de Villefort hadjust quitted. It is perhaps needless to add that Morrel departed almost at thesame time. Chapter 72. Madame deSaint-MéranA gloomy scene hadindeed just passed at the house of M. de Villefort. After the ladies haddeparted for the ball, whither all the entreaties of Madame de Villefort hadfailed in persuading him to accompany them, the procureur had shut himself upin his study, according to his custom, with a heap of papers calculated toalarm anyone else, but which generally scarcely satisfied his inordinatedesires.But this time the papers were a mere matter of form. Villefort had secludedhimself, not to study, but to reflect; and with the door locked and ordersgiven that he should not be disturbed excepting for important business, he satdown in his armchair and began to ponder over the events, the remembrance ofwhich had during the last eight days filled his mind with so many gloomythoughts and bitter recollections.Then, instead of plunging into the mass of documents piled before him, heopened the drawer of his desk, touched a spring, and drew out a parcel ofcherished memoranda, amongst which he had carefully arranged, in charactersonly known to himself, the names of all those who, either in his politicalcareer, in money matters, at the bar, or in his mysterious love affairs, hadbecome his enemies.Their number was formidable, now that he had begun to fear, and yet thesenames, powerful though they were, had often caused him to smile with the samekind of satisfaction experienced by a traveller who from the summit of amountain beholds at his feet the craggy eminences, the almost impassable paths,and the fearful chasms, through which he has so perilously climbed. When he hadrun over all these names in his memory, again read and studied them, commentingmeanwhile upon his lists, he shook his head.“No,” he murmured, “none of my enemies would have waited sopatiently and laboriously for so long a space of time, that they might now comeand crush me with this secret. Sometimes, as Hamlet says:‘Foul deeds will rise,Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes;’but, like a phosphoric light, they rise but to mislead. The story has been toldby the Corsican to some priest, who in his turn has repeated it. M. de MonteCristo may have heard it, and to enlighten himself——“But why should he wish to enlighten himself upon the subject?”asked Villefort, after a moment’s reflection, “what interest canthis M. de Monte Cristo or M. Zaccone,—son of a shipowner of Malta,discoverer of a mine in Thessaly, now visiting Paris for the firsttime,—what interest, I say, can he take in discovering a gloomy,mysterious, and useless fact like this? However, among all the incoherentdetails given to me by the Abbé Busoni and by Lord Wilmore, by that friend andthat enemy, one thing appears certain and clear in my opinion—that in noperiod, in no case, in no circumstance, could there have been any contactbetween him and me.”But Villefort uttered words which even he himself did not believe. He dreadednot so much the revelation, for he could reply to or deny its truth;—hecared little for that mene, mene, tekel upharsin, which appearedsuddenly in letters of blood upon the wall;—but what he was reallyanxious for was to discover whose hand had traced them. While he wasendeavoring to calm his fears,—and instead of dwelling upon the politicalfuture that had so often been the subject of his ambitious dreams, wasimagining a future limited to the enjoyments of home, in fear of awakening theenemy that had so long slept,—the noise of a carriage sounded in theyard, then he heard the steps of an aged person ascending the stairs, followedby tears and lamentations, such as servants always give vent to when they wishto appear interested in their master’s grief.He drew back the bolt of his door, and almost directly an old lady entered,unannounced, carrying her shawl on her arm, and her bonnet in her hand. Thewhite hair was thrown back from her yellow forehead, and her eyes, alreadysunken by the furrows of age, now almost disappeared beneath the eyelidsswollen with grief.“Oh, sir,” she said; “oh, sir, what a misfortune! I shall dieof it; oh, yes, I shall certainly die of it!”And then, falling upon the chair nearest the door, she burst into a paroxysm ofsobs. The servants, standing in the doorway, not daring to approach nearer,were looking at Noirtier’s old servant, who had heard the noise from hismaster’s room, and run there also, remaining behind the others. Villefortrose, and ran towards his mother-in-law, for it was she.“Why, what can have happened?” he exclaimed, “what has thusdisturbed you? Is M. de Saint-Méran with you?”“M. de Saint-Méran is dead,” answered the old marchioness, withoutpreface and without expression; she appeared to be stupefied. Villefort drewback, and clasping his hands together, exclaimed:“Dead!—so suddenly?”“A week ago,” continued Madame de Saint-Méran, “we went outtogether in the carriage after dinner. M. de Saint-Méran had been unwell forsome days; still, the idea of seeing our dear Valentine again inspired him withcourage, and notwithstanding his illness he would leave. At six leagues fromMarseilles, after having eaten some of the lozenges he is accustomed to take,he fell into such a deep sleep, that it appeared to me unnatural; still Ihesitated to wake him, although I fancied that his face was flushed, and thatthe veins of his temples throbbed more violently than usual. However, as itbecame dark, and I could no longer see, I fell asleep; I was soon aroused by apiercing shriek, as from a person suffering in his dreams, and he suddenlythrew his head back violently. I called the valet, I stopped the postilion, Ispoke to M. de Saint-Méran, I applied my smelling-salts; but all was over, andI arrived at Aix by the side of a corpse.”Villefort stood with his mouth half open, quite stupefied.“Of course you sent for a doctor?”“Immediately; but, as I have told you, it was too late.”“Yes; but then he could tell of what complaint the poor marquis haddied.”“Oh, yes, sir, he told me; it appears to have been an apoplecticstroke.”“And what did you do then?”“M. de Saint-Méran had always expressed a desire, in case his deathhappened during his absence from Paris, that his body might be brought to thefamily vault. I had him put into a leaden coffin, and I am preceding him by afew days.”“Oh! my poor mother!” said Villefort, “to have such duties toperform at your age after such a blow!”“God has supported me through all; and then, my dear marquis, he wouldcertainly have done everything for me that I performed for him. It is true thatsince I left him, I seem to have lost my senses. I cannot cry; at my age theysay that we have no more tears,—still I think that when one is in troubleone should have the power of weeping. Where is Valentine, sir? It is on heraccount I am here; I wish to see Valentine.”Villefort thought it would be terrible to reply that Valentine was at a ball;so he only said that she had gone out with her step-mother, and that she shouldbe fetched. “This instant, sir—this instant, I beseech you!”said the old lady. Villefort placed the arm of Madame de Saint-Méran within hisown, and conducted her to his apartment.“Rest yourself, mother,” he said.The marchioness raised her head at this word, and beholding the man who soforcibly reminded her of her deeply-regretted child, who still lived for her inValentine, she felt touched at the name of mother, and bursting into tears, shefell on her knees before an armchair, where she buried her venerable head.Villefort left her to the care of the women, while old Barrois ran,half-scared, to his master; for nothing frightens old people so much as whendeath relaxes its vigilance over them for a moment in order to strike someother old person. Then, while Madame de Saint-Méran remained on her knees,praying fervently, Villefort sent for a cab, and went himself to fetch his wifeand daughter from Madame de Morcerf’s. He was so pale when he appeared atthe door of the ball-room, that Valentine ran to him, saying:“Oh, father, some misfortune has happened!”“Your grandmamma has just arrived, Valentine,” said M. deVillefort.“And grandpapa?” inquired the young girl, trembling withapprehension. M. de Villefort only replied by offering his arm to his daughter.It was just in time, for Valentine’s head swam, and she staggered; Madamede Villefort instantly hastened to her assistance, and aided her husband indragging her to the carriage, saying:“What a singular event! Who could have thought it? Ah, yes, it is indeedstrange!”And the wretched family departed, leaving a cloud of sadness hanging over therest of the evening. At the foot of the stairs, Valentine found Barroisawaiting her.“M. Noirtier wishes to see you tonight, he said, in an undertone.“Tell him I will come when I leave my dear grandmamma,” shereplied, feeling, with true delicacy, that the person to whom she could be ofthe most service just then was Madame de Saint-Méran.Valentine found her grandmother in bed; silent caresses, heartwrung sobs,broken sighs, burning tears, were all that passed in this sad interview, whileMadame de Villefort, leaning on her husband’s arm, maintained all outwardforms of respect, at least towards the poor widow. She soon whispered to herhusband:“I think it would be better for me to retire, with your permission, forthe sight of me appears still to afflict your mother-in-law.” Madame deSaint-Méran heard her.“Yes, yes,” she said softly to Valentine, “let her leave; butdo you stay.”Madame de Villefort left, and Valentine remained alone beside the bed, for theprocureur, overcome with astonishment at the unexpected death, had followed hiswife. Meanwhile, Barrois had returned for the first time to old Noirtier, whohaving heard the noise in the house, had, as we have said, sent his old servantto inquire the cause; on his return, his quick intelligent eye interrogated themessenger.“Alas, sir,” exclaimed Barrois, “a great misfortune hashappened. Madame de Saint-Méran has arrived, and her husband is dead!”M. de Saint-Méran and Noirtier had never been on strict terms of friendship;still, the death of one old man always considerably affects another. Noirtierlet his head fall upon his chest, apparently overwhelmed and thoughtful; thenhe closed one eye, in token of inquiry.Barrois asked, “Mademoiselle Valentine?”Noirtier nodded his head.“She is at the ball, as you know, since she came to say good-bye to youin full dress.” Noirtier again closed his left eye.“Do you wish to see her?” Noirtier again made an affirmative sign.“Well, they have gone to fetch her, no doubt, from Madame deMorcerf’s; I will await her return, and beg her to come up here. Is thatwhat you wish for?”“Yes,” replied the invalid.Barrois, therefore, as we have seen, watched for Valentine, and informed her ofher grandfather’s wish. Consequently, Valentine came up to Noirtier, onleaving Madame de Saint-Méran, who in the midst of her grief had at lastyielded to fatigue and fallen into a feverish sleep. Within reach of her handthey placed a small table upon which stood a bottle of orangeade, her usualbeverage, and a glass. Then, as we have said, the young girl left the bedsideto see M. Noirtier.Valentine kissed the old man, who looked at her with such tenderness that hereyes again filled with tears, whose sources he thought must be exhausted. Theold gentleman continued to dwell upon her with the same expression.“Yes, yes,” said Valentine, “you mean that I have yet a kindgrandfather left, do you not.” The old man intimated that such was hismeaning. “Ah, yes, happily I have,” replied Valentine.“Without that, what would become of me?”It was one o’clock in the morning. Barrois, who wished to go to bedhimself, observed that after such sad events everyone stood in need of rest.Noirtier would not say that the only rest he needed was to see his child, butwished her good-night, for grief and fatigue had made her appear quite ill.The next morning she found her grandmother in bed; the fever had not abated, onthe contrary her eyes glistened and she appeared to be suffering from violentnervous irritability.“Oh, dear grandmamma, are you worse?” exclaimed Valentine,perceiving all these signs of agitation.“No, my child, no,” said Madame de Saint-Méran; “but I wasimpatiently waiting for your arrival, that I might send for your father.”“My father?” inquired Valentine, uneasily.“Yes, I wish to speak to him.”Valentine durst not oppose her grandmother’s wish, the cause of which shedid not know, and an instant afterwards Villefort entered.“Sir,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, without using anycircumlocution, and as if fearing she had no time to lose, “you wrote tome concerning the marriage of this child?”“Yes, madame,” replied Villefort, “it is not only projectedbut arranged.”“Your intended son-in-law is named M. Franz d’Épinay?”“Yes, madame.”“Is he not the son of General d’Épinay who was on our side, and whowas assassinated some days before the usurper returned from the Island ofElba?”“The same.”“Does he not dislike the idea of marrying the granddaughter of aJacobin?”“Our civil dissensions are now happily extinguished, mother,” saidVillefort; “M. d’Épinay was quite a child when his father died, heknows very little of M. Noirtier, and will meet him, if not with pleasure, atleast with indifference.”“Is it a suitable match?”“In every respect.”“And the young man?”“Is regarded with universal esteem.”“You approve of him?”“He is one of the most well-bred young men I know.”During the whole of this conversation Valentine had remained silent.“Well, sir,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, after a few minutes’reflection, “I must hasten the marriage, for I have but a short time tolive.”“You, madame?” “You, dear mamma?” exclaimed M. deVillefort and Valentine at the same time.“I know what I am saying,” continued the marchioness; “I musthurry you, so that, as she has no mother, she may at least have a grandmotherto bless her marriage. I am all that is left to her belonging to my poor Renée,whom you have so soon forgotten, sir.”“Ah, madame,” said Villefort, “you forget that I was obligedto give a mother to my child.”“A stepmother is never a mother, sir. But this is not to thepurpose,—our business concerns Valentine, let us leave the dead inpeace.”All this was said with such exceeding rapidity, that there was something in theconversation that seemed like the beginning of delirium.“It shall be as you wish, madame,” said Villefort; “moreespecially since your wishes coincide with mine, and as soon as M.d’Épinay arrives in Paris——”“My dear grandmother,” interrupted Valentine, “considerdecorum—the recent death. You would not have me marry under such sadauspices?”“My child,” exclaimed the old lady sharply, “let us hear noneof the conventional objections that deter weak minds from preparing for thefuture. I also was married at the death-bed of my mother, and certainly I havenot been less happy on that account.”“Still that idea of death, madame,” said Villefort.“Still?—Always! I tell you I am going to die—do youunderstand? Well, before dying, I wish to see my son-in-law. I wish to tell himto make my child happy; I wish to read in his eyes whether he intends to obeyme;—in fact, I will know him—I will!” continued the old lady,with a fearful expression, “that I may rise from the depths of my graveto find him, if he should not fulfil his duty!”“Madame,” said Villefort, “you must lay aside these exaltedideas, which almost assume the appearance of madness. The dead, once buried intheir graves, rise no more.”“And I tell you, sir, that you are mistaken. This night I have had afearful sleep. It seemed as though my soul were already hovering over my body,my eyes, which I tried to open, closed against my will, and what will appearimpossible above all to you, sir, I saw, with my eyes shut, in the spot whereyou are now standing, issuing from that corner where there is a door leadinginto Madame Villefort’s dressing-room—I saw, I tell you, silentlyenter, a white figure.”Valentine screamed.“It was the fever that disturbed you, madame,” said Villefort.“Doubt, if you please, but I am sure of what I say. I saw a white figure,and as if to prevent my discrediting the testimony of only one of my senses, Iheard my glass removed—the same which is there now on the table.”“Oh, dear mother, it was a dream.”“So little was it a dream, that I stretched my hand towards the bell; butwhen I did so, the shade disappeared; my maid then entered with a light.”“But she saw no one?”“Phantoms are visible to those only who ought to see them. It was thesoul of my husband!—Well, if my husband’s soul can come to me, whyshould not my soul reappear to guard my granddaughter? the tie is even moredirect, it seems to me.”“Oh, madame,” said Villefort, deeply affected, in spite of himself,“do not yield to those gloomy thoughts; you will long live with us,happy, loved, and honored, and we will make you forget——”“Never, never, never,” said the marchioness. “When does M.d’Épinay return?”“We expect him every moment.”“It is well. As soon as he arrives inform me. We must be expeditious. Andthen I also wish to see a notary, that I may be assured that all our propertyreturns to Valentine.”“Ah, grandmamma,” murmured Valentine, pressing her lips on theburning brow, “do you wish to kill me? Oh, how feverish you are; we mustnot send for a notary, but for a doctor!”“A doctor?” said she, shrugging her shoulders, “I am not ill;I am thirsty—that is all.”“What are you drinking, dear grandmamma?”“The same as usual, my dear, my glass is there on the table—give itto me, Valentine.” Valentine poured the orangeade into a glass and gaveit to her grandmother with a certain degree of dread, for it was the same glassshe fancied that had been touched by the spectre.The marchioness drained the glass at a single draught, and then turned on herpillow, repeating,“The notary, the notary!”M. de Villefort left the room, and Valentine seated herself at the bedside ofher grandmother. The poor child appeared herself to require the doctor she hadrecommended to her aged relative. A bright spot burned in either cheek, herrespiration was short and difficult, and her pulse beat with feverishexcitement. She was thinking of the despair of Maximilian, when he should beinformed that Madame de Saint-Méran, instead of being an ally, wasunconsciously acting as his enemy.More than once she thought of revealing all to her grandmother, and she wouldnot have hesitated a moment, if Maximilian Morrel had been named Albert deMorcerf or Raoul de Château-Renaud; but Morrel was of plebeian extraction, andValentine knew how the haughty Marquise de Saint-Méran despised all who werenot noble. Her secret had each time been repressed when she was about to revealit, by the sad conviction that it would be useless to do so; for, were it oncediscovered by her father and mother, all would be lost.Two hours passed thus; Madame de Saint-Méran was in a feverish sleep, and thenotary had arrived. Though his coming was announced in a very low tone, Madamede Saint-Méran arose from her pillow.“The notary!” she exclaimed, “let him come in.”The notary, who was at the door, immediately entered. “Go,Valentine,” said Madame de Saint-Méran, “and leave me with thisgentleman.”“But, grandmamma——”“Leave me—go!”The young girl kissed her grandmother, and left with her handkerchief to hereyes; at the door she found the valet de chambre, who told her that the doctorwas waiting in the dining-room. Valentine instantly ran down. The doctor was afriend of the family, and at the same time one of the cleverest men of the day,and very fond of Valentine, whose birth he had witnessed. He had himself adaughter about her age, but whose life was one continued source of anxiety andfear to him from her mother having been consumptive.“Oh,” said Valentine, “we have been waiting for you with suchimpatience, dear M. d’Avrigny. But, first of all, how are Madeleine andAntoinette?”Madeleine was the daughter of M. d’Avrigny, and Antoinette his niece. M.d’Avrigny smiled sadly.“Antoinette is very well,” he said, “and Madeleine tolerablyso. But you sent for me, my dear child. It is not your father or Madame deVillefort who is ill. As for you, although we doctors cannot divest ourpatients of nerves, I fancy you have no further need of me than to recommendyou not to allow your imagination to take too wide a field.”Valentine colored. M. d’Avrigny carried the science of divination almostto a miraculous extent, for he was one of the physicians who always work uponthe body through the mind.“No,” she replied, “it is for my poor grandmother. You knowthe calamity that has happened to us, do you not?”“I know nothing.” said M. d’Avrigny.“Alas,” said Valentine, restraining her tears, “mygrandfather is dead.”“M. de Saint-Méran?”“Yes.”“Suddenly?”“From an apoplectic stroke.”“An apoplectic stroke?” repeated the doctor.“Yes, and my poor grandmother fancies that her husband, whom she neverleft, has called her, and that she must go and join him. Oh, M.d’Avrigny, I beseech you, do something for her!”“Where is she?”“In her room with the notary.”“And M. Noirtier?”“Just as he was, his mind perfectly clear, but the same incapability ofmoving or speaking.”“And the same love for you—eh, my dear child?”“Yes,” said Valentine, “he was very fond of me.”“Who does not love you?” Valentine smiled sadly. “What areyour grandmother’s symptoms?”“An extreme nervous excitement and a strangely agitated sleep; shefancied this morning in her sleep that her soul was hovering above her body,which she at the same time watched. It must have been delirium; she fancies,too, that she saw a phantom enter her chamber and even heard the noise it madeon touching her glass.”“It is singular,” said the doctor; “I was not aware thatMadame de Saint-Méran was subject to such hallucinations.”“It is the first time I ever saw her in this condition,” saidValentine; “and this morning she frightened me so that I thought her mad;and my father, who you know is a strong-minded man, himself appeared deeplyimpressed.”“We will go and see,” said the doctor; “what you tell meseems very strange.” The notary here descended, and Valentine wasinformed that her grandmother was alone.“Go upstairs,” she said to the doctor.“And you?”“Oh, I dare not—she forbade my sending for you; and, as you say, Iam myself agitated, feverish and out of sorts. I will go and take a turn in thegarden to recover myself.”The doctor pressed Valentine’s hand, and while he visited hergrandmother, she descended the steps. We need not say which portion of thegarden was her favorite walk. After remaining for a short time in the parterresurrounding the house, and gathering a rose to place in her waist or hair, sheturned into the dark avenue which led to the bench; then from the bench shewent to the gate. As usual, Valentine strolled for a short time among herflowers, but without gathering them. The mourning in her heart forbade herassuming this simple ornament, though she had not yet had time to put on theoutward semblance of woe.She then turned towards the avenue. As she advanced she fancied she heard avoice speaking her name. She stopped astonished, then the voice reached her earmore distinctly, and she recognized it to be that of Maximilian. Chapter 73. ThePromiseIt was indeed MaximilianMorrel, who had passed a wretched existence since the previous day. With theinstinct peculiar to lovers he had anticipated after the return of Madame deSaint-Méran and the death of the marquis, that something would occur at M. deVillefort’s in connection with his attachment for Valentine. Hispresentiments were realized, as we shall see, and his uneasy forebodings hadgoaded him pale and trembling to the gate under the chestnut-trees.Valentine was ignorant of the cause of this sorrow and anxiety, and as it wasnot his accustomed hour for visiting her, she had gone to the spot simply byaccident or perhaps through sympathy. Morrel called her, and she ran to thegate.“You here at this hour?” said she.“Yes, my poor girl,” replied Morrel; “I come to bring and tohear bad tidings.”“This is, indeed, a house of mourning,” said Valentine;“speak, Maximilian, although the cup of sorrow seems already full.”“Dear Valentine,” said Morrel, endeavoring to conceal his ownemotion, “listen, I entreat you; what I am about to say is very serious.When are you to be married?”“I will tell you all,” said Valentine; “from you I havenothing to conceal. This morning the subject was introduced, and my deargrandmother, on whom I depended as my only support, not only declared herselffavorable to it, but is so anxious for it, that they only await the arrival ofM. d’Épinay, and the following day the contract will be signed.”A deep sigh escaped the young man, who gazed long and mournfully at her heloved.“Alas,” replied he, “it is dreadful thus to hear mycondemnation from your own lips. The sentence is passed, and, in a few hours,will be executed; it must be so, and I will not endeavor to prevent it. But,since you say nothing remains but for M. d’Épinay to arrive that thecontract may be signed, and the following day you will be his, tomorrow youwill be engaged to M. d’Épinay, for he came this morning to Paris.”Valentine uttered a cry.“I was at the house of Monte Cristo an hour since,” said Morrel;“we were speaking, he of the sorrow your family had experienced, and I ofyour grief, when a carriage rolled into the courtyard. Never, till then, had Iplaced any confidence in presentiments, but now I cannot help believing them,Valentine. At the sound of that carriage I shuddered; soon I heard steps on thestaircase, which terrified me as much as the footsteps of the commander did DonJuan. The door at last opened; Albert de Morcerf entered first, and I began tohope my fears were vain, when, after him, another young man advanced, and thecount exclaimed: ‘Ah, here is the Baron Franz d’Épinay!’ Isummoned all my strength and courage to my support. Perhaps I turned pale andtrembled, but certainly I smiled; and five minutes after I left, without havingheard one word that had passed.”“Poor Maximilian!” murmured Valentine.“Valentine, the time has arrived when you must answer me. And remember mylife depends on your answer. What do you intend doing?” Valentine helddown her head; she was overwhelmed.“Listen,” said Morrel; “it is not the first time you havecontemplated our present position, which is a serious and urgent one; I do notthink it is a moment to give way to useless sorrow; leave that for those wholike to suffer at their leisure and indulge their grief in secret. There aresuch in the world, and God will doubtless reward them in heaven for theirresignation on earth, but those who mean to contend must not lose one preciousmoment, but must return immediately the blow which fortune strikes. Do youintend to struggle against our ill-fortune? Tell me, Valentine for it is that Icame to know.”Valentine trembled, and looked at him with amazement. The idea of resisting herfather, her grandmother, and all the family, had never occurred to her.“What do you say, Maximilian?” asked Valentine. “What do youmean by a struggle? Oh, it would be a sacrilege. What? I resist myfather’s order, and my dying grandmother’s wish? Impossible!”Morrel started.“You are too noble not to understand me, and you understand me so wellthat you already yield, dear Maximilian. No, no; I shall need all my strengthto struggle with myself and support my grief in secret, as you say. But togrieve my father—to disturb my grandmother’s lastmoments—never!”“You are right,” said Morrel, calmly.“In what a tone you speak!” cried Valentine.“I speak as one who admires you, mademoiselle.”“Mademoiselle,” cried Valentine; “mademoiselle! Oh, selfishman! he sees me in despair, and pretends he cannot understand me!”“You mistake—I understand you perfectly. You will not oppose M.Villefort, you will not displease the marchioness, and tomorrow you will signthe contract which will bind you to your husband.”“But, mon Dieu! tell me, how can I do otherwise?”“Do not appeal to me, mademoiselle; I shall be a bad judge in such acase; my selfishness will blind me,” replied Morrel, whose low voice andclenched hands announced his growing desperation.“What would you have proposed, Maximilian, had you found me willing toaccede?”“It is not for me to say.”“You are wrong; you must advise me what to do.”“Do you seriously ask my advice, Valentine?”“Certainly, dear Maximilian, for if it is good, I will follow it; youknow my devotion to you.”“Valentine,” said Morrel pushing aside a loose plank, “giveme your hand in token of forgiveness of my anger; my senses are confused, andduring the last hour the most extravagant thoughts have passed through mybrain. Oh, if you refuse my advice——”“What do you advise?” said Valentine, raising her eyes to heavenand sighing.“I am free,” replied Maximilian, “and rich enough to supportyou. I swear to make you my lawful wife before my lips even shall haveapproached your forehead.”“You make me tremble!” said the young girl.“Follow me,” said Morrel; “I will take you to my sister, whois worthy also to be yours. We will embark for Algiers, for England, forAmerica, or, if you prefer it, retire to the country and only return to Pariswhen our friends have reconciled your family.”Valentine shook her head.“I feared it, Maximilian,” said she; “it is the counsel of amadman, and I should be more mad than you, did I not stop you at once with theword ‘Impossible, Morrel, impossible!’”“You will then submit to what fate decrees for you without evenattempting to contend with it?” said Morrel sorrowfully.“Yes,—if I die!”“Well, Valentine,” resumed Maximilian, “I can only say againthat you are right. Truly, it is I who am mad, and you prove to me that passionblinds the most well-meaning. I appreciate your calm reasoning. It is thenunderstood that tomorrow you will be irrevocably promised to M. Franzd’Épinay, not only by that theatrical formality invented to heighten theeffect of a comedy called the signature of the contract, but your ownwill?”“Again you drive me to despair, Maximilian,” said Valentine,“again you plunge the dagger into the wound! What would you do, tell me,if your sister listened to such a proposition?”“Mademoiselle,” replied Morrel with a bitter smile, “I amselfish—you have already said so—and as a selfish man I think notof what others would do in my situation, but of what I intend doing myself. Ithink only that I have known you not a whole year. From the day I first sawyou, all my hopes of happiness have been in securing your affection. One dayyou acknowledged that you loved me, and since that day my hope of futurehappiness has rested on obtaining you, for to gain you would be life to me.Now, I think no more; I say only that fortune has turned against me—I hadthought to gain heaven, and now I have lost it. It is an every-day occurrencefor a gambler to lose not only what he possesses but also what he hasnot.”Morrel pronounced these words with perfect calmness; Valentine looked at him amoment with her large, scrutinizing eyes, endeavoring not to let Morreldiscover the grief which struggled in her heart.“But, in a word, what are you going to do?” asked she.“I am going to have the honor of taking my leave of you, mademoiselle,solemnly assuring you that I wish your life may be so calm, so happy, and sofully occupied, that there may be no place for me even in your memory.”“Oh!” murmured Valentine.“Adieu, Valentine, adieu!” said Morrel, bowing.“Where are you going?” cried the young girl, extending her handthrough the opening, and seizing Maximilian by his coat, for she understoodfrom her own agitated feelings that her lover’s calmness could not bereal; “where are you going?”“I am going, that I may not bring fresh trouble into your family: and toset an example which every honest and devoted man, situated as I am, mayfollow.”“Before you leave me, tell me what you are going to do,Maximilian.” The young man smiled sorrowfully.“Speak, speak!” said Valentine; “I entreat you.”“Has your resolution changed, Valentine?”“It cannot change, unhappy man; you know it must not!” cried theyoung girl.“Then adieu, Valentine!”Valentine shook the gate with a strength of which she could not have beensupposed to be possessed, as Morrel was going away, and passing both her handsthrough the opening, she clasped and wrung them. “I must know what youmean to do!” said she. “Where are you going?”“Oh, fear not,” said Maximilian, stopping at a short distance,“I do not intend to render another man responsible for the rigorous fatereserved for me. Another might threaten to seek M. Franz, to provoke him, andto fight with him; all that would be folly. What has M. Franz to do with it? Hesaw me this morning for the first time, and has already forgotten he has seenme. He did not even know I existed when it was arranged by your two familiesthat you should be united. I have no enmity against M. Franz, and promise youthe punishment shall not fall on him.”“On whom, then!—on me?”“On you? Valentine! Oh, Heaven forbid! Woman is sacred; the woman oneloves is holy.”“On yourself, then, unhappy man; on yourself?”“I am the only guilty person, am I not?” said Maximilian.“Maximilian!” said Valentine, “Maximilian, come back, Ientreat you!”He drew near with his sweet smile, and but for his paleness one might havethought him in his usual happy mood.“Listen, my dear, my adored Valentine,” said he in his melodiousand grave tone; “those who, like us, have never had a thought for whichwe need blush before the world, such may read each other’s hearts. Inever was romantic, and am no melancholy hero. I imitate neither Manfred norAnthony; but without words, protestations, or vows, my life has entwined itselfwith yours; you leave me, and you are right in doing so,—I repeat it, youare right; but in losing you, I lose my life. The moment you leave me,Valentine, I am alone in the world. My sister is happily married; her husbandis only my brother-in-law, that is, a man whom the ties of social life aloneattach to me; no one then longer needs my useless life. This is what I shalldo; I will wait until the very moment you are married, for I will not lose theshadow of one of those unexpected chances which are sometimes reserved for us,since M. Franz may, after all, die before that time, a thunderbolt may falleven on the altar as you approach it,—nothing appears impossible to onecondemned to die, and miracles appear quite reasonable when his escape fromdeath is concerned. I will, then, wait until the last moment, and when mymisery is certain, irremediable, hopeless, I will write a confidential letterto my brother-in-law, another to the prefect of police, to acquaint them withmy intention, and at the corner of some wood, on the brink of some abyss, onthe bank of some river, I will put an end to my existence, as certainly as I amthe son of the most honest man who ever lived in France.”Valentine trembled convulsively; she loosened her hold of the gate, her armsfell by her side, and two large tears rolled down her cheeks. The young manstood before her, sorrowful and resolute.“Oh, for pity’s sake,” said she, “you will live, willyou not?”“No, on my honor,” said Maximilian; “but that will not affectyou. You have done your duty, and your conscience will be at rest.”Valentine fell on her knees, and pressed her almost bursting heart.“Maximilian,” said she, “Maximilian, my friend, my brother onearth, my true husband in heaven, I entreat you, do as I do, live in suffering;perhaps we may one day be united.”“Adieu, Valentine,” repeated Morrel.“My God,” said Valentine, raising both her hands to heaven with asublime expression, “I have done my utmost to remain a submissivedaughter; I have begged, entreated, implored; he has regarded neither myprayers, my entreaties, nor my tears. It is done,” cried she, wiping awayher tears, and resuming her firmness, “I am resolved not to die ofremorse, but rather of shame. Live, Maximilian, and I will be yours. Say whenshall it be? Speak, command, I will obey.”Morrel, who had already gone some few steps away, again returned, and pale withjoy extended both hands towards Valentine through the opening.“Valentine,” said he, “dear Valentine, you must not speakthus—rather let me die. Why should I obtain you by violence, if our loveis mutual? Is it from mere humanity you bid me live? I would then ratherdie.”“Truly,” murmured Valentine, “who on this earth cares for me,if he does not? Who has consoled me in my sorrow but he? On whom do my hopesrest? On whom does my bleeding heart repose? On him, on him, always on him!Yes, you are right, Maximilian, I will follow you. I will leave the paternalhome, I will give up all. Oh, ungrateful girl that I am,” criedValentine, sobbing, “I will give up all, even my dear old grandfather,whom I had nearly forgotten.”“No,” said Maximilian, “you shall not leave him. M. Noirtierhas evinced, you say, a kind feeling towards me. Well, before you leave, tellhim all; his consent would be your justification in God’s sight. As soonas we are married, he shall come and live with us, instead of one child, heshall have two. You have told me how you talk to him and how he answers you; Ishall very soon learn that language by signs, Valentine, and I promise yousolemnly, that instead of despair, it is happiness that awaits us.”“Oh, see, Maximilian, see the power you have over me, you almost make mebelieve you; and yet, what you tell me is madness, for my father will curseme—he is inflexible—he will never pardon me. Now listen to me,Maximilian; if by artifice, by entreaty, by accident—in short, if by anymeans I can delay this marriage, will you wait?”“Yes, I promise you, as faithfully as you have promised me that thishorrible marriage shall not take place, and that if you are dragged before amagistrate or a priest, you will refuse.”“I promise you by all that is most sacred to me in the world, namely, bymy mother.”“We will wait, then,” said Morrel.“Yes, we will wait,” replied Valentine, who revived at these words;“there are so many things which may save unhappy beings such as weare.”“I rely on you, Valentine,” said Morrel; “all you do will bewell done; only if they disregard your prayers, if your father and Madame deSaint-Méran insist that M. d’Épinay should be called tomorrow to sign thecontract——”“Then you have my promise, Maximilian.”“Instead of signing——”“I will go to you, and we will fly; but from this moment until then, letus not tempt Providence, let us not see each other. It is a miracle, it is aprovidence that we have not been discovered. If we were surprised, if it wereknown that we met thus, we should have no further resource.”“You are right, Valentine; but how shall I ascertain?”“From the notary, M. Deschamps.”“I know him.”“And for myself—I will write to you, depend on me. I dread thismarriage, Maximilian, as much as you.”“Thank you, my adored Valentine, thank you; that is enough. When once Iknow the hour, I will hasten to this spot, you can easily get over this fencewith my assistance, a carriage will await us at the gate, in which you willaccompany me to my sister’s; there living, retired or mingling insociety, as you wish, we shall be enabled to use our power to resistoppression, and not suffer ourselves to be put to death like sheep, which onlydefend themselves by sighs.”“Yes,” said Valentine, “I will now acknowledge you are right,Maximilian; and now are you satisfied with your betrothal?” said theyoung girl sorrowfully.“My adored Valentine, words cannot express one half of mysatisfaction.”Valentine had approached, or rather, had placed her lips so near the fence,that they nearly touched those of Morrel, which were pressed against the otherside of the cold and inexorable barrier.“Adieu, then, till we meet again,” said Valentine, tearing herselfaway. “I shall hear from you?”“Yes.”“Thanks, thanks, dear love, adieu!”The sound of a kiss was heard, and Valentine fled through the avenue. Morrellistened to catch the last sound of her dress brushing the branches, and of herfootstep on the gravel, then raised his eyes with an ineffable smile ofthankfulness to heaven for being permitted to be thus loved, and then alsodisappeared.The young man returned home and waited all the evening and all the next daywithout getting any message. It was only on the following day, at about teno’clock in the morning, as he was starting to call on M. Deschamps, thenotary, that he received from the postman a small billet, which he knew to befrom Valentine, although he had not before seen her writing. It was to thiseffect:“Tears, entreaties, prayers, have availed me nothing. Yesterday, for twohours, I was at the church of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, and for two hours Iprayed most fervently. Heaven is as inflexible as man, and the signature of thecontract is fixed for this evening at nine o’clock. I have but onepromise and but one heart to give; that promise is pledged to you, that heartis also yours. This evening, then, at a quarter to nine at the gate.“Your betrothed,“Valentine de Villefort.”“P.S.—My poor grandmother gets worse and worse; yesterday her feveramounted to delirium; today her delirium is almost madness. You will be verykind to me, will you not, Morrel, to make me forget my sorrow in leaving herthus? I think it is kept a secret from grandpapa Noirtier, that the contract isto be signed this evening.”Morrel went also to the notary, who confirmed the news that the contract was tobe signed that evening. Then he went to call on Monte Cristo and heard stillmore. Franz had been to announce the ceremony, and Madame de Villefort had alsowritten to beg the count to excuse her not inviting him; the death of M. deSaint-Méran and the dangerous illness of his widow would cast a gloom over themeeting which she would regret should be shared by the count whom she wishedevery happiness.The day before Franz had been presented to Madame de Saint-Méran, who had lefther bed to receive him, but had been obliged to return to it immediately after.It is easy to suppose that Morrel’s agitation would not escape thecount’s penetrating eye. Monte Cristo was more affectionate thanever,—indeed, his manner was so kind that several times Morrel was on thepoint of telling him all. But he recalled the promise he had made to Valentine,and kept his secret.The young man read Valentine’s letter twenty times in the course of theday. It was her first, and on what an occasion! Each time he read it he renewedhis vow to make her happy. How great is the power of a woman who has made socourageous a resolution! What devotion does she deserve from him for whom shehas sacrificed everything! How ought she really to be supremely loved! Shebecomes at once a queen and a wife, and it is impossible to thank and love hersufficiently.Morrel longed intensely for the moment when he should hear Valentine say,“Here I am, Maximilian; come and help me.” He had arrangedeverything for her escape; two ladders were hidden in the clover-field; acabriolet was ordered for Maximilian alone, without a servant, without lights;at the turning of the first street they would light the lamps, as it would befoolish to attract the notice of the police by too many precautions.Occasionally he shuddered; he thought of the moment when, from the top of thatwall, he should protect the descent of his dear Valentine, pressing in his armsfor the first time her of whom he had yet only kissed the delicate hand.When the afternoon arrived and he felt that the hour was drawing near, hewished for solitude, his agitation was extreme; a simple question from a friendwould have irritated him. He shut himself in his room, and tried to read, buthis eye glanced over the page without understanding a word, and he threw awaythe book, and for the second time sat down to sketch his plan, the ladders andthe fence.At length the hour drew near. Never did a man deeply in love allow the clocksto go on peacefully. Morrel tormented his so effectually that they struck eightat half-past six. He then said, “It is time to start; the signature wasindeed fixed to take place at nine o’clock, but perhaps Valentine willnot wait for that.” Consequently, Morrel, having left the Rue Meslay athalf-past eight by his timepiece, entered the clover-field while the clock ofSaint-Philippe-du-Roule was striking eight. The horse and cabriolet wereconcealed behind a small ruin, where Morrel had often waited.The night gradually drew on, and the foliage in the garden assumed a deeperhue. Then Morrel came out from his hiding-place with a beating heart, andlooked through the small opening in the gate; there was yet no one to be seen.The clock struck half-past eight, and still another half-hour was passed inwaiting, while Morrel walked to and fro, and gazed more and more frequentlythrough the opening. The garden became darker still, but in the darkness helooked in vain for the white dress, and in the silence he vainly listened forthe sound of footsteps. The house, which was discernible through the trees,remained in darkness, and gave no indication that so important an event as thesignature of a marriage-contract was going on. Morrel looked at his watch,which wanted a quarter to ten; but soon the same clock he had already heardstrike two or three times rectified the error by striking half-past nine.This was already half an hour past the time Valentine had fixed. It was aterrible moment for the young man. The slightest rustling of the foliage, theleast whistling of the wind, attracted his attention, and drew the perspirationto his brow; then he tremblingly fixed his ladder, and, not to lose a moment,placed his foot on the first step. Amidst all these alternations of hope andfear, the clock struck ten. “It is impossible,” said Maximilian,“that the signing of a contract should occupy so long a time withoutunexpected interruptions. I have weighed all the chances, calculated the timerequired for all the forms; something must have happened.”And then he walked rapidly to and fro, and pressed his burning forehead againstthe fence. Had Valentine fainted? or had she been discovered and stopped in herflight? These were the only obstacles which appeared possible to the young man.The idea that her strength had failed her in attempting to escape, and that shehad fainted in one of the paths, was the one that most impressed itself uponhis mind. “In that case,” said he, “I should lose her, and bymy own fault.” He dwelt on this idea for a moment, then it appearedreality. He even thought he could perceive something on the ground at adistance; he ventured to call, and it seemed to him that the wind wafted backan almost inarticulate sigh.At last the half-hour struck. It was impossible to wait longer, his templesthrobbed violently, his eyes were growing dim; he passed one leg over the wall,and in a moment leaped down on the other side. He was on Villefort’spremises—had arrived there by scaling the wall. What might be theconsequences? However, he had not ventured thus far to draw back. He followed ashort distance close under the wall, then crossed a path, hid entered a clumpof trees. In a moment he had passed through them, and could see the housedistinctly.Then Morrel saw that he had been right in believing that the house was notilluminated. Instead of lights at every window, as is customary on days ofceremony, he saw only a gray mass, which was veiled also by a cloud, which atthat moment obscured the moon’s feeble light. A light moved rapidly fromtime to time past three windows of the second floor. These three windows werein Madame de Saint-Méran’s room. Another remained motionless behind somered curtains which were in Madame de Villefort’s bedroom. Morrel guessedall this. So many times, in order to follow Valentine in thought at every hourin the day, had he made her describe the whole house, that without having seenit he knew it all.This darkness and silence alarmed Morrel still more than Valentine’sabsence had done. Almost mad with grief, and determined to venture everythingin order to see Valentine once more, and be certain of the misfortune hefeared, Morrel gained the edge of the clump of trees, and was going to pass asquickly as possible through the flower-garden, when the sound of a voice, stillat some distance, but which was borne upon the wind, reached him. At thissound, as he was already partially exposed to view, he stepped back andconcealed himself completely, remaining perfectly motionless.He had formed his resolution. If it was Valentine alone, he would speak as shepassed; if she was accompanied, and he could not speak, still he should seeher, and know that she was safe; if they were strangers, he would listen totheir conversation, and might understand something of this hithertoincomprehensible mystery.The moon had just then escaped from behind the cloud which had concealed it,and Morrel saw Villefort come out upon the steps, followed by a gentleman inblack. They descended, and advanced towards the clump of trees, and Morrel soonrecognized the other gentleman as Doctor d’Avrigny.The young man, seeing them approach, drew back mechanically, until he foundhimself stopped by a sycamore-tree in the centre of the clump; there he wascompelled to remain. Soon the two gentlemen stopped also.“Ah, my dear doctor,” said the procureur, “Heaven declaresitself against my house! What a dreadful death—what a blow! Seek not toconsole me; alas, nothing can alleviate so great a sorrow—the wound istoo deep and too fresh! Dead, dead!”The cold sweat sprang to the young man’s brow, and his teeth chattered.Who could be dead in that house, which Villefort himself had called accursed?“My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with a tone whichredoubled the terror of the young man, “I have not led you here toconsole you; on the contrary——”“What can you mean?” asked the procureur, alarmed.“I mean that behind the misfortune which has just happened to you, thereis another, perhaps, still greater.”“Can it be possible?” murmured Villefort, clasping his hands.“What are you going to tell me?”“Are we quite alone, my friend?”“Yes, quite; but why all these precautions?”“Because I have a terrible secret to communicate to you,” said thedoctor. “Let us sit down.”Villefort fell, rather than seated himself. The doctor stood before him, withone hand placed on his shoulder. Morrel, horrified, supported his head with onehand, and with the other pressed his heart, lest its beatings should be heard.“Dead, dead!” repeated he within himself; and he felt as if he werealso dying.“Speak, doctor—I am listening,” said Villefort;“strike—I am prepared for everything!”“Madame de Saint-Méran was, doubtless, advancing in years, but sheenjoyed excellent health.” Morrel began again to breathe freely, which hehad not done during the last ten minutes.“Grief has consumed her,” said Villefort—“yes, grief,doctor! After living forty years with the marquis——”“It is not grief, my dear Villefort,” said the doctor; “griefmay kill, although it rarely does, and never in a day, never in an hour, neverin ten minutes.” Villefort answered nothing, he simply raised his head,which had been cast down before, and looked at the doctor with amazement.“Were you present during the last struggle?” asked M.d’Avrigny.“I was,” replied the procureur; “you begged me not toleave.”“Did you notice the symptoms of the disease to which Madame deSaint-Méran has fallen a victim?”“I did. Madame de Saint-Méran had three successive attacks, at intervalsof some minutes, each one more serious than the former. When you arrived,Madame de Saint-Méran had already been panting for breath some minutes; shethen had a fit, which I took to be simply a nervous attack, and it was onlywhen I saw her raise herself in the bed, and her limbs and neck appearstiffened, that I became really alarmed. Then I understood from yourcountenance there was more to fear than I had thought. This crisis past, Iendeavored to catch your eye, but could not. You held her hand—you werefeeling her pulse—and the second fit came on before you had turnedtowards me. This was more terrible than the first; the same nervous movementswere repeated, and the mouth contracted and turned purple.”“And at the third she expired.”“At the end of the first attack I discovered symptoms of tetanus; youconfirmed my opinion.”“Yes, before others,” replied the doctor; “but now we arealone——”“What are you going to say? Oh, spare me!”“That the symptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances arethe same.”M. de Villefort started from his seat, then in a moment fell down again, silentand motionless. Morrel knew not if he were dreaming or awake.“Listen,” said the doctor; “I know the full importance of thestatement I have just made, and the disposition of the man to whom I have madeit.”“Do you speak to me as a magistrate or as a friend?” askedVillefort.“As a friend, and only as a friend, at this moment. The similarity in thesymptoms of tetanus and poisoning by vegetable substances is so great, thatwere I obliged to affirm by oath what I have now stated, I should hesitate; Itherefore repeat to you, I speak not to a magistrate, but to a friend. And tothat friend I say, ‘During the three-quarters of an hour that thestruggle continued, I watched the convulsions and the death of Madame deSaint-Méran, and am thoroughly convinced that not only did her death proceedfrom poison, but I could also specify the poison.’”“Can it be possible?”“The symptoms are marked, do you see?—sleep broken by nervousspasms, excitation of the brain, torpor of the nerve centres. Madame deSaint-Méran succumbed to a powerful dose of brucine or of strychnine, which bysome mistake, perhaps, has been given to her.”Villefort seized the doctor’s hand.“Oh, it is impossible,” said he, “I must be dreaming! It isfrightful to hear such things from such a man as you! Tell me, I entreat you,my dear doctor, that you may be deceived.”“Doubtless I may, but——”“But?”“But I do not think so.”“Have pity on me doctor! So many dreadful things have happened to melately that I am on the verge of madness.”“Has anyone besides me seen Madame de Saint-Méran?”“No.”“Has anything been sent for from a chemist’s that I have notexamined?”“Nothing.”“Had Madame de Saint-Méran any enemies?”“Not to my knowledge.”“Would her death affect anyone’s interest?”“It could not indeed, my daughter is her only heiress—Valentinealone. Oh, if such a thought could present itself, I would stab myself topunish my heart for having for one instant harbored it.”“Indeed, my dear friend,” said M. d’Avrigny, “I wouldnot accuse anyone; I speak only of an accident, you understand,—of amistake,—but whether accident or mistake, the fact is there; it is on myconscience and compels me to speak aloud to you. Make inquiry.”“Of whom?—how?—of what?”“May not Barrois, the old servant, have made a mistake, and have givenMadame de Saint-Méran a dose prepared for his master?”“For my father?”“Yes.”“But how could a dose prepared for M. Noirtier poison Madame deSaint-Méran?”“Nothing is more simple. You know poisons become remedies in certaindiseases, of which paralysis is one. For instance, having tried every otherremedy to restore movement and speech to M. Noirtier, I resolved to try onelast means, and for three months I have been giving him brucine; so that in thelast dose I ordered for him there were six grains. This quantity, which isperfectly safe to administer to the paralyzed frame of M. Noirtier, which hasbecome gradually accustomed to it, would be sufficient to kill anotherperson.”“My dear doctor, there is no communication between M. Noirtier’sapartment and that of Madame de Saint-Méran, and Barrois never entered mymother-in-law’s room. In short, doctor although I know you to be the mostconscientious man in the world, and although I place the utmost reliance inyou, I want, notwithstanding my conviction, to believe this axiom, errarehumanum est.”“Is there one of my brethren in whom you have equal confidence withmyself?”“Why do you ask me that?—what do you wish?”“Send for him; I will tell him what I have seen, and we will consulttogether, and examine the body.”“And you will find traces of poison?”“No, I did not say of poison, but we can prove what was the state of thebody; we shall discover the cause of her sudden death, and we shall say,‘Dear Villefort, if this thing has been caused by negligence, watch overyour servants; if from hatred, watch your enemies.’”“What do you propose to me, d’Avrigny?” said Villefort indespair; “so soon as another is admitted into our secret, an inquest willbecome necessary; and an inquest in my house—impossible! Still,”continued the procureur, looking at the doctor with uneasiness, “if youwish it—if you demand it, why then it shall be done. But, doctor, you seeme already so grieved—how can I introduce into my house so much scandal,after so much sorrow? My wife and my daughter would die of it! And I,doctor—you know a man does not arrive at the post I occupy—one hasnot been king’s attorney twenty-five years without having amassed atolerable number of enemies; mine are numerous. Let this affair be talked of,it will be a triumph for them, which will make them rejoice, and cover me withshame. Pardon me, doctor, these worldly ideas; were you a priest I should notdare tell you that, but you are a man, and you know mankind. Doctor, prayrecall your words; you have said nothing, have you?”“My dear M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, “my first dutyis to humanity. I would have saved Madame de Saint-Méran, if science could havedone it; but she is dead and my duty regards the living. Let us bury thisterrible secret in the deepest recesses of our hearts; I am willing, if anyoneshould suspect this, that my silence on the subject should be imputed to myignorance. Meanwhile, sir, watch always—watch carefully, for perhaps theevil may not stop here. And when you have found the culprit, if you find him, Iwill say to you, ‘You are a magistrate, do as you will!’”“I thank you, doctor,” said Villefort with indescribable joy;“I never had a better friend than you.” And, as if he feared Doctord’Avrigny would recall his promise, he hurried him towards the house.When they were gone, Morrel ventured out from under the trees, and the moonshone upon his face, which was so pale it might have been taken for that of aghost.“I am manifestly protected in a most wonderful, but most terriblemanner,” said he; “but Valentine, poor girl, how will she bear somuch sorrow?”As he thought thus, he looked alternately at the window with red curtains andthe three windows with white curtains. The light had almost disappeared fromthe former; doubtless Madame de Villefort had just put out her lamp, and thenightlamp alone reflected its dull light on the window. At the extremity of thebuilding, on the contrary, he saw one of the three windows open. A wax-lightplaced on the mantle-piece threw some of its pale rays without, and a shadowwas seen for one moment on the balcony. Morrel shuddered; he thought he heard asob.It cannot be wondered at that his mind, generally so courageous, but nowdisturbed by the two strongest human passions, love and fear, was weakened evento the indulgence of superstitious thoughts. Although it was impossible thatValentine should see him, hidden as he was, he thought he heard the shadow atthe window call him; his disturbed mind told him so. This double error becamean irresistible reality, and by one of the incomprehensible transports ofyouth, he bounded from his hiding-place, and with two strides, at the risk ofbeing seen, at the risk of alarming Valentine, at the risk of being discoveredby some exclamation which might escape the young girl, he crossed theflower-garden, which by the light of the moon resembled a large white lake, andhaving passed the rows of orange-trees which extended in front of the house, hereached the step, ran quickly up and pushed the door, which opened withoutoffering any resistance.Valentine had not seen him. Her eyes, raised towards heaven, were watching asilvery cloud gliding over the azure, its form that of a shadow mountingtowards heaven. Her poetic and excited mind pictured it as the soul of hergrandmother.Meanwhile, Morrel had traversed the anteroom and found the staircase, which,being carpeted, prevented his approach being heard, and he had regained thatdegree of confidence that the presence of M. de Villefort even would not havealarmed him. He was quite prepared for any such encounter. He would at onceapproach Valentine’s father and acknowledge all, begging Villefort topardon and sanction the love which united two fond and loving hearts. Morrelwas mad.Happily he did not meet anyone. Now, especially, did he find the descriptionValentine had given of the interior of the house useful to him; he arrivedsafely at the top of the staircase, and while he was feeling his way, a sobindicated the direction he was to take. He turned back, a door partly openenabled him to see his road, and to hear the voice of one in sorrow. He pushedthe door open and entered. At the other end of the room, under a white sheetwhich covered it, lay the corpse, still more alarming to Morrel since theaccount he had so unexpectedly overheard. By its side, on her knees, and withher head buried in the cushion of an easy-chair, was Valentine, trembling andsobbing, her hands extended above her head, clasped and stiff. She had turnedfrom the window, which remained open, and was praying in accents that wouldhave affected the most unfeeling; her words were rapid, incoherent,unintelligible, for the burning weight of grief almost stopped her utterance.The moon shining through the open blinds made the lamp appear to burn paler,and cast a sepulchral hue over the whole scene. Morrel could not resist this;he was not exemplary for piety, he was not easily impressed, but Valentinesuffering, weeping, wringing her hands before him, was more than he could bearin silence. He sighed, and whispered a name, and the head bathed in tears andpressed on the velvet cushion of the chair—a head like that of a Magdalenby Correggio—was raised and turned towards him. Valentine perceived himwithout betraying the least surprise. A heart overwhelmed with one great griefis insensible to minor emotions. Morrel held out his hand to her. Valentine, asher only apology for not having met him, pointed to the corpse under the sheet,and began to sob again.Neither dared for some time to speak in that room. They hesitated to break thesilence which death seemed to impose; at length Valentine ventured.“My friend,” said she, “how came you here? Alas, I would sayyou are welcome, had not death opened the way for you into this house.”“Valentine,” said Morrel with a trembling voice, “I hadwaited since half-past eight, and did not see you come; I became uneasy, leapedthe wall, found my way through the garden, when voices conversing about thefatal event——”“What voices?” asked Valentine. Morrel shuddered as he thought ofthe conversation of the doctor and M. de Villefort, and he thought he could seethrough the sheet the extended hands, the stiff neck, and the purple lips.“Your servants,” said he, “who were repeating the whole ofthe sorrowful story; from them I learned it all.”“But it was risking the failure of our plan to come up here, love.”“Forgive me,” replied Morrel; “I will go away.”“No,” said Valentine, “you might meet someone; stay.”“But if anyone should come here——”The young girl shook her head. “No one will come,” said she;“do not fear, there is our safeguard,” pointing to the bed.“But what has become of M. d’Épinay?” replied Morrel.“M. Franz arrived to sign the contract just as my dear grandmother wasdying.”“Alas,” said Morrel with a feeling of selfish joy; for he thoughtthis death would cause the wedding to be postponed indefinitely.“But what redoubles my sorrow,” continued the young girl, as ifthis feeling was to receive its immediate punishment, “is that the poorold lady, on her death-bed, requested that the marriage might take place assoon as possible; she also, thinking to protect me, was acting againstme.”“Hark!” said Morrel. They both listened; steps were distinctlyheard in the corridor and on the stairs.“It is my father, who has just left his study.”“To accompany the doctor to the door,” added Morrel.“How do you know it is the doctor?” asked Valentine, astonished.“I imagined it must be,” said Morrel.Valentine looked at the young man; they heard the street door close, then M. deVillefort locked the garden door, and returned upstairs. He stopped a moment inthe anteroom, as if hesitating whether to turn to his own apartment or intoMadame de Saint-Méran’s; Morrel concealed himself behind a door;Valentine remained motionless, grief seeming to deprive her of all fear. M. deVillefort passed on to his own room.“Now,” said Valentine, “you can neither go out by the frontdoor nor by the garden.”Morrel looked at her with astonishment.“There is but one way left you that is safe,” said she; “itis through my grandfather’s room.” She rose. “Come,”she added.“Where?” asked Maximilian.“To my grandfather’s room.”“I in M. Noirtier’s apartment?”“Yes.”“Can you mean it, Valentine?”“I have long wished it; he is my only remaining friend and we both needhis help,—come.”“Be careful, Valentine,” said Morrel, hesitating to comply with theyoung girl’s wishes; “I now see my error—I acted like amadman in coming in here. Are you sure you are more reasonable?”“Yes,” said Valentine; “and I have but onescruple,—that of leaving my dear grandmother’s remains, which I hadundertaken to watch.”“Valentine,” said Morrel, “death is in itself sacred.”“Yes,” said Valentine; “besides, it will not be forlong.”She then crossed the corridor, and led the way down a narrow staircase to M.Noirtier’s room; Morrel followed her on tiptoe; at the door they foundthe old servant.“Barrois,” said Valentine, “shut the door, and let no onecome in.”She passed first.Noirtier, seated in his chair, and listening to every sound, was watching thedoor; he saw Valentine, and his eye brightened. There was something grave andsolemn in the approach of the young girl which struck the old man, andimmediately his bright eye began to interrogate.“Dear grandfather.” said she hurriedly, “you know poorgrandmamma died an hour since, and now I have no friend in the world butyou.”His expressive eyes evinced the greatest tenderness.“To you alone, then, may I confide my sorrows and my hopes?”The paralytic motioned “Yes.”Valentine took Maximilian’s hand.“Look attentively, then, at this gentleman.”The old man fixed his scrutinizing gaze with slight astonishment on Morrel.“It is M. Maximilian Morrel,” said she; “the son of that goodmerchant of Marseilles, whom you doubtless recollect.”“Yes,” said the old man.“He brings an irreproachable name, which Maximilian is likely to renderglorious, since at thirty years of age he is a captain, an officer of theLegion of Honor.”The old man signified that he recollected him.“Well, grandpapa,” said Valentine, kneeling before him, andpointing to Maximilian, “I love him, and will be only his; were Icompelled to marry another, I would destroy myself.”The eyes of the paralytic expressed a multitude of tumultuous thoughts.“You like M. Maximilian Morrel, do you not, grandpapa?” askedValentine.“Yes.”“And you will protect us, who are your children, against the will of myfather?”Noirtier cast an intelligent glance at Morrel, as if to say, “perhaps Imay.”Maximilian understood him.“Mademoiselle,” said he, “you have a sacred duty to fulfil inyour deceased grandmother’s room, will you allow me the honor of a fewminutes’ conversation with M. Noirtier?”“That is it,” said the old man’s eye. Then he lookedanxiously at Valentine.“Do you fear he will not understand?”“Yes.”“Oh, we have so often spoken of you, that he knows exactly how I talk toyou.” Then turning to Maximilian, with an adorable smile; although shadedby sorrow,—“He knows everything I know,” said she.Valentine arose, placed a chair for Morrel, requested Barrois not to admitanyone, and having tenderly embraced her grandfather, and sorrowfully takenleave of Morrel, she went away. To prove to Noirtier that he was inValentine’s confidence and knew all their secrets, Morrel took thedictionary, a pen, and some paper, and placed them all on a table where therewas a light.“But first,” said Morrel, “allow me, sir, to tell you who Iam, how much I love Mademoiselle Valentine, and what are my designs respectingher.”Noirtier made a sign that he would listen.It was an imposing sight to witness this old man, apparently a mere uselessburden, becoming the sole protector, support, and adviser of the lovers whowere both young, beautiful, and strong. His remarkably noble and austereexpression struck Morrel, who began his story with trembling. He related themanner in which he had become acquainted with Valentine, and how he had lovedher, and that Valentine, in her solitude and her misfortune, had accepted theoffer of his devotion. He told him his birth, his position, his fortune, andmore than once, when he consulted the look of the paralytic, that lookanswered, “That is good, proceed.”“And now,” said Morrel, when he had finished the first part of hisrecital, “now I have told you of my love and my hopes, may I inform youof my intentions?”“Yes,” signified the old man.“This was our resolution; a cabriolet was in waiting at the gate, inwhich I intended to carry off Valentine to my sister’s house, to marryher, and to wait respectfully M. de Villefort’s pardon.”“No,” said Noirtier.“We must not do so?”“No.”“You do not sanction our project?”“No.”“There is another way,” said Morrel. The old man’sinterrogative eye said, “Which?”“I will go,” continued Maximilian, “I will seek M. Franzd’Épinay—I am happy to be able to mention this in Mademoiselle deVillefort’s absence—and will conduct myself toward him so as tocompel him to challenge me.” Noirtier’s look continued tointerrogate.“You wish to know what I will do?”“Yes.”“I will find him, as I told you. I will tell him the ties which bind meto Mademoiselle Valentine; if he be a sensible man, he will prove it byrenouncing of his own accord the hand of his betrothed, and will secure myfriendship, and love until death; if he refuse, either through interest orridiculous pride, after I have proved to him that he would be forcing my wifefrom me, that Valentine loves me, and will have no other, I will fight withhim, give him every advantage, and I shall kill him, or he will kill me; if Iam victorious, he will not marry Valentine, and if I die, I am very sureValentine will not marry him.”Noirtier watched, with indescribable pleasure, this noble and sincerecountenance, on which every sentiment his tongue uttered was depicted, addingby the expression of his fine features all that coloring adds to a sound andfaithful drawing.Still, when Morrel had finished, he shut his eyes several times, which was hismanner of saying “No.”“No?” said Morrel; “you disapprove of this second project, asyou did of the first?”“I do,” signified the old man.“But what then must be done?” asked Morrel. “Madame deSaint-Méran’s last request was, that the marriage might not be delayed;must I let things take their course?” Noirtier did not move. “Iunderstand,” said Morrel; “I am to wait.”“Yes.”“But delay may ruin our plan, sir,” replied the young man.“Alone, Valentine has no power; she will be compelled to submit. I amhere almost miraculously, and can scarcely hope for so good an opportunity tooccur again. Believe me, there are only the two plans I have proposed to you;forgive my vanity, and tell me which you prefer. Do you authorize MademoiselleValentine to intrust herself to my honor?”“No.”“Do you prefer I should seek M. d’Épinay?”“No.”“Whence then will come the help we need—from chance?” resumedMorrel.“No.”“From you?”“Yes.”“You thoroughly understand me, sir? Pardon my eagerness, for my lifedepends on your answer. Will our help come from you?”“Yes.”“You are sure of it?”“Yes.” There was so much firmness in the look which gave thisanswer, no one could, at any rate, doubt his will, if they did his power.“Oh, thank you a thousand times! But how, unless a miracle should restoreyour speech, your gesture, your movement, how can you, chained to thatarmchair, dumb and motionless, oppose this marriage?” A smile lit up theold man’s face, a strange smile of the eyes in a paralyzed face.“Then I must wait?” asked the young man.“Yes.”“But the contract?” The same smile returned. “Will you assureme it shall not be signed?”“Yes,” said Noirtier.“The contract shall not be signed!” cried Morrel. “Oh, pardonme, sir; I can scarcely realize so great a happiness. Will they not signit?”“No,” said the paralytic. Notwithstanding that assurance, Morrelstill hesitated. This promise of an impotent old man was so strange that,instead of being the result of the power of his will, it might emanate fromenfeebled organs. Is it not natural that the madman, ignorant of his folly,should attempt things beyond his power? The weak man talks of burdens he canraise, the timid of giants he can confront, the poor of treasures he spends,the most humble peasant, in the height of his pride, calls himself Jupiter.Whether Noirtier understood the young man’s indecision, or whether he hadnot full confidence in his docility, he looked uneasily at him.“What do you wish, sir?” asked Morrel; “that I should renewmy promise of remaining tranquil?” Noirtier’s eye remained fixedand firm, as if to imply that a promise did not suffice; then it passed fromhis face to his hands.“Shall I swear to you, sir?” asked Maximilian.“Yes,” said the paralytic with the same solemnity. Morrelunderstood that the old man attached great importance to an oath. He extendedhis hand.“I swear to you, on my honor,” said he, “to await yourdecision respecting the course I am to pursue with M. d’Épinay.”“That is right,” said the old man.“Now,” said Morrel, “do you wish me to retire?”“Yes.”“Without seeing Mademoiselle Valentine?”“Yes.”Morrel made a sign that he was ready to obey. “But,” said he,“first allow me to embrace you as your daughter did just now.”Noirtier’s expression could not be understood. The young man pressed hislips on the same spot, on the old man’s forehead, where Valentine’shad been. Then he bowed a second time and retired.He found outside the door the old servant, to whom Valentine had givendirections. Morrel was conducted along a dark passage, which led to a littledoor opening on the garden, soon found the spot where he had entered, with theassistance of the shrubs gained the top of the wall, and by his ladder was inan instant in the clover-field where his cabriolet was still waiting for him.He got in it, and thoroughly wearied by so many emotions, arrived aboutmidnight in the Rue Meslay, threw himself on his bed and slept soundly.VOLUME FOUR Chapter 74. The VillefortFamily VaultTwo days after, aconsiderable crowd was assembled, towards ten o’clock in the morning,around the door of M. de Villefort’s house, and a long file ofmourning-coaches and private carriages extended along the Faubourg Saint-Honoréand the Rue de la Pépinière. Among them was one of a very singular form, whichappeared to have come from a distance. It was a kind of covered wagon, paintedblack, and was one of the first to arrive. Inquiry was made, and it wasascertained that, by a strange coincidence, this carriage contained the corpseof the Marquis de Saint-Méran, and that those who had come thinking to attendone funeral would follow two. Their number was great. The Marquis deSaint-Méran, one of the most zealous and faithful dignitaries of Louis XVIII.and King Charles X., had preserved a great number of friends, and these, addedto the personages whom the usages of society gave Villefort a claim on, formeda considerable body.Due information was given to the authorities, and permission obtained that thetwo funerals should take place at the same time. A second hearse, decked withthe same funereal pomp, was brought to M. de Villefort’s door, and thecoffin removed into it from the post-wagon. The two bodies were to be interredin the cemetery of Père-Lachaise, where M. de Villefort had long since had atomb prepared for the reception of his family. The remains of poor Renée werealready deposited there, and now, after ten years of separation, her father andmother were to be reunited with her.The Parisians, always curious, always affected by funereal display, looked onwith religious silence while the splendid procession accompanied to their lastabode two of the number of the old aristocracy—the greatest protectors ofcommerce and sincere devotees to their principles.In one of the mourning-coaches Beauchamp, Debray, and Château-Renaud weretalking of the very sudden death of the marchioness.“I saw Madame de Saint-Méran only last year at Marseilles, when I wascoming back from Algiers,” said Château-Renaud; “she looked like awoman destined to live to be a hundred years old, from her apparent soundhealth and great activity of mind and body. How old was she?”“Franz assured me,” replied Albert, “that she was sixty-sixyears old. But she has not died of old age, but of grief; it appears that sincethe death of the marquis, which affected her very deeply, she has notcompletely recovered her reason.”“But of what disease, then, did she die?” asked Debray.“It is said to have been a congestion of the brain, or apoplexy, which isthe same thing, is it not?”“Nearly.”“It is difficult to believe that it was apoplexy,” said Beauchamp.“Madame de Saint-Méran, whom I once saw, was short, of slender form, andof a much more nervous than sanguine temperament; grief could hardly produceapoplexy in such a constitution as that of Madame de Saint-Méran.”“At any rate,” said Albert, “whatever disease or doctor mayhave killed her, M. de Villefort, or rather, Mademoiselle Valentine,—or,still rather, our friend Franz, inherits a magnificent fortune, amounting, Ibelieve, to 80,000 livres per annum.”“And this fortune will be doubled at the death of the old Jacobin,Noirtier.”“That is a tenacious old grandfather,” said Beauchamp.“Tenacem propositi virum. I think he must have made an agreementwith death to outlive all his heirs, and he appears likely to succeed. Heresembles the old Conventionalist of ’93, who said to Napoleon, in 1814,‘You bend because your empire is a young stem, weakened by rapid growth.Take the Republic for a tutor; let us return with renewed strength to thebattle-field, and I promise you 500,000 soldiers, another Marengo, and a secondAusterlitz. Ideas do not become extinct, sire; they slumber sometimes, but onlyrevive the stronger before they sleep entirely.’”“Ideas and men appeared the same to him,” said Albert. “Onething only puzzles me, namely, how Franz d’Épinay will like a grandfatherwho cannot be separated from his wife. But where is Franz?”“In the first carriage, with M. de Villefort, who considers him alreadyas one of the family.”Such was the conversation in almost all the carriages; these two sudden deaths,so quickly following each other, astonished everyone, but no one suspected theterrible secret which M. d’Avrigny had communicated, in his nocturnalwalk to M. de Villefort. They arrived in about an hour at the cemetery; theweather was mild, but dull, and in harmony with the funeral ceremony. Among thegroups which flocked towards the family vault, Château-Renaud recognizedMorrel, who had come alone in a cabriolet, and walked silently along the pathbordered with yew-trees.“You here?” said Château-Renaud, passing his arms through the youngcaptain’s; “are you a friend of Villefort’s? How is it that Ihave never met you at his house?”“I am no acquaintance of M. de Villefort’s,” answered Morrel,“but I was of Madame de Saint-Méran.” Albert came up to them atthis moment with Franz.“The time and place are but ill-suited for an introduction.” saidAlbert; “but we are not superstitious. M. Morrel, allow me to present toyou M. Franz d’Épinay, a delightful travelling companion, with whom Imade the tour of Italy. My dear Franz, M. Maximilian Morrel, an excellentfriend I have acquired in your absence, and whose name you will hear me mentionevery time I make any allusion to affection, wit, or amiability.”Morrel hesitated for a moment; he feared it would be hypocritical to accost ina friendly manner the man whom he was tacitly opposing, but his oath and thegravity of the circumstances recurred to his memory; he struggled to concealhis emotion and bowed to Franz.“Mademoiselle de Villefort is in deep sorrow, is she not?” saidDebray to Franz.“Extremely,” replied he; “she looked so pale this morning, Iscarcely knew her.”These apparently simple words pierced Morrel to the heart. This man had seenValentine, and spoken to her! The young and high-spirited officer required allhis strength of mind to resist breaking his oath. He took the arm ofChâteau-Renaud, and turned towards the vault, where the attendants had alreadyplaced the two coffins.“This is a magnificent habitation,” said Beauchamp, looking towardsthe mausoleum; “a summer and winter palace. You will, in turn, enter it,my dear d’Épinay, for you will soon be numbered as one of the family. I,as a philosopher, should like a little country-house, a cottage down thereunder the trees, without so many free-stones over my poor body. In dying, Iwill say to those around me what Voltaire wrote to Piron: ‘Eo rus,and all will be over.’ But come, Franz, take courage, your wife is anheiress.”“Indeed, Beauchamp, you are unbearable. Politics has made you laugh ateverything, and political men have made you disbelieve everything. But when youhave the honor of associating with ordinary men, and the pleasure of leavingpolitics for a moment, try to find your affectionate heart, which you leavewith your stick when you go to the Chamber.”“But tell me,” said Beauchamp, “what is life? Is it not ahalt in Death’s anteroom?”“I am prejudiced against Beauchamp,” said Albert, drawing Franzaway, and leaving the former to finish his philosophical dissertation withDebray.The Villefort vault formed a square of white stones, about twenty feet high; aninterior partition separated the two families, and each apartment had itsentrance door. Here were not, as in other tombs, ignoble drawers, one aboveanother, where thrift bestows its dead and labels them like specimens in amuseum; all that was visible within the bronze gates was a gloomy-looking room,separated by a wall from the vault itself. The two doors before mentioned werein the middle of this wall, and enclosed the Villefort and Saint-Méran coffins.There grief might freely expend itself without being disturbed by the triflingloungers who came from a picnic party to visit Père-Lachaise, or by lovers whomake it their rendezvous.The two coffins were placed on trestles previously prepared for their receptionin the right-hand crypt belonging to the Saint-Méran family. Villefort, Franz,and a few near relatives alone entered the sanctuary.As the religious ceremonies had all been performed at the door, and there wasno address given, the party all separated; Château-Renaud, Albert, and Morrel,went one way, and Debray and Beauchamp the other. Franz remained with M. deVillefort; at the gate of the cemetery Morrel made an excuse to wait; he sawFranz and M. de Villefort get into the same mourning-coach, and thought thismeeting forboded evil. He then returned to Paris, and although in the samecarriage with Château-Renaud and Albert, he did not hear one word of theirconversation.As Franz was about to take leave of M. de Villefort, “When shall I seeyou again?” said the latter.“At what time you please, sir,” replied Franz.“As soon as possible.”“I am at your command, sir; shall we return together?”“If not unpleasant to you.”“On the contrary, I shall feel much pleasure.”Thus, the future father and son-in-law stepped into the same carriage, andMorrel, seeing them pass, became uneasy. Villefort and Franz returned to theFaubourg Saint-Honoré. The procureur, without going to see either his wife orhis daughter, went at once to his study, and, offering the young man a chair:“M. d’Épinay,” said he, “allow me to remind you at thismoment,—which is perhaps not so ill-chosen as at first sight may appear,for obedience to the wishes of the departed is the first offering which shouldbe made at their tomb,—allow me then to remind you of the wish expressedby Madame de Saint-Méran on her death-bed, that Valentine’s wedding mightnot be deferred. You know the affairs of the deceased are in perfect order, andher will bequeaths to Valentine the entire property of the Saint-Méran family;the notary showed me the documents yesterday, which will enable us to draw upthe contract immediately. You may call on the notary, M. Deschamps, PlaceBeauveau, Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and you have my authority to inspect thosedeeds.”“Sir,” replied M. d’Épinay, “it is not, perhaps, themoment for Mademoiselle Valentine, who is in deep distress, to think of ahusband; indeed, I fear——”“Valentine will have no greater pleasure than that of fulfilling hergrandmother’s last injunctions; there will be no obstacle from thatquarter, I assure you.”“In that case,” replied Franz, “as I shall raise none, youmay make arrangements when you please; I have pledged my word, and shall feelpleasure and happiness in adhering to it.”“Then,” said Villefort, “nothing further is required. Thecontract was to have been signed three days since; we shall find it all ready,and can sign it today.”“But the mourning?” said Franz, hesitating.“Don’t be uneasy on that score,” replied Villefort; “noceremony will be neglected in my house. Mademoiselle de Villefort may retireduring the prescribed three months to her estate of Saint-Méran; I say hers,for she inherits it today. There, after a few days, if you like, the civilmarriage shall be celebrated without pomp or ceremony. Madame de Saint-Méranwished her daughter should be married there. When that is over, you, sir, canreturn to Paris, while your wife passes the time of her mourning with hermother-in-law.”“As you please, sir,” said Franz.“Then,” replied M. de Villefort, “have the kindness to waithalf an hour; Valentine shall come down into the drawing-room. I will send forM. Deschamps; we will read and sign the contract before we separate, and thisevening Madame de Villefort shall accompany Valentine to her estate, where wewill rejoin them in a week.”“Sir,” said Franz, “I have one request to make.”“What is it?”“I wish Albert de Morcerf and Raoul de Château-Renaud to be present atthis signature; you know they are my witnesses.”“Half an hour will suffice to apprise them; will you go for themyourself, or shall you send?”“I prefer going, sir.”“I shall expect you, then, in half an hour, baron, and Valentine will beready.”Franz bowed and left the room. Scarcely had the door closed, when M. deVillefort sent to tell Valentine to be ready in the drawing-room in half anhour, as he expected the notary and M. d’Épinay and his witnesses. Thenews caused a great sensation throughout the house; Madame de Villefort wouldnot believe it, and Valentine was thunderstruck. She looked around for help,and would have gone down to her grandfather’s room, but on the stairs shemet M. de Villefort, who took her arm and led her into the drawing-room. In theanteroom, Valentine met Barrois, and looked despairingly at the old servant. Amoment later, Madame de Villefort entered the drawing-room with her littleEdward. It was evident that she had shared the grief of the family, for she waspale and looked fatigued. She sat down, took Edward on her knees, and from timeto time pressed this child, on whom her affections appeared centred, almostconvulsively to her bosom.Two carriages were soon heard to enter the courtyard. One was thenotary’s; the other, that of Franz and his friends. In a moment the wholeparty was assembled. Valentine was so pale one might trace the blue veins fromher temples, round her eyes and down her cheeks. Franz was deeply affected.Château-Renaud and Albert looked at each other with amazement; the ceremonywhich was just concluded had not appeared more sorrowful than did that whichwas about to begin. Madame de Villefort had placed herself in the shadow behinda velvet curtain, and as she constantly bent over her child, it was difficultto read the expression of her face. M. de Villefort was, as usual, unmoved.The notary, after having, according to the customary method, arranged thepapers on the table, taken his place in an armchair, and raised his spectacles,turned towards Franz:“Are you M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d’Épinay?” asked he,although he knew it perfectly.“Yes, sir,” replied Franz. The notary bowed.“I have, then, to inform you, sir, at the request of M. de Villefort,that your projected marriage with Mademoiselle de Villefort has changed thefeeling of M. Noirtier towards his grandchild, and that he disinherits herentirely of the fortune he would have left her. Let me hasten to add,”continued he, “that the testator, having only the right to alienate apart of his fortune, and having alienated it all, the will will not bearscrutiny, and is declared null and void.”“Yes.” said Villefort; “but I warn M. d’Épinay, thatduring my life-time my father’s will shall never be questioned, myposition forbidding any doubt to be entertained.”“Sir,” said Franz, “I regret much that such a question hasbeen raised in the presence of Mademoiselle Valentine; I have never inquiredthe amount of her fortune, which, however limited it may be, exceeds mine. Myfamily has sought consideration in this alliance with M. de Villefort; all Iseek is happiness.”Valentine imperceptibly thanked him, while two silent tears rolled down hercheeks.“Besides, sir,” said Villefort, addressing himself to his futureson-in-law, “excepting the loss of a portion of your hopes, thisunexpected will need not personally wound you; M. Noirtier’s weakness ofmind sufficiently explains it. It is not because Mademoiselle Valentine isgoing to marry you that he is angry, but because she will marry, a union withany other would have caused him the same sorrow. Old age is selfish, sir, andMademoiselle de Villefort has been a faithful companion to M. Noirtier, whichshe cannot be when she becomes the Baroness d’Épinay. My father’smelancholy state prevents our speaking to him on any subjects, which theweakness of his mind would incapacitate him from understanding, and I amperfectly convinced that at the present time, although, he knows that hisgranddaughter is going to be married, M. Noirtier has even forgotten the nameof his intended grandson.” M. de Villefort had scarcely said this, whenthe door opened, and Barrois appeared.“Gentlemen,” said he, in a tone strangely firm for a servantspeaking to his masters under such solemncircumstances,—“gentlemen, M. Noirtier de Villefort wishes to speakimmediately to M. Franz de Quesnel, baron d’Épinay.” He, as well asthe notary, that there might be no mistake in the person, gave all his titlesto the bridegroom elect.Villefort started, Madame de Villefort let her son slip from her knees,Valentine rose, pale and dumb as a statue. Albert and Château-Renaud exchangeda second look, more full of amazement than the first. The notary looked atVillefort.“It is impossible,” said the procureur. “M. d’Épinaycannot leave the drawing-room at present.”“It is at this moment,” replied Barrois with the same firmness,“that M. Noirtier, my master, wishes to speak on important subjects to M.Franz d’Épinay.”“Grandpapa Noirtier can speak now, then,” said Edward, with hishabitual quickness. However, his remark did not make Madame de Villefort evensmile, so much was every mind engaged, and so solemn was the situation.“Tell M. Nortier,” resumed Villefort, “that what he demandsis impossible.”“Then, M. Nortier gives notice to these gentlemen,” repliedBarrois, “that he will give orders to be carried to thedrawing-room.”Astonishment was at its height. Something like a smile was perceptible onMadame de Villefort’s countenance. Valentine instinctively raised hereyes, as if to thank heaven.“Pray go, Valentine,” said; M. de Villefort, “and see whatthis new fancy of your grandfather’s is.” Valentine rose quickly,and was hastening joyfully towards the door, when M. de Villefort altered hisintention.“Stop,” said he; “I will go with you.”“Excuse me, sir,” said Franz, “since M. Noirtier sent for me,I am ready to attend to his wish; besides, I shall be happy to pay my respectsto him, not having yet had the honor of doing so.”“Pray, sir,” said Villefort with marked uneasiness, “do notdisturb yourself.”“Forgive me, sir,” said Franz in a resolute tone. “I wouldnot lose this opportunity of proving to M. Noirtier how wrong it would be ofhim to encourage feelings of dislike to me, which I am determined to conquer,whatever they may be, by my devotion.”And without listening to Villefort he arose, and followed Valentine, who wasrunning downstairs with the joy of a shipwrecked mariner who finds a rock tocling to. M. de Villefort followed them. Château-Renaud and Morcerf exchanged athird look of still increasing wonder. Chapter 75. A SignedStatementNoirtier was prepared toreceive them, dressed in black, and installed in his armchair. When the threepersons he expected had entered, he looked at the door, which his valetimmediately closed.“Listen,” whispered Villefort to Valentine, who could not concealher joy; “if M. Noirtier wishes to communicate anything which would delayyour marriage, I forbid you to understand him.”Valentine blushed, but did not answer. Villefort, approached Noirtier.“Here is M. Franz d’Épinay,” said he; “you requested tosee him. We have all wished for this interview, and I trust it will convinceyou how ill-formed are your objections to Valentine’s marriage.”Noirtier answered only by a look which made Villefort’s blood run cold.He motioned to Valentine to approach. In a moment, thanks to her habit ofconversing with her grandfather, she understood that he asked for a key. Thenhis eye was fixed on the drawer of a small chest between the windows. Sheopened the drawer, and found a key; and, understanding that was what he wanted,again watched his eyes, which turned toward an old secretaire which had beenneglected for many years and was supposed to contain nothing but uselessdocuments.“Shall I open the secretaire?” asked Valentine.“Yes,” said the old man.“And the drawers?”“Yes.”“Those at the side?”“No.”“The middle one?”“Yes.”Valentine opened it and drew out a bundle of papers. “Is that what youwish for?” asked she.“No.”She took successively all the other papers out till the drawer was empty.“But there are no more,” said she. Noirtier’s eye was fixedon the dictionary.“Yes, I understand, grandfather,” said the young girl.She pointed to each letter of the alphabet. At the letter S the old man stoppedher. She opened, and found the word “secret.”“Ah! is there a secret spring?” said Valentine.“Yes,” said Noirtier.“And who knows it?” Noirtier looked at the door where the servanthad gone out.“Barrois?” said she.“Yes.”“Shall I call him?”“Yes.”Valentine went to the door, and called Barrois. Villefort’s impatienceduring this scene made the perspiration roll from his forehead, and Franz wasstupefied. The old servant came.“Barrois,” said Valentine, “my grandfather has told me toopen that drawer in the secretaire, but there is a secret spring in it, whichyou know—will you open it?”Barrois looked at the old man. “Obey,” said Noirtier’sintelligent eye. Barrois touched a spring, the false bottom came out, and theysaw a bundle of papers tied with a black string.“Is that what you wish for?” said Barrois.“Yes.”“Shall I give these papers to M. de Villefort?”“No.”“To Mademoiselle Valentine?”“No.”“To M. Franz d’Épinay?”“Yes.”Franz, astonished, advanced a step. “To me, sir?” said he.“Yes.”Franz took them from Barrois and casting a glance at the cover, read:“‘To be given, after my death, to General Durand, who shallbequeath the packet to his son, with an injunction to preserve it as containingan important document.’“Well, sir,” asked Franz, “what do you wish me to do withthis paper?”“To preserve it, sealed up as it is, doubtless,” said theprocureur.“No,” replied Noirtier eagerly.“Do you wish him to read it?” said Valentine.“Yes,” replied the old man.“You understand, baron, my grandfather wishes you to read thispaper,” said Valentine.“Then let us sit down,” said Villefort impatiently, “for itwill take some time.”“Sit down,” said the old man. Villefort took a chair, but Valentineremained standing by her father’s side, and Franz before him, holding themysterious paper in his hand. “Read,” said the old man. Franzuntied it, and in the midst of the most profound silence read:“‘Extract of the report of a meeting of the Bonapartist Club inthe Rue Saint-Jacques, held February 5th, 1815.’”Franz stopped. “February 5th, 1815!” said he; “it is the daymy father was murdered.” Valentine and Villefort were dumb; the eye ofthe old man alone seemed to say clearly, “Go on.”“But it was on leaving this club,” said he, “my fatherdisappeared.”Noirtier’s eye continued to say, “Read.” He resumed:—“‘The undersigned Louis-Jacques Beaurepaire, lieutenant-colonel ofartillery, Étienne Duchampy, general of brigade, and Claude Lecharpal, keeperof woods and forests, declare, that on the 4th of February, a letter arrivedfrom the Island of Elba, recommending to the kindness and the confidence of theBonapartist Club, General Flavien de Quesnel, who having served the emperorfrom 1804 to 1814 was supposed to be devoted to the interests of the Napoleondynasty, notwithstanding the title of baron which Louis XVIII. had just grantedto him with his estate of Épinay.“‘A note was in consequence addressed to General de Quesnel,begging him to be present at the meeting next day, the 5th. The note indicatedneither the street nor the number of the house where the meeting was to beheld; it bore no signature, but it announced to the general that someone wouldcall for him if he would be ready at nine o’clock. The meetings werealways held from that time till midnight. At nine o’clock the presidentof the club presented himself; the general was ready, the president informedhim that one of the conditions of his introduction was that he should beeternally ignorant of the place of meeting, and that he would allow his eyes tobe bandaged, swearing that he would not endeavor to take off the bandage.General de Quesnel accepted the condition, and promised on his honor not toseek to discover the road they took. The general’s carriage was ready,but the president told him it was impossible for him to use it, since it wasuseless to blindfold the master if the coachman knew through what streets hewent. “What must be done then?” asked the general.—“Ihave my carriage here,” said the president.“‘“Have you, then, so much confidence in your servant thatyou can intrust him with a secret you will not allow me to know?”“‘“Our coachman is a member of the club,” said thepresident; “we shall be driven by a State-Councillor.”“‘“Then we run another risk,” said the general,laughing, “that of being upset.” We insert this joke to prove thatthe general was not in the least compelled to attend the meeting, but that hecame willingly. When they were seated in the carriage the president remindedthe general of his promise to allow his eyes to be bandaged, to which he madeno opposition. On the road the president thought he saw the general make anattempt to remove the handkerchief, and reminded him of his oath. “Sureenough,” said the general. The carriage stopped at an alley leading outof the Rue Saint-Jacques. The general alighted, leaning on the arm of thepresident, of whose dignity he was not aware, considering him simply as amember of the club; they went through the alley, mounted a flight of stairs,and entered the assembly-room.“‘The deliberations had already begun. The members, apprised of thesort of presentation which was to be made that evening, were all in attendance.When in the middle of the room the general was invited to remove his bandage,he did so immediately, and was surprised to see so many well-known faces in asociety of whose existence he had till then been ignorant. They questioned himas to his sentiments, but he contented himself with answering, that the lettersfrom the Island of Elba ought to have informed them——’”Franz interrupted himself by saying, “My father was a royalist; they neednot have asked his sentiments, which were well known.”“And hence,” said Villefort, “arose my affection for yourfather, my dear M. Franz. Opinions held in common are a ready bond ofunion.”“Read again,” said the old man.Franz continued:“‘The president then sought to make him speak more explicitly, butM. de Quesnel replied that he wished first to know what they wanted with him.He was then informed of the contents of the letter from the Island of Elba, inwhich he was recommended to the club as a man who would be likely to advancethe interests of their party. One paragraph spoke of the return of Bonaparteand promised another letter and further details, on the arrival of thePharaon belonging to the shipbuilder Morrel, of Marseilles, whosecaptain was entirely devoted to the emperor. During all this time, the general,on whom they thought to have relied as on a brother, manifested evidently signsof discontent and repugnance. When the reading was finished, he remainedsilent, with knitted brows.“‘“Well,” asked the president, “what do you sayto this letter, general?”“‘“I say that it is too soon after declaring myself for LouisXVIII. to break my vow in behalf of the ex-emperor.” This answer was tooclear to permit of any mistake as to his sentiments. “General,”said the president, “we acknowledge no King Louis XVIII., or anex-emperor, but his majesty the emperor and king, driven from France, which ishis kingdom, by violence and treason.”“‘“Excuse me, gentlemen,” said the general; “youmay not acknowledge Louis XVIII., but I do, as he has made me a baron and afield-marshal, and I shall never forget that for these two titles I am indebtedto his happy return to France.”“‘“Sir,” said the president, rising with gravity,“be careful what you say; your words clearly show us that they aredeceived concerning you in the Island of Elba, and have deceived us! Thecommunication has been made to you in consequence of the confidence placed inyou, and which does you honor. Now we discover our error; a title and promotionattach you to the government we wish to overturn. We will not constrain you tohelp us; we enroll no one against his conscience, but we will compel you to actgenerously, even if you are not disposed to do so.”“‘“You would call acting generously, knowing your conspiracyand not informing against you, that is what I should call becoming youraccomplice. You see I am more candid than you.”’”“Ah, my father!” said Franz, interrupting himself. “Iunderstand now why they murdered him.” Valentine could not help castingone glance towards the young man, whose filial enthusiasm it was delightful tobehold. Villefort walked to and fro behind them. Noirtier watched theexpression of each one, and preserved his dignified and commanding attitude.Franz returned to the manuscript, and continued:“‘“Sir,” said the president, “you have beeninvited to join this assembly—you were not forced here; it was proposedto you to come blindfolded—you accepted. When you complied with thistwofold request you well knew we did not wish to secure the throne of LouisXVIII., or we should not take so much care to avoid the vigilance of thepolice. It would be conceding too much to allow you to put on a mask to aid youin the discovery of our secret, and then to remove it that you may ruin thosewho have confided in you. No, no, you must first say if you declare yourselffor the king of a day who now reigns, or for his majesty the emperor.”“‘“I am a royalist,” replied the general; “I havetaken the oath of allegiance to Louis XVIII., and I will adhere to it.”These words were followed by a general murmur, and it was evident that severalof the members were discussing the propriety of making the general repent ofhis rashness.“‘The president again arose, and having imposed silence,said,—“Sir, you are too serious and too sensible a man not tounderstand the consequences of our present situation, and your candor hasalready dictated to us the conditions which remain for us to offer you.”The general, putting his hand on his sword, exclaimed,—“If you talkof honor, do not begin by disavowing its laws, and impose nothing byviolence.”“‘“And you, sir,” continued the president, with acalmness still more terrible than the general’s anger, “I adviseyou not to touch your sword.” The general looked around him with slightuneasiness; however he did not yield, but calling up all his fortitude,said,—“I will not swear.”“‘“Then you must die,” replied the president calmly. M.d’Épinay became very pale; he looked round him a second time, severalmembers of the club were whispering, and getting their arms from under theircloaks. “General,” said the president, “do not alarmyourself; you are among men of honor who will use every means to convince youbefore resorting to the last extremity, but as you have said, you are amongconspirators, you are in possession of our secret, and you must restore it tous.” A significant silence followed these words, and as the general didnot reply,—“Close the doors,” said the president to thedoor-keeper.“‘The same deadly silence succeeded these words. Then the generaladvanced, and making a violent effort to control his feelings,—“Ihave a son,” said he, “and I ought to think of him, finding myselfamong assassins.”“‘“General,” said the chief of the assembly, “oneman may insult fifty—it is the privilege of weakness. But he does wrongto use his privilege. Follow my advice, swear, and do not insult.” Thegeneral, again daunted by the superiority of the chief, hesitated a moment;then advancing to the president’s desk,—“What is the form,said he.“‘“It is this:—‘I swear by my honor not to revealto anyone what I have seen and heard on the 5th of February, 1815, between nineand ten o’clock in the evening; and I plead guilty of death should I everviolate this oath.’” The general appeared to be affected by anervous tremor, which prevented his answering for some moments; then,overcoming his manifest repugnance, he pronounced the required oath, but in solow a tone as to be scarcely audible to the majority of the members, whoinsisted on his repeating it clearly and distinctly, which he did.“‘“Now am I at liberty to retire?” said the general.The president rose, appointed three members to accompany him, and got into thecarriage with the general after bandaging his eyes. One of those three memberswas the coachman who had driven them there. The other members silentlydispersed. “Where do you wish to be taken?” asked thepresident.—“Anywhere out of your presence,” replied M.d’Épinay. “Beware, sir,” replied the president, “youare no longer in the assembly, and have only to do with individuals; do notinsult them unless you wish to be held responsible.” But instead oflistening, M. d’Épinay went on,—“You are still as brave inyour carriage as in your assembly because you are still four againstone.” The president stopped the coach. They were at that part of the Quaides Ormes where the steps lead down to the river. “Why do you stophere?” asked d’Épinay.“‘“Because, sir,” said the president, “you haveinsulted a man, and that man will not go one step farther without demandinghonorable reparation.”“‘“Another method of assassination?” said the general,shrugging his shoulders.“‘“Make no noise, sir, unless you wish me to consider you asone of the men of whom you spoke just now as cowards, who take their weaknessfor a shield. You are alone, one alone shall answer you; you have a sword byyour side, I have one in my cane; you have no witness, one of these gentlemenwill serve you. Now, if you please, remove your bandage.” The generaltore the handkerchief from his eyes. “At last,” said he, “Ishall know with whom I have to do.” They opened the door and the four menalighted.’”Franz again interrupted himself, and wiped the cold drops from his brow; therewas something awful in hearing the son read aloud in trembling pallor thesedetails of his father’s death, which had hitherto been a mystery.Valentine clasped her hands as if in prayer. Noirtier looked at Villefort withan almost sublime expression of contempt and pride.Franz continued:“‘It was, as we said, the fifth of February. For three days themercury had been five or six degrees below freezing and the steps were coveredwith ice. The general was stout and tall, the president offered him the side ofthe railing to assist him in getting down. The two witnesses followed. It was adark night. The ground from the steps to the river was covered with snow andhoarfrost, the water of the river looked black and deep. One of the secondswent for a lantern in a coal-barge near, and by its light they examined theweapons. The president’s sword, which was simply, as he had said, one hecarried in his cane, was five inches shorter than the general’s, and hadno guard. The general proposed to cast lots for the swords, but the presidentsaid it was he who had given the provocation, and when he had given it he hadsupposed each would use his own arms. The witnesses endeavored to insist, butthe president bade them be silent. The lantern was placed on the ground, thetwo adversaries took their stations, and the duel began. The light made the twoswords appear like flashes of lightning; as for the men, they were scarcelyperceptible, the darkness was so great.“‘General d’Épinay passed for one of the best swordsmen inthe army, but he was pressed so closely in the onset that he missed his aim andfell. The witnesses thought he was dead, but his adversary, who knew he had notstruck him, offered him the assistance of his hand to rise. The circumstanceirritated instead of calming the general, and he rushed on his adversary. Buthis opponent did not allow his guard to be broken. He received him on his swordand three times the general drew back on finding himself too closely engaged,and then returned to the charge. At the third he fell again. They thought heslipped, as at first, and the witnesses, seeing he did not move, approached andendeavored to raise him, but the one who passed his arm around the body foundit was moistened with blood. The general, who had almost fainted, revived.“Ah,” said he, “they have sent some fencing-master to fightwith me.” The president, without answering, approached the witness whoheld the lantern, and raising his sleeve, showed him two wounds he had receivedin his arm; then opening his coat, and unbuttoning his waistcoat, displayed hisside, pierced with a third wound. Still he had not even uttered a sigh. Generald’Épinay died five minutes after.’”Franz read these last words in a voice so choked that they were hardly audible,and then stopped, passing his hand over his eyes as if to dispel a cloud; butafter a moment’s silence, he continued:“‘The president went up the steps, after pushing his sword into hiscane; a track of blood on the snow marked his course. He had scarcely arrivedat the top when he heard a heavy splash in the water—it was thegeneral’s body, which the witnesses had just thrown into the river afterascertaining that he was dead. The general fell, then, in a loyal duel, and notin ambush as it might have been reported. In proof of this we have signed thispaper to establish the truth of the facts, lest the moment should arrive wheneither of the actors in this terrible scene should be accused of premeditatedmurder or of infringement of the laws of honor.“‘Signed, Beaurepaire, Duchampy, and Lecharpal.’”When Franz had finished reading this account, so dreadful for a son; whenValentine, pale with emotion, had wiped away a tear; when Villefort, trembling,and crouched in a corner, had endeavored to lessen the storm by supplicatingglances at the implacable old man,—“Sir,” said d’Épinay to Noirtier, “since you are wellacquainted with all these details, which are attested by honorablesignatures,—since you appear to take some interest in me, although youhave only manifested it hitherto by causing me sorrow, refuse me not one finalsatisfaction—tell me the name of the president of the club, that I may atleast know who killed my father.”Villefort mechanically felt for the handle of the door; Valentine, whounderstood sooner than anyone her grandfather’s answer, and who had oftenseen two scars upon his right arm, drew back a few steps.“Mademoiselle,” said Franz, turning towards Valentine, “uniteyour efforts with mine to find out the name of the man who made me an orphan attwo years of age.” Valentine remained dumb and motionless.“Hold, sir,” said Villefort, “do not prolong this dreadfulscene. The names have been purposely concealed; my father himself does not knowwho this president was, and if he knows, he cannot tell you; proper names arenot in the dictionary.”“Oh, misery,” cried Franz: “the only hope which sustained meand enabled me to read to the end was that of knowing, at least, the name ofhim who killed my father! Sir, sir,” cried he, turning to Noirtier,“do what you can—make me understand in some way!”“Yes,” replied Noirtier.“Oh, mademoiselle, mademoiselle!” cried Franz, “yourgrandfather says he can indicate the person. Help me,—lend me yourassistance!”Noirtier looked at the dictionary. Franz took it with a nervous trembling, andrepeated the letters of the alphabet successively, until he came to M. At thatletter the old man signified “Yes.”“M,” repeated Franz. The young man’s finger, glided over thewords, but at each one Noirtier answered by a negative sign. Valentine hid herhead between her hands. At length, Franz arrived at the word MYSELF.“Yes!”“You!” cried Franz, whose hair stood on end; “you, M.Noirtier—you killed my father?”“Yes!” replied Noirtier, fixing a majestic look on the young man.Franz fell powerless on a chair; Villefort opened the door and escaped, for theidea had entered his mind to stifle the little remaining life in the heart ofthis terrible old man.    Chapter 76. Progress ofCavalcanti the YoungerMeanwhile M. Cavalcantithe elder had returned to his service, not in the army of his majesty theEmperor of Austria, but at the gaming-table of the baths of Lucca, of which hewas one of the most assiduous courtiers. He had spent every farthing that hadbeen allowed for his journey as a reward for the majestic and solemn manner inwhich he had maintained his assumed character of father.M. Andrea at his departure inherited all the papers which proved that he hadindeed the honor of being the son of the Marquis Bartolomeo and the MarchionessOliva Corsinari. He was now fairly launched in that Parisian society whichgives such ready access to foreigners, and treats them, not as they really are,but as they wish to be considered. Besides, what is required of a young man inParis? To speak its language tolerably, to make a good appearance, to be a goodgamester, and to pay in cash. They are certainly less particular with aforeigner than with a Frenchman. Andrea had, then, in a fortnight, attained avery fair position. He was called count, he was said to possess 50,000 livresper annum; and his father’s immense riches, buried in the quarries ofSaravezza, were a constant theme. A learned man, before whom the lastcircumstance was mentioned as a fact, declared he had seen the quarries inquestion, which gave great weight to assertions hitherto somewhat doubtful, butwhich now assumed the garb of reality.Such was the state of society in Paris at the period we bring before ourreaders, when Monte Cristo went one evening to pay M. Danglars a visit. M.Danglars was out, but the count was asked to go and see the baroness, and heaccepted the invitation. It was never without a nervous shudder, since thedinner at Auteuil, and the events which followed it, that Madame Danglars heardMonte Cristo’s name announced. If he did not come, the painful sensationbecame most intense; if, on the contrary, he appeared, his noble countenance,his brilliant eyes, his amiability, his polite attention even towards MadameDanglars, soon dispelled every impression of fear. It appeared impossible tothe baroness that a man of such delightfully pleasing manners should entertainevil designs against her; besides, the most corrupt minds only suspect evilwhen it would answer some interested end—useless injury is repugnant toevery mind.When Monte Cristo entered the boudoir, to which we have already once introducedour readers, and where the baroness was examining some drawings, which herdaughter passed to her after having looked at them with M. Cavalcanti, hispresence soon produced its usual effect, and it was with smiles that thebaroness received the count, although she had been a little disconcerted at theannouncement of his name. The latter took in the whole scene at a glance.The baroness was partially reclining on a sofa, Eugénie sat near her, andCavalcanti was standing. Cavalcanti, dressed in black, like one ofGoethe’s heroes, with varnished shoes and white silk open-workedstockings, passed a white and tolerably nice-looking hand through his lighthair, and so displayed a sparkling diamond, that in spite of MonteCristo’s advice the vain young man had been unable to resist putting onhis little finger. This movement was accompanied by killing glances atMademoiselle Danglars, and by sighs launched in the same direction.Mademoiselle Danglars was still the same—cold, beautiful, and satirical.Not one of these glances, nor one sigh, was lost on her; they might have beensaid to fall on the shield of Minerva, which some philosophers assert protectedsometimes the breast of Sappho. Eugénie bowed coldly to the count, and availedherself of the first moment when the conversation became earnest to escape toher study, whence very soon two cheerful and noisy voices being heard inconnection with occasional notes of the piano assured Monte Cristo thatMademoiselle Danglars preferred to his society and to that of M. Cavalcanti thecompany of Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, her singing teacher.It was then, especially while conversing with Madame Danglars, and apparentlyabsorbed by the charm of the conversation, that the count noticed M. AndreaCavalcanti’s solicitude, his manner of listening to the music at the doorhe dared not pass, and of manifesting his admiration.The banker soon returned. His first look was certainly directed towards MonteCristo, but the second was for Andrea. As for his wife, he bowed to her, assome husbands do to their wives, but in a way that bachelors will nevercomprehend, until a very extensive code is published on conjugal life.“Have not the ladies invited you to join them at the piano?” saidDanglars to Andrea.“Alas, no, sir,” replied Andrea with a sigh, still more remarkablethan the former ones. Danglars immediately advanced towards the door and openedit.The two young ladies were seen seated on the same chair, at the piano,accompanying themselves, each with one hand, a fancy to which they hadaccustomed themselves, and performed admirably. Mademoiselle d’Armilly,whom they then perceived through the open doorway, formed with Eugénie one ofthe tableaux vivants of which the Germans are so fond. She was somewhatbeautiful, and exquisitely formed—a little fairy-like figure, with largecurls falling on her neck, which was rather too long, as Perugino sometimesmakes his Virgins, and her eyes dull from fatigue. She was said to have a weakchest, and like Antonia in the Cremona Violin, she would die one daywhile singing.Monte Cristo cast one rapid and curious glance round this sanctum; it was thefirst time he had ever seen Mademoiselle d’Armilly, of whom he had heardmuch.“Well,” said the banker to his daughter, “are we then all tobe excluded?”He then led the young man into the study, and either by chance or manœuvre thedoor was partially closed after Andrea, so that from the place where they satneither the Count nor the baroness could see anything; but as the banker hadaccompanied Andrea, Madame Danglars appeared to take no notice of it.The count soon heard Andrea’s voice, singing a Corsican song, accompaniedby the piano. While the count smiled at hearing this song, which made him losesight of Andrea in the recollection of Benedetto, Madame Danglars was boastingto Monte Cristo of her husband’s strength of mind, who that very morninghad lost three or four hundred thousand francs by a failure at Milan. Thepraise was well deserved, for had not the count heard it from the baroness, orby one of those means by which he knew everything, the baron’scountenance would not have led him to suspect it.“Hem,” thought Monte Cristo, “he begins to conceal hislosses; a month since he boasted of them.”Then aloud,—“Oh, madame, M. Danglars is so skilful, he will soonregain at the Bourse what he loses elsewhere.”“I see that you participate in a prevalent error,” said MadameDanglars.“What is it?” said Monte Cristo.“That M. Danglars speculates, whereas he never does.”“Truly, madame, I recollect M. Debray told me——apropos, whathas become of him? I have seen nothing of him the last three or fourdays.”“Nor I,” said Madame Danglars; “but you began a sentence,sir, and did not finish.”“Which?”“M. Debray had told you——”“Ah, yes; he told me it was you who sacrificed to the demon ofspeculation.”“I was once very fond of it, but I do not indulge now.”“Then you are wrong, madame. Fortune is precarious; and if I were a womanand fate had made me a banker’s wife, whatever might be my confidence inmy husband’s good fortune, still in speculation you know there is greatrisk. Well, I would secure for myself a fortune independent of him, even if Iacquired it by placing my interests in hands unknown to him.” MadameDanglars blushed, in spite of all her efforts.“Stay,” said Monte Cristo, as though he had not observed herconfusion, “I have heard of a lucky hit that was made yesterday on theNeapolitan bonds.”“I have none—nor have I ever possessed any; but really we havetalked long enough of money, count, we are like two stockbrokers; have youheard how fate is persecuting the poor Villeforts?”“What has happened?” said the count, simulating total ignorance.“You know the Marquis of Saint-Méran died a few days after he had set outon his journey to Paris, and the marchioness a few days after herarrival?”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “I have heard that; but, asClaudius said to Hamlet, ‘it is a law of nature; their fathers diedbefore them, and they mourned their loss; they will die before their children,who will, in their turn, grieve for them.’”“But that is not all.”“Not all!”“No; they were going to marry their daughter——”“To M. Franz d’Épinay. Is it broken off?”“Yesterday morning, it appears, Franz declined the honor.”“Indeed? And is the reason known?”“No.”“How extraordinary! And how does M. de Villefort bear it?”“As usual. Like a philosopher.”Danglars returned at this moment alone.“Well,” said the baroness, “do you leave M. Cavalcanti withyour daughter?”“And Mademoiselle d’Armilly,” said the banker; “do youconsider her no one?” Then, turning to Monte Cristo, he said,“Prince Cavalcanti is a charming young man, is he not? But is he really aprince?”“I will not answer for it,” said Monte Cristo. “His fatherwas introduced to me as a marquis, so he ought to be a count; but I do notthink he has much claim to that title.”“Why?” said the banker. “If he is a prince, he is wrong notto maintain his rank; I do not like anyone to deny his origin.”“Oh, you are a thorough democrat,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.“But do you see to what you are exposing yourself?” said thebaroness. “If, perchance, M. de Morcerf came, he would find M. Cavalcantiin that room, where he, the betrothed of Eugénie, has never beenadmitted.”“You may well say, perchance,” replied the banker; “for hecomes so seldom, it would seem only chance that brings him.”“But should he come and find that young man with your daughter, he mightbe displeased.”“He? You are mistaken. M. Albert would not do us the honor to be jealous;he does not like Eugénie sufficiently. Besides, I care not for hisdispleasure.”“Still, situated as we are——”“Yes, do you know how we are situated? At his mother’s ball hedanced once with Eugénie, and M. Cavalcanti three times, and he took no noticeof it.”The valet announced the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf. The baroness rose hastily,and was going into the study, when Danglars stopped her.“Let her alone,” said he.She looked at him in amazement. Monte Cristo appeared to be unconscious of whatpassed. Albert entered, looking very handsome and in high spirits. He bowedpolitely to the baroness, familiarly to Danglars, and affectionately to MonteCristo. Then turning to the baroness: “May I ask how MademoiselleDanglars is?” said he.“She is quite well,” replied Danglars quickly; “she is at thepiano with M. Cavalcanti.”Albert retained his calm and indifferent manner; he might feel perhaps annoyed,but he knew Monte Cristo’s eye was on him. “M. Cavalcanti has afine tenor voice,” said he, “and Mademoiselle Eugénie a splendidsoprano, and then she plays the piano like Thalberg. The concert must be adelightful one.”“They suit each other remarkably well,” said Danglars. Albertappeared not to notice this remark, which was, however, so rude that MadameDanglars blushed.“I, too,” said the young man, “am a musician—at least,my masters used to tell me so; but it is strange that my voice never would suitany other, and a soprano less than any.”Danglars smiled, and seemed to say, “It is of no consequence.”Then, hoping doubtless to effect his purpose, he said,—“The princeand my daughter were universally admired yesterday. You were not of the party,M. de Morcerf?”“What prince?” asked Albert.“Prince Cavalcanti,” said Danglars, who persisted in giving theyoung man that title.“Pardon me,” said Albert, “I was not aware that he was aprince. And Prince Cavalcanti sang with Mademoiselle Eugénie yesterday? It musthave been charming, indeed. I regret not having heard them. But I was unable toaccept your invitation, having promised to accompany my mother to a Germanconcert given by the Baroness of Château-Renaud.”This was followed by rather an awkward silence.“May I also be allowed,” said Morcerf, “to pay my respects toMademoiselle Danglars?”“Wait a moment,” said the banker, stopping the young man; “doyou hear that delightful cavatina? Ta, ta, ta, ti, ta, ti, ta, ta; it ischarming, let them finish—one moment. Bravo, bravi, brava!” Thebanker was enthusiastic in his applause.“Indeed,” said Albert, “it is exquisite; it is impossible tounderstand the music of his country better than Prince Cavalcanti does. Yousaid prince, did you not? But he can easily become one, if he is not already;it is no uncommon thing in Italy. But to return to the charmingmusicians—you should give us a treat, Danglars, without telling themthere is a stranger. Ask them to sing one more song; it is so delightful tohear music in the distance, when the musicians are unrestrained byobservation.”Danglars was quite annoyed by the young man’s indifference. He took MonteCristo aside.“What do you think of our lover?” said he.“He appears cool. But, then your word is given.”“Yes, doubtless I have promised to give my daughter to a man who lovesher, but not to one who does not. See him there, cold as marble and proud likehis father. If he were rich, if he had Cavalcanti’s fortune, that mightbe pardoned. Ma foi, I haven’t consulted my daughter; but if shehas good taste——”“Oh,” said Monte Cristo, “my fondness may blind me, but Iassure you I consider Morcerf a charming young man who will render yourdaughter happy and will sooner or later attain a certain amount of distinction,and his father’s position is good.”“Hem,” said Danglars.“Why do you doubt?”“The past—that obscurity on the past.”“But that does not affect the son.”“Very true.”“Now, I beg of you, don’t go off your head. It’s a month nowthat you have been thinking of this marriage, and you must see that it throwssome responsibility on me, for it was at my house you met this youngCavalcanti, whom I do not really know at all.”“But I do.”“Have you made inquiry?”“Is there any need of that! Does not his appearance speak for him? And heis very rich.”“I am not so sure of that.”“And yet you said he had money.”“Fifty thousand livres—a mere trifle.”“He is well educated.”“Hem,” said Monte Cristo in his turn.“He is a musician.”“So are all Italians.”“Come, count, you do not do that young man justice.”“Well, I acknowledge it annoys me, knowing your connection with theMorcerf family, to see him throw himself in the way.” Danglars burst outlaughing.“What a Puritan you are!” said he; “that happens everyday.”“But you cannot break it off in this way; the Morcerfs are depending onthis union.”“Indeed.”“Positively.”“Then let them explain themselves; you should give the father a hint, youare so intimate with the family.”“I?—where the devil did you find out that?”“At their ball; it was apparent enough. Why, did not the countess, theproud Mercédès, the disdainful Catalane, who will scarcely open her lips to heroldest acquaintances, take your arm, lead you into the garden, into the privatewalks, and remain there for half an hour?”“Ah, baron, baron,” said Albert, “you are notlistening—what barbarism in a megalomaniac like you!”“Oh, don’t worry about me, Sir Mocker,” said Danglars; thenturning to Monte Cristo he said:“But will you undertake to speak to the father?”“Willingly, if you wish it.”“But let it be done explicitly and positively. If he demands my daughterlet him fix the day—declare his conditions; in short, let us eitherunderstand each other, or quarrel. You understand—no more delay.”“Yes, sir, I will give my attention to the subject.”“I do not say that I await with pleasure his decision, but I do await it.A banker must, you know, be a slave to his promise.” And Danglars sighedas M. Cavalcanti had done half an hour before.“Bravi! bravo! brava!” cried Morcerf, parodying the banker, as theselection came to an end. Danglars began to look suspiciously at Morcerf, whensomeone came and whispered a few words to him.“I shall soon return,” said the banker to Monte Cristo; “waitfor me. I shall, perhaps, have something to say to you.” And he went out.The baroness took advantage of her husband’s absence to push open thedoor of her daughter’s study, and M. Andrea, who was sitting before thepiano with Mademoiselle Eugénie, started up like a jack-in-the-box. Albertbowed with a smile to Mademoiselle Danglars, who did not appear in the leastdisturbed, and returned his bow with her usual coolness. Cavalcanti wasevidently embarrassed; he bowed to Morcerf, who replied with the mostimpertinent look possible. Then Albert launched out in praise of MademoiselleDanglars’ voice, and on his regret, after what he had just heard, that hehad been unable to be present the previous evening.Cavalcanti, being left alone, turned to Monte Cristo.“Come,” said Madame Danglars, “leave music and compliments,and let us go and take tea.”“Come, Louise,” said Mademoiselle Danglars to her friend.They passed into the next drawing-room, where tea was prepared. Just as theywere beginning, in the English fashion, to leave the spoons in their cups, thedoor again opened and Danglars entered, visibly agitated. Monte Cristo observedit particularly, and by a look asked the banker for an explanation.“I have just received my courier from Greece,” said Danglars.“Ah, yes,” said the count; “that was the reason of yourrunning away from us.”“Yes.”“How is King Otho getting on?” asked Albert in the most sprightlytone.Danglars cast another suspicious look towards him without answering, and MonteCristo turned away to conceal the expression of pity which passed over hisfeatures, but which was gone in a moment.“We shall go together, shall we not?” said Albert to the count.“If you like,” replied the latter.Albert could not understand the banker’s look, and turning to MonteCristo, who understood it perfectly,—“Did you see,” said he,“how he looked at me?”“Yes,” said the count; “but did you think there was anythingparticular in his look?”“Indeed, I did; and what does he mean by his news from Greece?”“How can I tell you?”“Because I imagine you have correspondents in that country.”Monte Cristo smiled significantly.“Stop,” said Albert, “here he comes. I shall complimentMademoiselle Danglars on her cameo, while the father talks to you.”“If you compliment her at all, let it be on her voice, at least,”said Monte Cristo.“No, everyone would do that.”“My dear viscount, you are dreadfully impertinent.”Albert advanced towards Eugénie, smiling.Meanwhile, Danglars, stooping to Monte Cristo’s ear, “Your advicewas excellent,” said he; “there is a whole history connected withthe names Fernand and Yanina.”“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo.“Yes, I will tell you all; but take away the young man; I cannot endurehis presence.”“He is going with me. Shall I send the father to you?”“Immediately.”“Very well.” The count made a sign to Albert and they bowed to theladies, and took their leave, Albert perfectly indifferent to MademoiselleDanglars’ contempt, Monte Cristo reiterating his advice to MadameDanglars on the prudence a banker’s wife should exercise in providing forthe future.M. Cavalcanti remained master of the field. Chapter 77. HaydéeScarcely had thecount’s horses cleared the angle of the boulevard, when Albert, turningtowards the count, burst into a loud fit of laughter—much too loud infact not to give the idea of its being rather forced and unnatural.“Well,” said he, “I will ask you the same question whichCharles IX. put to Catherine de’ Medici, after the massacre of SaintBartholomew: ‘How have I played my little part?’”“To what do you allude?” asked Monte Cristo.“To the installation of my rival at M. Danglars’.”“What rival?”“Ma foi! what rival? Why, your protégé, M. AndreaCavalcanti!”“Ah, no joking, viscount, if you please; I do not patronize M.Andrea—at least, not as concerns M. Danglars.”“And you would be to blame for not assisting him, if the young man reallyneeded your help in that quarter, but, happily for me, he can dispense withit.”“What, do you think he is paying his addresses?”“I am certain of it; his languishing looks and modulated tones whenaddressing Mademoiselle Danglars fully proclaim his intentions. He aspires tothe hand of the proud Eugénie.”“What does that signify, so long as they favor your suit?”“But it is not the case, my dear count: on the contrary. I am repulsed onall sides.”“What!”“It is so indeed; Mademoiselle Eugénie scarcely answers me, andMademoiselle d’Armilly, her confidant, does not speak to me atall.”“But the father has the greatest regard possible for you,” saidMonte Cristo.“He? Oh, no, he has plunged a thousand daggers into my heart,tragedy-weapons, I own, which instead of wounding sheathe their points in theirown handles, but daggers which he nevertheless believed to be real anddeadly.”“Jealousy indicates affection.”“True; but I am not jealous.”“He is.”“Of whom?—of Debray?”“No, of you.”“Of me? I will engage to say that before a week is past the door will beclosed against me.”“You are mistaken, my dear viscount.”“Prove it to me.”“Do you wish me to do so?”“Yes.”“Well, I am charged with the commission of endeavoring to induce theComte de Morcerf to make some definite arrangement with the baron.”“By whom are you charged?”“By the baron himself.”“Oh,” said Albert with all the cajolery of which he was capable.“You surely will not do that, my dear count?”“Certainly I shall, Albert, as I have promised to do it.”“Well,” said Albert, with a sigh, “it seems you aredetermined to marry me.”“I am determined to try and be on good terms with everybody, at allevents,” said Monte Cristo. “But apropos of Debray, how is it thatI have not seen him lately at the baron’s house?”“There has been a misunderstanding.”“What, with the baroness?”“No, with the baron.”“Has he perceived anything?”“Ah, that is a good joke!”“Do you think he suspects?” said Monte Cristo with charmingartlessness.“Where have you come from, my dear count?” said Albert.“From Congo, if you will.”“It must be farther off than even that.”“But what do I know of your Parisian husbands?”“Oh, my dear count, husbands are pretty much the same everywhere; anindividual husband of any country is a pretty fair specimen of the wholerace.”“But then, what can have led to the quarrel between Danglars and Debray?They seemed to understand each other so well,” said Monte Cristo withrenewed energy.“Ah, now you are trying to penetrate into the mysteries of Isis, in whichI am not initiated. When M. Andrea Cavalcanti has become one of the family, youcan ask him that question.”The carriage stopped.“Here we are,” said Monte Cristo; “it is only half-past teno’clock, come in.”“Certainly, I will.”“My carriage shall take you back.”“No, thank you; I gave orders for my coupé to follow me.”“There it is, then,” said Monte Cristo, as he stepped out of thecarriage. They both went into the house; the drawing-room was lightedup—they went in there. “You will make tea for us, Baptistin,”said the count. Baptistin left the room without waiting to answer, and in twoseconds reappeared, bringing on a tray, all that his master had ordered, readyprepared, and appearing to have sprung from the ground, like the repasts whichwe read of in fairy tales.“Really, my dear count,” said Morcerf, “what I admire in youis, not so much your riches, for perhaps there are people even wealthier thanyourself, nor is it only your wit, for Beaumarchais might have possessed asmuch,—but it is your manner of being served, without any questions, in amoment, in a second; it is as if they guessed what you wanted by your manner ofringing, and made a point of keeping everything you can possibly desire inconstant readiness.”“What you say is perhaps true; they know my habits. For instance, youshall see; how do you wish to occupy yourself during tea-time?”“Ma foi, I should like to smoke.”Monte Cristo took the gong and struck it once. In about the space of a second aprivate door opened, and Ali appeared, bringing two chibouques filled withexcellent latakia.“It is quite wonderful,” said Albert.“Oh no, it is as simple as possible,” replied Monte Cristo.“Ali knows I generally smoke while I am taking my tea or coffee; he hasheard that I ordered tea, and he also knows that I brought you home with me;when I summoned him he naturally guessed the reason of my doing so, and as hecomes from a country where hospitality is especially manifested through themedium of smoking, he naturally concludes that we shall smoke in company, andtherefore brings two chibouques instead of one—and now the mystery issolved.”“Certainly you give a most commonplace air to your explanation, but it isnot the less true that you——Ah, but what do I hear?” andMorcerf inclined his head towards the door, through which sounds seemed toissue resembling those of a guitar.“Ma foi, my dear viscount, you are fated to hear music thisevening; you have only escaped from Mademoiselle Danglars’ piano, to beattacked by Haydée’s guzla.”“Haydée—what an adorable name! Are there, then, really women whobear the name of Haydée anywhere but in Byron’s poems?”“Certainly there are. Haydée is a very uncommon name in France, but iscommon enough in Albania and Epirus; it is as if you said, for example,Chastity, Modesty, Innocence,—it is a kind of baptismal name, as youParisians call it.”“Oh, that is charming,” said Albert, “how I should like tohear my countrywomen called Mademoiselle Goodness, Mademoiselle Silence,Mademoiselle Christian Charity! Only think, then, if Mademoiselle Danglars,instead of being called Claire-Marie-Eugénie, had been named MademoiselleChastity-Modesty-Innocence Danglars; what a fine effect that would haveproduced on the announcement of her marriage!”“Hush,” said the count, “do not joke in so loud a tone;Haydée may hear you, perhaps.”“And you think she would be angry?”“No, certainly not,” said the count with a haughty expression.“She is very amiable, then, is she not?” said Albert.“It is not to be called amiability, it is her duty; a slave does notdictate to a master.”“Come; you are joking yourself now. Are there any more slaves to be hadwho bear this beautiful name?”“Undoubtedly.”“Really, count, you do nothing, and have nothing like other people. Theslave of the Count of Monte Cristo! Why, it is a rank of itself in France, andfrom the way in which you lavish money, it is a place that must be worth ahundred thousand francs a year.”“A hundred thousand francs! The poor girl originally possessed much morethan that; she was born to treasures in comparison with which those recorded inthe Thousand and One Nights would seem but poverty.”“She must be a princess then.”“You are right; and she is one of the greatest in her country too.”“I thought so. But how did it happen that such a great princess became aslave?”“How was it that Dionysius the Tyrant became a schoolmaster? The fortuneof war, my dear viscount,—the caprice of fortune; that is the way inwhich these things are to be accounted for.”“And is her name a secret?”“As regards the generality of mankind it is; but not for you, my dearviscount, who are one of my most intimate friends, and on whose silence I feelI may rely, if I consider it necessary to enjoin it—may I not doso?”“Certainly; on my word of honor.”“You know the history of the Pasha of Yanina, do you not?”“Of Ali Tepelini?[13]Oh, yes; it was in his service that my father made his fortune.”“True, I had forgotten that.”“Well, what is Haydée to Ali Tepelini?”“Merely his daughter.”“What? the daughter of Ali Pasha?”“Of Ali Pasha and the beautiful Vasiliki.”“And your slave?”“Ma foi, yes.”“But how did she become so?”“Why, simply from the circumstance of my having bought her one day, as Iwas passing through the market at Constantinople.”“Wonderful! Really, my dear count, you seem to throw a sort of magicinfluence over all in which you are concerned; when I listen to you, existenceno longer seems reality, but a waking dream. Now, I am perhaps going to make animprudent and thoughtless request, but——”“Say on.”“But, since you go out with Haydée, and sometimes even take her to theOpera——”“Well?”“I think I may venture to ask you this favor.”“You may venture to ask me anything.”“Well then, my dear count, present me to your princess.”“I will do so; but on two conditions.”“I accept them at once.”“The first is, that you will never tell anyone that I have granted theinterview.”“Very well,” said Albert, extending his hand; “I swear I willnot.”“The second is, that you will not tell her that your father ever servedhers.”“I give you my oath that I will not.”“Enough, viscount; you will remember those two vows, will you not? But Iknow you to be a man of honor.”The count again struck the gong. Ali reappeared. “Tell Haydée,”said he, “that I will take coffee with her, and give her to understandthat I desire permission to present one of my friends to her.”Ali bowed and left the room.“Now, understand me,” said the count, “no direct questions,my dear Morcerf; if you wish to know anything, tell me, and I will askher.”“Agreed.”Ali reappeared for the third time, and drew back the tapestried hanging whichconcealed the door, to signify to his master and Albert that they were atliberty to pass on.“Let us go in,” said Monte Cristo.Albert passed his hand through his hair, and curled his moustache, then, havingsatisfied himself as to his personal appearance, followed the count into theroom, the latter having previously resumed his hat and gloves. Ali wasstationed as a kind of advanced guard, and the door was kept by the threeFrench attendants, commanded by Myrtho.Haydée was awaiting her visitors in the first room of her apartments, which wasthe drawing-room. Her large eyes were dilated with surprise and expectation,for it was the first time that any man, except Monte Cristo, had been accordedan entrance into her presence. She was sitting on a sofa placed in an angle ofthe room, with her legs crossed under her in the Eastern fashion, and seemed tohave made for herself, as it were, a kind of nest in the rich Indian silkswhich enveloped her. Near her was the instrument on which she had just beenplaying; it was elegantly fashioned, and worthy of its mistress. On perceivingMonte Cristo, she arose and welcomed him with a smile peculiar to herself,expressive at once of the most implicit obedience and also of the deepest love.Monte Cristo advanced towards her and extended his hand, which she as usualraised to her lips.Albert had proceeded no farther than the door, where he remained rooted to thespot, being completely fascinated by the sight of such surpassing beauty,beheld as it was for the first time, and of which an inhabitant of morenorthern climes could form no adequate idea.“Whom do you bring?” asked the young girl in Romaic, of MonteCristo; “is it a friend, a brother, a simple acquaintance, or anenemy.”“A friend,” said Monte Cristo in the same language.“What is his name?”“Count Albert; it is the same man whom I rescued from the hands of thebanditti at Rome.”“In what language would you like me to converse with him?”Monte Cristo turned to Albert. “Do you know modern Greek,” askedhe.“Alas! no,” said Albert; “nor even ancient Greek, my dearcount; never had Homer or Plato a more unworthy scholar than myself.”“Then,” said Haydée, proving by her remark that she had quiteunderstood Monte Cristo’s question and Albert’s answer, “thenI will speak either in French or Italian, if my lord so wills it.”Monte Cristo reflected one instant. “You will speak in Italian,”said he.Then, turning towards Albert,—“It is a pity you do not understandeither ancient or modern Greek, both of which Haydée speaks so fluently; thepoor child will be obliged to talk to you in Italian, which will give you but avery false idea of her powers of conversation.”The count made a sign to Haydée to address his visitor. “Sir,” shesaid to Morcerf, “you are most welcome as the friend of my lord andmaster.” This was said in excellent Tuscan, and with that soft Romanaccent which makes the language of Dante as sonorous as that of Homer. Then,turning to Ali, she directed him to bring coffee and pipes, and when he hadleft the room to execute the orders of his young mistress she beckoned Albertto approach nearer to her. Monte Cristo and Morcerf drew their seats towards asmall table, on which were arranged music, drawings, and vases of flowers. Alithen entered bringing coffee and chibouques; as to M. Baptistin, this portionof the building was interdicted to him. Albert refused the pipe which theNubian offered him.“Oh, take it—take it,” said the count; “Haydée isalmost as civilized as a Parisian; the smell of a Havana is disagreeable toher, but the tobacco of the East is a most delicious perfume, you know.”Ali left the room. The cups of coffee were all prepared, with the addition ofsugar, which had been brought for Albert. Monte Cristo and Haydée took thebeverage in the original Arabian manner, that is to say, without sugar. Haydéetook the porcelain cup in her little slender fingers and conveyed it to hermouth with all the innocent artlessness of a child when eating or drinkingsomething which it likes. At this moment two women entered, bringing salversfilled with ices and sherbet, which they placed on two small tablesappropriated to that purpose.“My dear host, and you, signora,” said Albert, in Italian,“excuse my apparent stupidity. I am quite bewildered, and it is naturalthat it should be so. Here I am in the heart of Paris; but a moment ago I heardthe rumbling of the omnibuses and the tinkling of the bells of thelemonade-sellers, and now I feel as if I were suddenly transported to the East;not such as I have seen it, but such as my dreams have painted it. Oh, signora,if I could but speak Greek, your conversation, added to the fairy-scene whichsurrounds me, would furnish an evening of such delight as it would beimpossible for me ever to forget.”“I speak sufficient Italian to enable me to converse with you,sir,” said Haydée quietly; “and if you like what is Eastern, I willdo my best to secure the gratification of your tastes while you arehere.”“On what subject shall I converse with her?” said Albert, in a lowtone to Monte Cristo.“Just what you please; you may speak of her country and of her youthfulreminiscences, or if you like it better you can talk of Rome, Naples, orFlorence.”“Oh,” said Albert, “it is of no use to be in the company of aGreek if one converses just in the same style as with a Parisian; let me speakto her of the East.”“Do so then, for of all themes which you could choose that will be themost agreeable to her taste.”Albert turned towards Haydée. “At what age did you leave Greece,signora?” asked he.“I left it when I was but five years old,” replied Haydée.“And have you any recollection of your country?”“When I shut my eyes and think, I seem to see it all again. The mind cansee as well as the body. The body forgets sometimes; but the mind alwaysremembers.”“And how far back into the past do your recollections extend?”“I could scarcely walk when my mother, who was called Vasiliki, whichmeans royal,” said the young girl, tossing her head proudly, “tookme by the hand, and after putting in our purse all the money we possessed, wewent out, both covered with veils, to solicit alms for the prisoners, saying,‘He who giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord.’ Then when ourpurse was full we returned to the palace, and without saying a word to myfather, we sent it to the convent, where it was divided amongst theprisoners.”“And how old were you at that time?”“I was three years old,” said Haydée.“Then you remember everything that went on about you from the time whenyou were three years old?” said Albert.“Everything.”“Count,” said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, “doallow the signora to tell me something of her history. You prohibited mymentioning my father’s name to her, but perhaps she will allude to him ofher own accord in the course of the recital, and you have no idea how delightedI should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful lips.”Monte Cristo turned to Haydée, and with an expression of countenance whichcommanded her to pay the most implicit attention to his words, he said inGreek,“Πατρὸς μὲν ἄτηνμήζε τὸ ὄνομαπροδότου καὶπροδοσίαν εἰπὲἡμῖν,”—that is, “Tell us the fate ofyour father; but neither the name of the traitor nor the treason.” Haydéesighed deeply, and a shade of sadness clouded her beautiful brow.“What are you saying to her?” said Morcerf in an undertone.“I again reminded her that you were a friend, and that she need notconceal anything from you.”“Then,” said Albert, “this pious pilgrimage in behalf of theprisoners was your first remembrance; what is the next?”“Oh, then I remember as if it were but yesterday sitting under the shadeof some sycamore-trees, on the borders of a lake, in the waters of which thetrembling foliage was reflected as in a mirror. Under the oldest and thickestof these trees, reclining on cushions, sat my father; my mother was at hisfeet, and I, childlike, amused myself by playing with his long white beardwhich descended to his girdle, or with the diamond-hilt of the scimitarattached to his girdle. Then from time to time there came to him an Albanianwho said something to which I paid no attention, but which he always answeredin the same tone of voice, either ‘Kill,’ or‘Pardon.’”“It is very strange,” said Albert, “to hear such wordsproceed from the mouth of anyone but an actress on the stage, and one needsconstantly to be saying to one’s self, ‘This is no fiction, it isall reality,’ in order to believe it. And how does France appear in youreyes, accustomed as they have been to gaze on such enchanted scenes?”“I think it is a fine country,” said Haydée, “but I seeFrance as it really is, because I look on it with the eyes of a woman; whereasmy own country, which I can only judge of from the impression produced on mychildish mind, always seems enveloped in a vague atmosphere, which is luminousor otherwise, according as my remembrances of it are sad or joyous.”“So young,” said Albert, forgetting at the moment the Count’scommand that he should ask no questions of the slave herself, “is itpossible that you can have known what suffering is except by name?”Haydée turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making at the same time someimperceptible sign, murmured:“Εἰπέ—speak.”“Nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as the memory of ourearly childhood, and with the exception of the two scenes I have just describedto you, all my earliest reminiscences are fraught with deepest sadness.”“Speak, speak, signora,” said Albert, “I am listening withthe most intense delight and interest to all you say.”Haydée answered his remark with a melancholy smile. “You wish me, then,to relate the history of my past sorrows?” said she.“I beg you to do so,” replied Albert.“Well, I was but four years old when one night I was suddenly awakened bymy mother. We were in the palace of Yanina; she snatched me from the cushionson which I was sleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers filled with tears.She took me away without speaking. When I saw her weeping I began to cry too.‘Hush, child!’ said she. At other times in spite of maternalendearments or threats, I had with a child’s caprice been accustomed toindulge my feelings of sorrow or anger by crying as much as I felt inclined;but on this occasion there was an intonation of such extreme terror in mymother’s voice when she enjoined me to silence, that I ceased crying assoon as her command was given. She bore me rapidly away.“I saw then that we were descending a large staircase; around us were allmy mother’s servants carrying trunks, bags, ornaments, jewels, purses ofgold, with which they were hurrying away in the greatest distraction.“Behind the women came a guard of twenty men armed with long guns andpistols, and dressed in the costume which the Greeks have assumed since theyhave again become a nation. You may imagine there was something startling andominous,” said Haydée, shaking her head and turning pale at the mereremembrance of the scene, “in this long file of slaves and women onlyhalf-aroused from sleep, or at least so they appeared to me, who was myselfscarcely awake. Here and there on the walls of the staircase, were reflectedgigantic shadows, which trembled in the flickering light of the pine-torchestill they seemed to reach to the vaulted roof above.“‘Quick!’ said a voice at the end of the gallery. This voicemade everyone bow before it, resembling in its effect the wind passing over afield of wheat, by its superior strength forcing every ear to yield obeisance.As for me, it made me tremble. This voice was that of my father. He came last,clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his hand the carbine which youremperor presented him. He was leaning on the shoulder of his favorite Selim,and he drove us all before him, as a shepherd would his straggling flock. Myfather,” said Haydée, raising her head, “was that illustrious manknown in Europe under the name of Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and beforewhom Turkey trembled.”Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these words pronounced withsuch a haughty and dignified accent; it appeared to him as if there wassomething supernaturally gloomy and terrible in the expression which gleamedfrom the brilliant eyes of Haydée at this moment; she appeared like a Pythonessevoking a spectre, as she recalled to his mind the remembrance of the fearfuldeath of this man, to the news of which all Europe had listened with horror.“Soon,” said Haydée, “we halted on our march, and foundourselves on the borders of a lake. My mother pressed me to her throbbingheart, and at the distance of a few paces I saw my father, who was glancinganxiously around. Four marble steps led down to the water’s edge, andbelow them was a boat floating on the tide.“From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake a large blankmass; it was the kiosk to which we were going. This kiosk appeared to me to beat a considerable distance, perhaps on account of the darkness of the night,which prevented any object from being more than partially discerned. We steppedinto the boat. I remember well that the oars made no noise whatever in strikingthe water, and when I leaned over to ascertain the cause I saw that they weremuffled with the sashes of our Palikares.[14]Besides the rowers, the boat contained only the women, my father, mother,Selim, and myself. The Palikares had remained on the shore of the lake, readyto cover our retreat; they were kneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, andin that manner intended making a rampart of the three others, in case ofpursuit. Our bark flew before the wind. ‘Why does the boat go sofast?’ asked I of my mother.“‘Silence, child! Hush, we are flying!’ I did not understand.Why should my father fly?—he, the all-powerful—he, before whomothers were accustomed to fly—he, who had taken for his device,‘They hate me; then they fear me!’“It was, indeed, a flight which my father was trying to effect. I havebeen told since that the garrison of the castle of Yanina, fatigued with longservice——”Here Haydée cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose eyes had beenriveted on her countenance during the whole course of her narrative. The younggirl then continued, speaking slowly, like a person who is either inventing orsuppressing some feature of the history which he is relating.“You were saying, signora,” said Albert, who was paying the mostimplicit attention to the recital, “that the garrison of Yanina, fatiguedwith long service——”“Had treated with the Seraskier[15]Kourchid, who had been sent by the sultan to gain possession of the person ofmy father; it was then that Ali Tepelini—after having sent to the sultana French officer in whom he reposed great confidence—resolved to retireto the asylum which he had long before prepared for himself, and which hecalled kataphygion, or the refuge.”“And this officer,” asked Albert, “do you remember his name,signora?”Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the young girl, which was quiteunperceived by Albert.“No,” said she, “I do not remember it just at this moment;but if it should occur to me presently, I will tell you.”Albert was on the point of pronouncing his father’s name, when MonteCristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young manrecollected his promise, and was silent.“It was towards this kiosk that we were rowing. A ground floor,ornamented with arabesques, bathing its terraces in the water, and anotherfloor, looking on the lake, was all which was visible to the eye. But beneaththe ground floor, stretching out into the island, was a large subterraneancavern, to which my mother, myself, and the women were conducted. In this placewere together 60,000 pouches and 200 barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000of money in gold, and the barrels were filled with 30,000 pounds of gunpowder.“Near the barrels stood Selim, my father’s favorite, whom Imentioned to you just now. He stood watch day and night with a lance providedwith a lighted slowmatch in his hand, and he had orders to blow upeverything—kiosk, guards, women, gold, and Ali Tepelini himself—atthe first signal given by my father. I remember well that the slaves, convincedof the precarious tenure on which they held their lives, passed whole days andnights in praying, crying, and groaning. As for me, I can never forget the palecomplexion and black eyes of the young soldier, and whenever the angel of deathsummons me to another world, I am quite sure I shall recognize Selim. I cannottell you how long we remained in this state; at that period I did not even knowwhat time meant. Sometimes, but very rarely, my father summoned me and mymother to the terrace of the palace; these were hours of recreation for me, asI never saw anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances of theslaves and Selim’s fiery lance. My father was endeavoring to pierce withhis eager looks the remotest verge of the horizon, examining attentively everyblack speck which appeared on the lake, while my mother, reclining by his side,rested her head on his shoulder, and I played at his feet, admiring everythingI saw with that unsophisticated innocence of childhood which throws a charmround objects insignificant in themselves, but which in its eyes are investedwith the greatest importance. The heights of Pindus towered above us; thecastle of Yanina rose white and angular from the blue waters of the lake, andthe immense masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the distance, gave theidea of lichens clinging to the rocks, were in reality gigantic fir-trees andmyrtles.“One morning my father sent for us; my mother had been crying all thenight, and was very wretched; we found the pasha calm, but paler than usual.‘Take courage, Vasiliki,’ said he; ‘today arrives the firmanof the master, and my fate will be decided. If my pardon be complete, we shallreturn triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must fly thisnight.’—‘But supposing our enemy should not allow us to doso?’ said my mother. ‘Oh, make yourself easy on that head,’said Ali, smiling; ‘Selim and his flaming lance will settle that matter.They would be glad to see me dead, but they would not like themselves to diewith me.’“My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which she knew did notcome from my father’s heart. She prepared the iced water which he was inthe habit of constantly drinking,—for since his sojourn at the kiosk hehad been parched by the most violent fever,—after which she anointed hiswhite beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his chibouque, which he sometimessmoked for hours together, quietly watching the wreaths of vapor that ascendedin spiral clouds and gradually melted away in the surrounding atmosphere.Presently he made such a sudden movement that I was paralyzed with fear. Then,without taking his eyes from the object which had first attracted hisattention, he asked for his telescope. My mother gave it him, and as she didso, looked whiter than the marble against which she leaned. I saw myfather’s hand tremble. ‘A boat!—two!—three!’murmured my, father;—‘four!’ He then arose, seizing his armsand priming his pistols. ‘Vasiliki,’ said he to my mother,trembling perceptibly, ‘the instant approaches which will decideeverything. In the space of half an hour we shall know the emperor’sanswer. Go into the cavern with Haydée.’—‘I will not quityou,’ said Vasiliki; ‘if you die, my lord, I will die withyou.’—‘Go to Selim!’ cried my father. ‘Adieu, mylord,’ murmured my mother, determining quietly to await the approach ofdeath. ‘Take away Vasiliki!’ said my father to his Palikares.“As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; I ran towardAli Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him, and he stooped down andpressed my forehead with his lips. Oh, how distinctly I remember thatkiss!—it was the last he ever gave me, and I feel as if it were stillwarm on my forehead. On descending, we saw through the lattice-work severalboats which were gradually becoming more distinct to our view. At first theyappeared like black specks, and now they looked like birds skimming the surfaceof the waves. During this time, in the kiosk at my father’s feet, wereseated twenty Palikares, concealed from view by an angle of the wall andwatching with eager eyes the arrival of the boats. They were armed with theirlong guns inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in greatnumbers were lying scattered on the floor. My father looked at his watch, andpaced up and down with a countenance expressive of the greatest anguish. Thiswas the scene which presented itself to my view as I quitted my father afterthat last kiss.“My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage leading to the cavern.Selim was still at his post, and smiled sadly on us as we entered. We fetchedour cushions from the other end of the cavern, and sat down by Selim. In greatdangers the devoted ones cling to each other; and, young as I was, I quiteunderstood that some imminent danger was hanging over our heads.”Albert had often heard—not from his father, for he never spoke on thesubject, but from strangers—the description of the last moments of thevizier of Yanina; he had read different accounts of his death, but the storyseemed to acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of the younggirl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy expression of hercountenance at once charmed and horrified him.As to Haydée, these terrible reminiscences seemed to have overpowered her for amoment, for she ceased speaking, her head leaning on her hand like a beautifulflower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and her eyes gazing on vacancyindicated that she was mentally contemplating the green summit of the Pindusand the blue waters of the lake of Yanina, which, like a magic mirror, seemedto reflect the sombre picture which she sketched. Monte Cristo looked at herwith an indescribable expression of interest and pity.“Go on, my child,” said the count in the Romaic language.Haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of Monte Cristo’svoice had awakened her from a dream; and she resumed her narrative.“It was about four o’clock in the afternoon, and although the daywas brilliant out-of-doors, we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of thecavern. One single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared like astar set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim’s flaming lance. Mymother was a Christian, and she prayed. Selim repeated from time to time thesacred words: ‘God is great!’ However, my mother had still somehope. As she was coming down, she thought she recognized the French officer whohad been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my father placed so muchconfidence; for he knew that all the soldiers of the French emperor werenaturally noble and generous. She advanced some steps towards the staircase,and listened. ‘They are approaching,’ said she; ‘perhaps theybring us peace and liberty!’“‘What do you fear, Vasiliki?’ said Selim, in a voice at onceso gentle and yet so proud. ‘If they do not bring us peace, we will givethem war; if they do not bring life, we will give them death.’ And herenewed the flame of his lance with a gesture which made one think of Dionysusof old Crete.[16]But I, being only a little child, was terrified by this undaunted courage,which appeared to me both ferocious and senseless, and I recoiled with horrorfrom the idea of the frightful death amidst fire and flames which probablyawaited us.“My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt her tremble.‘Mamma, mamma,’ said I, ‘are we really to be killed?’And at the sound of my voice the slaves redoubled their cries and prayers andlamentations. ‘My child,’ said Vasiliki, ‘may God preserveyou from ever wishing for that death which today you so much dread!’Then, whispering to Selim, she asked what were her master’s orders.‘If he send me his poniard, it will signify that the emperor’sintentions are not favorable, and I am to set fire to the powder; if, on thecontrary, he send me his ring, it will be a sign that the emperor pardons him,and I am to extinguish the match and leave the magazineuntouched.’—‘My friend,’ said my mother, ‘whenyour master’s orders arrive, if it is the poniard which he sends, insteadof despatching us by that horrible death which we both so much dread, you willmercifully kill us with this same poniard, will younot?’—‘Yes, Vasiliki,’ replied Selim tranquilly.“Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that they werecries of joy. The name of the French officer who had been sent toConstantinople resounded on all sides amongst our Palikares; it was evidentthat he brought the answer of the emperor, and that it was favorable.”“And do you not remember the Frenchman’s name?” said Morcerf,quite ready to aid the memory of the narrator. Monte Cristo made a sign to himto be silent.“I do not recollect it,” said Haydée.“The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer and nearer;they were descending the steps leading to the cavern. Selim made ready hislance. Soon a figure appeared in the gray twilight at the entrance of the cave,formed by the reflection of the few rays of daylight which had found their wayinto this gloomy retreat. ‘Who are you?’ cried Selim. ‘Butwhoever you may be, I charge you not to advance anotherstep.’—‘Long live the emperor!’ said the figure.‘He grants a full pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not only gives him hislife, but restores to him his fortune and his possessions.’ My motheruttered a cry of joy, and clasped me to her bosom. ‘Stop,’ saidSelim, seeing that she was about to go out; ‘you see I have not yetreceived the ring,’—‘True,’ said my mother. And shefell on her knees, at the same time holding me up towards heaven, as if shedesired, while praying to God in my behalf, to raise me actually to hispresence.”And for the second time Haydée stopped, overcome by such violent emotion thatthe perspiration stood upon her pale brow, and her stifled voice seemed hardlyable to find utterance, so parched and dry were her throat and lips.Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, and presented it to her,saying with a mildness in which was also a shade ofcommand,—“Courage.”Haydée dried her eyes, and continued:“By this time our eyes, habituated to the darkness, had recognized themessenger of the pasha,—it was a friend. Selim had also recognized him,but the brave young man only acknowledged one duty, which was to obey.‘In whose name do you come?’ said he to him. ‘I come in thename of our master, Ali Tepelini.’—‘If you come from Alihimself,’ said Selim, ‘you know what you were charged to remit tome?’—‘Yes,’ said the messenger, ‘and I bring youhis ring.’ At these words he raised his hand above his head, to show thetoken; but it was too far off, and there was not light enough to enable Selim,where he was standing, to distinguish and recognize the object presented to hisview. ‘I do not see what you have in your hand,’ said Selim.‘Approach then,’ said the messenger, ‘or I will come nearerto you, if you prefer it.’—‘I will agree to neither one northe other,’ replied the young soldier; ‘place the object which Idesire to see in the ray of light which shines there, and retire while Iexamine it.’—‘Be it so,’ said the envoy; and heretired, after having first deposited the token agreed on in the place pointedout to him by Selim.“Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be a ringwhich was placed there. But was it my father’s ring? that was thequestion. Selim, still holding in his hand the lighted match, walked towardsthe opening in the cavern, and, aided by the faint light which streamed inthrough the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.“‘It is well,’ said he, kissing it; ‘it is mymaster’s ring!’ And throwing the match on the ground, he trampledon it and extinguished it. The messenger uttered a cry of joy and clapped hishands. At this signal four soldiers of the Seraskier Kourchid suddenlyappeared, and Selim fell, pierced by five blows. Each man had stabbed himseparately, and, intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, theysought all over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of fire, afterwhich they amused themselves by rolling on the bags of gold. At this moment mymother seized me in her arms, and hurrying noiselessly along numerous turningsand windings known only to ourselves, she arrived at a private staircase of thekiosk, where was a scene of frightful tumult and confusion. The lower roomswere entirely filled with Kourchid’s troops; that is to say, with ourenemies. Just as my mother was on the point of pushing open a small door, weheard the voice of the pasha sounding in a loud and threatening tone. My motherapplied her eye to the crack between the boards; I luckily found a smallopening which afforded me a view of the apartment and what was passing within.‘What do you want?’ said my father to some people who were holdinga paper inscribed with characters of gold. ‘What we want,’ repliedone, ‘is to communicate to you the will of his highness. Do you see thisfirman?’—‘I do,’ said my father. ‘Well, read it;he demands your head.’“My father answered with a loud laugh, which was more frightful than eventhreats would have been, and he had not ceased when two reports of a pistolwere heard; he had fired them himself, and had killed two men. The Palikares,who were prostrated at my father’s feet, now sprang up and fired, and theroom was filled with fire and smoke. At the same instant the firing began onthe other side, and the balls penetrated the boards all round us. Oh, how nobledid the grand vizier my father look at that moment, in the midst of the flyingbullets, his scimitar in his hand, and his face blackened with the powder ofhis enemies! and how he terrified them, even then, and made them fly beforehim! ‘Selim, Selim!’ cried he, ‘guardian of the fire, do yourduty!’—‘Selim is dead,’ replied a voice which seemed tocome from the depths of the earth, ‘and you are lost, Ali!’ At thesame moment an explosion was heard, and the flooring of the room in which myfather was sitting was suddenly torn up and shivered to atoms—the troopswere firing from underneath. Three or four Palikares fell with their bodiesliterally ploughed with wounds.“My father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holes which theballs had made, and tore up one of the planks entire. But immediately throughthis opening twenty more shots were fired, and the flame, rushing up like firefrom the crater of a volcano, soon reached the tapestry, which it quicklydevoured. In the midst of all this frightful tumult and these terrific cries,two reports, fearfully distinct, followed by two shrieks more heartrending thanall, froze me with terror. These two shots had mortally wounded my father, andit was he who had given utterance to these frightful cries. However, heremained standing, clinging to a window. My mother tried to force the door,that she might go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside. Allaround him were lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies, while twoor three who were only slightly wounded were trying to escape by springing fromthe windows. At this crisis the whole flooring suddenly gave way, my fatherfell on one knee, and at the same moment twenty hands were thrust forth, armedwith sabres, pistols, and poniards—twenty blows were instantaneouslydirected against one man, and my father disappeared in a whirlwind of fire andsmoke kindled by these demons, and which seemed like hell itself openingbeneath his feet. I felt myself fall to the ground, my mother hadfainted.”Haydée’s arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deep groan, at the sametime looking towards the count as if to ask if he were satisfied with herobedience to his commands.Monte Cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, and said to her inRomaic:“Calm yourself, my dear child, and take courage in remembering that thereis a God who will punish traitors.”“It is a frightful story, count,” said Albert, terrified at thepaleness of Haydée’s countenance, “and I reproach myself now forhaving been so cruel and thoughtless in my request.”“Oh, it is nothing,” said Monte Cristo. Then, patting the younggirl on the head, he continued, “Haydée is very courageous, and shesometimes even finds consolation in the recital of her misfortunes.”“Because, my lord,” said Haydée eagerly, “my miseries recallto me the remembrance of your goodness.”Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet related what he mostdesired to know,—how she had become the slave of the count. Haydée saw ata glance the same expression pervading the countenances of her two auditors;she continued:“When my mother recovered her senses we were before the seraskier.‘Kill,’ said she, ‘but spare the honor of the widow ofAli.’—‘It is not to me to whom you must addressyourself,’ said Kourchid.“‘To whom, then?’—‘To your new master.’“‘Who and where is he?’—‘He is here.’“And Kourchid pointed out one who had more than any contributed to thedeath of my father,” said Haydée, in a tone of chastened anger.“Then,” said Albert, “you became the property of thisman?”“No,” replied Haydée, “he did not dare to keep us, so we weresold to some slave-merchants who were going to Constantinople. We traversedGreece, and arrived half dead at the imperial gates. They were surrounded by acrowd of people, who opened a way for us to pass, when suddenly my mother,having looked closely at an object which was attracting their attention,uttered a piercing cry and fell to the ground, pointing as she did so to a headwhich was placed over the gates, and beneath which were inscribed these words:‘This is the head of Ali Tepelini, Pasha of Yanina.’“I cried bitterly, and tried to raise my mother from the earth, but shewas dead! I was taken to the slave-market, and was purchased by a richArmenian. He caused me to be instructed, gave me masters, and when I wasthirteen years of age he sold me to the Sultan Mahmoud.”“Of whom I bought her,” said Monte Cristo, “as I told you,Albert, with the emerald which formed a match to the one I had made into a boxfor the purpose of holding my hashish pills.”“Oh, you are good, you are great, my lord!” said Haydée, kissingthe count’s hand, “and I am very fortunate in belonging to such amaster!”Albert remained quite bewildered with all that he had seen and heard.“Come, finish your cup of coffee,” said Monte Cristo; “thehistory is ended.” Chapter 78. We hear FromYaninaIf Valentine could haveseen the trembling step and agitated countenance of Franz when he quitted thechamber of M. Noirtier, even she would have been constrained to pity him.Villefort had only just given utterance to a few incoherent sentences, and thenretired to his study, where he received about two hours afterwards thefollowing letter:“After all the disclosures which were made this morning, M. Noirtier deVillefort must see the utter impossibility of any alliance being formed betweenhis family and that of M. Franz d’Épinay. M. d’Épinay must say thathe is shocked and astonished that M. de Villefort, who appeared to be aware ofall the circumstances detailed this morning, should not have anticipated him inthis announcement.”No one who had seen the magistrate at this moment, so thoroughly unnerved bythe recent inauspicious combination of circumstances, would have supposed foran instant that he had anticipated the annoyance; although it certainly neverhad occurred to him that his father would carry candor, or rather rudeness, sofar as to relate such a history. And in justice to Villefort, it must beunderstood that M. Noirtier, who never cared for the opinion of his son on anysubject, had always omitted to explain the affair to Villefort, so that he hadall his life entertained the belief that General de Quesnel, or the Barond’Épinay, as he was alternately styled, according as the speaker wishedto identify him by his own family name, or by the title which had beenconferred on him, fell the victim of assassination, and not that he was killedfairly in a duel. This harsh letter, coming as it did from a man generally sopolite and respectful, struck a mortal blow at the pride of Villefort.Hardly had he read the letter, when his wife entered. The sudden departure ofFranz, after being summoned by M. Noirtier, had so much astonished everyone,that the position of Madame de Villefort, left alone with the notary and thewitnesses, became every moment more embarrassing. Determined to bear it nolonger, she arose and left the room; saying she would go and make someinquiries into the cause of his sudden disappearance.M. de Villefort’s communications on the subject were very limited andconcise; he told her, in fact, that an explanation had taken place between M.Noirtier, M. d’Épinay, and himself, and that the marriage of Valentineand Franz would consequently be broken off. This was an awkward and unpleasantthing to have to report to those who were waiting. She therefore contentedherself with saying that M. Noirtier having at the commencement of thediscussion been attacked by a sort of apoplectic fit, the affair wouldnecessarily be deferred for some days longer. This news, false as it wasfollowing so singularly in the train of the two similar misfortunes which hadso recently occurred, evidently astonished the auditors, and they retiredwithout a word.During this time Valentine, at once terrified and happy, after having embracedand thanked the feeble old man for thus breaking with a single blow the chainwhich she had been accustomed to consider as irrefragable, asked leave toretire to her own room, in order to recover her composure. Noirtier looked thepermission which she solicited. But instead of going to her own room,Valentine, having once gained her liberty, entered the gallery, and, opening asmall door at the end of it, found herself at once in the garden.In the midst of all the strange events which had crowded one on the other, anindefinable sentiment of dread had taken possession of Valentine’s mind.She expected every moment that she should see Morrel appear, pale andtrembling, to forbid the signing of the contract, like the Laird of Ravenswoodin The Bride of Lammermoor.It was high time for her to make her appearance at the gate, for Maximilian hadlong awaited her coming. He had half guessed what was going on when he sawFranz quit the cemetery with M. de Villefort. He followed M. d’Épinay,saw him enter, afterwards go out, and then re-enter with Albert andChâteau-Renaud. He had no longer any doubts as to the nature of the conference;he therefore quickly went to the gate in the clover-patch, prepared to hear theresult of the proceedings, and very certain that Valentine would hasten to himthe first moment she should be set at liberty. He was not mistaken; peeringthrough the crevices of the wooden partition, he soon discovered the younggirl, who cast aside all her usual precautions and walked at once to thebarrier. The first glance which Maximilian directed towards her entirelyreassured him, and the first words she spoke made his heart bound with delight.“We are saved!” said Valentine.“Saved?” repeated Morrel, not being able to conceive such intensehappiness; “by whom?”“By my grandfather. Oh, Morrel, pray love him for all his goodness tous!”Morrel swore to love him with all his soul; and at that moment he could safelypromise to do so, for he felt as though it were not enough to love him merelyas a friend or even as a father, he worshiped him as a god.“But tell me, Valentine, how has it all been effected? What strange meanshas he used to compass this blessed end?”Valentine was on the point of relating all that had passed, but she suddenlyremembered that in doing so she must reveal a terrible secret which concernedothers as well as her grandfather, and she said:“At some future time I will tell you all about it.”“But when will that be?”“When I am your wife.”The conversation had now turned upon a topic so pleasing to Morrel, that he wasready to accede to anything that Valentine thought fit to propose, and helikewise felt that a piece of intelligence such as he just heard ought to bemore than sufficient to content him for one day. However, he would not leavewithout the promise of seeing Valentine again the next night. Valentinepromised all that Morrel required of her, and certainly it was less difficultnow for her to believe that she should marry Maximilian than it was an hour agoto assure herself that she should not marry Franz.During the time occupied by the interview we have just detailed, Madame deVillefort had gone to visit M. Noirtier. The old man looked at her with thatstern and forbidding expression with which he was accustomed to receive her.“Sir,” said she, “it is superfluous for me to tell you thatValentine’s marriage is broken off, since it was here that the affair wasconcluded.”Noirtier’s countenance remained immovable.“But one thing I can tell you, of which I do not think you are aware;that is, that I have always been opposed to this marriage, and that thecontract was entered into entirely without my consent or approbation.”Noirtier regarded his daughter-in-law with the look of a man desiring anexplanation.“Now that this marriage, which I know you so much disliked, is done awaywith, I come to you on an errand which neither M. de Villefort nor Valentinecould consistently undertake.”Noirtier’s eyes demanded the nature of her mission.“I come to entreat you, sir,” continued Madame de Villefort,“as the only one who has the right of doing so, inasmuch as I am the onlyone who will receive no personal benefit from the transaction,—I come toentreat you to restore, not your love, for that she has always possessed, butto restore your fortune to your granddaughter.”There was a doubtful expression in Noirtier’s eyes; he was evidentlytrying to discover the motive of this proceeding, and he could not succeed indoing so.“May I hope, sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “that yourintentions accord with my request?”Noirtier made a sign that they did.“In that case, sir,” rejoined Madame de Villefort, “I willleave you overwhelmed with gratitude and happiness at your prompt acquiescenceto my wishes.” She then bowed to M. Noirtier and retired.The next day M. Noirtier sent for the notary; the first will was torn up and asecond made, in which he left the whole of his fortune to Valentine, oncondition that she should never be separated from him. It was then generallyreported that Mademoiselle de Villefort, the heiress of the marquis andmarchioness of Saint-Méran, had regained the good graces of her grandfather,and that she would ultimately be in possession of an income of 300,000 livres.While all the proceedings relative to the dissolution of the marriage-contractwere being carried on at the house of M. de Villefort, Monte Cristo had paidhis visit to the Count of Morcerf, who, in order to lose no time in respondingto M. Danglars’ wishes, and at the same time to pay all due deference tohis position in society, donned his uniform of lieutenant-general, which heornamented with all his crosses, and thus attired, ordered his finest horsesand drove to the Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin.Danglars was balancing his monthly accounts, and it was perhaps not the mostfavorable moment for finding him in his best humor. At the first sight of hisold friend, Danglars assumed his majestic air, and settled himself in hiseasy-chair.Morcerf, usually so stiff and formal, accosted the banker in an affable andsmiling manner, and, feeling sure that the overture he was about to make wouldbe well received, he did not consider it necessary to adopt any manœuvres inorder to gain his end, but went at once straight to the point.“Well, baron,” said he, “here I am at last; some time haselapsed since our plans were formed, and they are not yet executed.”Morcerf paused at these words, quietly waiting till the cloud should havedispersed which had gathered on the brow of Danglars, and which he attributedto his silence; but, on the contrary, to his great surprise, it grew darker anddarker.“To what do you allude, monsieur?” said Danglars; as if he weretrying in vain to guess at the possible meaning of the general’s words.“Ah,” said Morcerf, “I see you are a stickler for forms, mydear sir, and you would remind me that the ceremonial rites should not beomitted. Ma foi, I beg your pardon, but as I have but one son, and it isthe first time I have ever thought of marrying him, I am still serving myapprenticeship, you know; come, I will reform.”And Morcerf with a forced smile arose, and, making a low bow to M. Danglars,said:“Baron, I have the honor of asking of you the hand of MademoiselleEugénie Danglars for my son, the Vicomte Albert de Morcerf.”But Danglars, instead of receiving this address in the favorable manner whichMorcerf had expected, knit his brow, and without inviting the count, who wasstill standing, to take a seat, he said:“Monsieur, it will be necessary to reflect before I give you ananswer.”“To reflect?” said Morcerf, more and more astonished; “haveyou not had enough time for reflection during the eight years which haveelapsed since this marriage was first discussed between us?”“Count,” said the banker, “things are constantly occurring inthe world to induce us to lay aside our most established opinions, or at allevents to cause us to remodel them according to the change of circumstances,which may have placed affairs in a totally different light to that in which weat first viewed them.”“I do not understand you, baron,” said Morcerf.“What I mean to say is this, sir,—that during the last fortnightunforeseen circumstances have occurred——”“Excuse me,” said Morcerf, “but is it a play we areacting?”“A play?”“Yes, for it is like one; pray let us come more to the point, andendeavor thoroughly to understand each other.”“That is quite my desire.”“You have seen M. de Monte Cristo have you not?”“I see him very often,” said Danglars, drawing himself up;“he is a particular friend of mine.”“Well, in one of your late conversations with him, you said that Iappeared to be forgetful and irresolute concerning this marriage, did younot?”“I did say so.”“Well, here I am, proving at once that I am really neither the one northe other, by entreating you to keep your promise on that score.”Danglars did not answer.“Have you so soon changed your mind,” added Morcerf, “or haveyou only provoked my request that you may have the pleasure of seeing mehumbled?”Danglars, seeing that if he continued the conversation in the same tone inwhich he had begun it, the whole thing might turn out to his own disadvantage,turned to Morcerf, and said:“Count, you must doubtless be surprised at my reserve, and I assure youit costs me much to act in such a manner towards you; but, believe me when Isay that imperative necessity has imposed the painful task upon me.”“These are all so many empty words, my dear sir,” said Morcerf:“they might satisfy a new acquaintance, but the Comte de Morcerf does notrank in that list; and when a man like him comes to another, recalls to him hisplighted word, and this man fails to redeem the pledge, he has at least a rightto exact from him a good reason for so doing.”Danglars was a coward, but did not wish to appear so; he was piqued at the tonewhich Morcerf had just assumed.“I am not without a good reason for my conduct,” replied thebanker.“What do you mean to say?”“I mean to say that I have a good reason, but that it is difficult toexplain.”“You must be aware, at all events, that it is impossible for me tounderstand motives before they are explained to me; but one thing at least isclear, which is, that you decline allying yourself with my family.”“No, sir,” said Danglars; “I merely suspend my decision, thatis all.”“And do you really flatter yourself that I shall yield to all yourcaprices, and quietly and humbly await the time of again being received intoyour good graces?”“Then, count, if you will not wait, we must look upon these projects asif they had never been entertained.”The count bit his lips till the blood almost started, to prevent the ebullitionof anger which his proud and irritable temper scarcely allowed him to restrain;understanding, however, that in the present state of things the laugh woulddecidedly be against him, he turned from the door, towards which he had beendirecting his steps, and again confronted the banker. A cloud settled on hisbrow, evincing decided anxiety and uneasiness, instead of the expression ofoffended pride which had lately reigned there.“My dear Danglars,” said Morcerf, “we have been acquaintedfor many years, and consequently we ought to make some allowance for eachother’s failings. You owe me an explanation, and really it is but fairthat I should know what circumstance has occurred to deprive my son of yourfavor.”“It is from no personal ill-feeling towards the viscount, that is all Ican say, sir,” replied Danglars, who resumed his insolent manner as soonas he perceived that Morcerf was a little softened and calmed down.“And towards whom do you bear this personal ill-feeling, then?”said Morcerf, turning pale with anger. The expression of the count’s facehad not remained unperceived by the banker; he fixed on him a look of greaterassurance than before, and said:“You may, perhaps, be better satisfied that I should not go farther intoparticulars.”A tremor of suppressed rage shook the whole frame of the count, and making aviolent effort over himself, he said: “I have a right to insist on yourgiving me an explanation. Is it Madame de Morcerf who has displeased you? Is itmy fortune which you find insufficient? Is it because my opinions differ fromyours?”“Nothing of the kind, sir,” replied Danglars: “if such hadbeen the case, I only should have been to blame, inasmuch as I was aware of allthese things when I made the engagement. No, do not seek any longer to discoverthe reason. I really am quite ashamed to have been the cause of your undergoingsuch severe self-examination; let us drop the subject, and adopt the middlecourse of delay, which implies neither a rupture nor an engagement. Mafoi, there is no hurry. My daughter is only seventeen years old, and yourson twenty-one. While we wait, time will be progressing, events will succeedeach other; things which in the evening look dark and obscure, appear but tooclearly in the light of morning, and sometimes the utterance of one word, orthe lapse of a single day, will reveal the most cruel calumnies.”“Calumnies, did you say, sir?” cried Morcerf, turning livid withrage. “Does anyone dare to slander me?”“Monsieur, I told you that I considered it best to avoid allexplanation.”“Then, sir, I am patiently to submit to your refusal?”“Yes, sir, although I assure you the refusal is as painful for me to giveas it is for you to receive, for I had reckoned on the honor of your alliance,and the breaking off of a marriage contract always injures the lady more thanthe gentleman.”“Enough, sir,” said Morcerf, “we will speak no more on thesubject.”And clutching his gloves in anger, he left the apartment. Danglars observedthat during the whole conversation Morcerf had never once dared to ask if itwas on his own account that Danglars recalled his word.That evening he had a long conference with several friends; and M. Cavalcanti,who had remained in the drawing-room with the ladies, was the last to leave thebanker’s house.The next morning, as soon as he awoke, Danglars asked for the newspapers; theywere brought to him; he laid aside three or four, and at last fixed onl’Impartial, the paper of which Beauchamp was the chief editor. Hehastily tore off the cover, opened the journal with nervous precipitation,passed contemptuously over the Paris jottings, and arriving at themiscellaneous intelligence, stopped with a malicious smile, at a paragraphheadedWe hear from Yanina.“Very good,” observed Danglars, after having read the paragraph;“here is a little article on Colonel Fernand, which, if I am notmistaken, would render the explanation which the Comte de Morcerf required ofme perfectly unnecessary.”At the same moment, that is, at nine o’clock in the morning, Albert deMorcerf, dressed in a black coat buttoned up to his chin, might have been seenwalking with a quick and agitated step in the direction of Monte Cristo’shouse in the Champs-Élysées. When he presented himself at the gate the porterinformed him that the Count had gone out about half an hour previously.“Did he take Baptistin with him?”“No, my lord.”“Call him, then; I wish to speak to him.”The concierge went to seek the valet de chambre, and returned with him in aninstant.“My good friend,” said Albert, “I beg pardon for myintrusion, but I was anxious to know from your own mouth if your master wasreally out or not.”“He is really out, sir,” replied Baptistin.“Out, even to me?”“I know how happy my master always is to receive the vicomte,” saidBaptistin; “and I should therefore never think of including him in anygeneral order.”“You are right; and now I wish to see him on an affair of greatimportance. Do you think it will be long before he comes in?”“No, I think not, for he ordered his breakfast at teno’clock.”“Well, I will go and take a turn in the Champs-Élysées, and at teno’clock I will return here; meanwhile, if the count should come in, willyou beg him not to go out again without seeing me?”“You may depend on my doing so, sir,” said Baptistin.Albert left the cab in which he had come at the count’s door, intendingto take a turn on foot. As he was passing the Allée des Veuves, he thought hesaw the count’s horses standing at Gosset’s shooting-gallery; heapproached, and soon recognized the coachman.“Is the count shooting in the gallery?” said Morcerf.“Yes, sir,” replied the coachman. While he was speaking, Albert hadheard the report of two or three pistol-shots. He entered, and on his way metthe waiter.“Excuse me, my lord,” said the lad; “but will you have thekindness to wait a moment?”“What for, Philip?” asked Albert, who, being a constant visitorthere, did not understand this opposition to his entrance.“Because the person who is now in the gallery prefers being alone, andnever practices in the presence of anyone.”“Not even before you, Philip? Then who loads his pistol?”“His servant.”“A Nubian?”“A negro.”“It is he, then.”“Do you know this gentleman?”“Yes, and I am come to look for him; he is a friend of mine.”“Oh, that is quite another thing, then. I will go immediately and informhim of your arrival.”And Philip, urged by his own curiosity, entered the gallery; a secondafterwards, Monte Cristo appeared on the threshold.“I ask your pardon, my dear count,” said Albert, “forfollowing you here, and I must first tell you that it was not the fault of yourservants that I did so; I alone am to blame for the indiscretion. I went toyour house, and they told me you were out, but that they expected you home atten o’clock to breakfast. I was walking about in order to pass away thetime till ten o’clock, when I caught sight of your carriage andhorses.”“What you have just said induces me to hope that you intend breakfastingwith me.”“No, thank you, I am thinking of other things besides breakfast just now;perhaps we may take that meal at a later hour and in worse company.”“What on earth are you talking of?”“I am to fight today.”“For what?”“For the sake of fighting!”“Yes, I understand that, but what is the quarrel? People fight for allsorts of reasons, you know.”“I fight in the cause of honor.”“Ah, that is something serious.”“So serious, that I come to beg you to render me a service.”“What is it?”“To be my second.”“That is a serious matter, and we will not discuss it here; let us speakof nothing till we get home. Ali, bring me some water.”The count turned up his sleeves, and passed into the little vestibule where thegentlemen were accustomed to wash their hands after shooting.“Come in, my lord,” said Philip in a low tone, “and I willshow you something droll.” Morcerf entered, and in place of the usualtarget, he saw some playing-cards fixed against the wall. At a distance Albertthought it was a complete suit, for he counted from the ace to the ten.“Ah, ha,” said Albert, “I see you were preparing for a gameof cards.”“No,” said the count, “I was making a suit.”“How?” said Albert.“Those are really aces and twos which you see, but my shots have turnedthem into threes, fives, sevens, eights, nines, and tens.”Albert approached. In fact, the bullets had actually pierced the cards in theexact places which the painted signs would otherwise have occupied, the linesand distances being as regularly kept as if they had been ruled with pencil. Ingoing up to the target Morcerf picked up two or three swallows that had beenrash enough to come within the range of the count’s pistol.“Diable!” said Morcerf.“What would you have, my dear viscount?” said Monte Cristo, wipinghis hands on the towel which Ali had brought him; “I must occupy myleisure moments in some way or other. But come, I am waiting for you.”Both men entered Monte Cristo’s carriage, which in the course of a fewminutes deposited them safely at No. 30. Monte Cristo took Albert into hisstudy, and pointing to a seat, placed another for himself. “Now let ustalk the matter over quietly,” said the count.“You see I am perfectly composed,” said Albert.“With whom are you going to fight?”“With Beauchamp.”“One of your friends!”“Of course; it is always with friends that one fights.”“I suppose you have some cause of quarrel?”“I have.”“What has he done to you?”“There appeared in his journal last night—but wait, and read foryourself.” And Albert handed over the paper to the count, who read asfollows:“A correspondent at Yanina informs us of a fact of which until now we hadremained in ignorance. The castle which formed the protection of the town wasgiven up to the Turks by a French officer named Fernand, in whom the grandvizier, Ali Tepelini, had reposed the greatest confidence.”“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “what do you see in that to annoyyou?”“What do I see in it?”“Yes; what does it signify to you if the castle of Yanina was given up bya French officer?”“It signifies to my father, the Count of Morcerf, whose Christian name isFernand!”“Did your father serve under Ali Pasha?”“Yes; that is to say, he fought for the independence of the Greeks, andhence arises the calumny.”“Oh, my dear viscount, do talk reason!”“I do not desire to do otherwise.”“Now, just tell me who the devil should know in France that the officerFernand and the Count of Morcerf are one and the same person? and who cares nowabout Yanina, which was taken as long ago as the year 1822 or 1823?”“That just shows the meanness of this slander. They have allowed all thistime to elapse, and then all of a sudden rake up events which have beenforgotten to furnish materials for scandal, in order to tarnish the lustre ofour high position. I inherit my father’s name, and I do not choose thatthe shadow of disgrace should darken it. I am going to Beauchamp, in whosejournal this paragraph appears, and I shall insist on his retracting theassertion before two witnesses.”“Beauchamp will never retract.”“Then we must fight.”“No you will not, for he will tell you, what is very true, that perhapsthere were fifty officers in the Greek army bearing the same name.”“We will fight, nevertheless. I will efface that blot on myfather’s character. My father, who was such a brave soldier, whose careerwas so brilliant——”“Oh, well, he will add, ‘We are warranted in believing that thisFernand is not the illustrious Count of Morcerf, who also bears the sameChristian name.’”“I am determined not to be content with anything short of an entireretractation.”“And you intend to make him do it in the presence of two witnesses, doyou?”“Yes.”“You do wrong.”“Which means, I suppose, that you refuse the service which I asked ofyou?”“You know my theory regarding duels; I told you my opinion on thatsubject, if you remember, when we were at Rome.”“Nevertheless, my dear count, I found you this morning engaged in anoccupation but little consistent with the notions you profess toentertain.”“Because, my dear fellow, you understand one must never be eccentric. Ifone’s lot is cast among fools, it is necessary to study folly. I shallperhaps find myself one day called out by some harebrained scamp, who has nomore real cause of quarrel with me than you have with Beauchamp; he may take meto task for some foolish trifle or other, he will bring his witnesses, or willinsult me in some public place, and I am expected to kill him for allthat.”“You admit that you would fight, then? Well, if so, why do you object tomy doing so?”“I do not say that you ought not to fight, I only say that a duel is aserious thing, and ought not to be undertaken without due reflection.”“Did he reflect before he insulted my father?”“If he spoke hastily, and owns that he did so, you ought to besatisfied.”“Ah, my dear count, you are far too indulgent.”“And you are far too exacting. Supposing, for instance, and do not beangry at what I am going to say——”“Well.”“Supposing the assertion to be really true?”“A son ought not to submit to such a stain on his father’shonor.”“Ma foi! we live in times when there is much to which we mustsubmit.”“That is precisely the fault of the age.”“And do you undertake to reform it?”“Yes, as far as I am personally concerned.”“Well, you are indeed exacting, my dear fellow!”“Yes, I own it.”“Are you quite impervious to good advice?”“Not when it comes from a friend.”“And do you account me that title?”“Certainly I do.”“Well, then, before going to Beauchamp with your witnesses, seek furtherinformation on the subject.”“From whom?”“From Haydée.”“Why, what can be the use of mixing a woman up in the affair?—whatcan she do in it?”“She can declare to you, for example, that your father had no handwhatever in the defeat and death of the vizier; or if by chance he had, indeed,the misfortune to——”“I have told you, my dear count, that I would not for one moment admit ofsuch a proposition.”“You reject this means of information, then?”“I do—most decidedly.”“Then let me offer one more word of advice.”“Do so, then, but let it be the last.”“You do not wish to hear it, perhaps?”“On the contrary, I request it.”“Do not take any witnesses with you when you go to Beauchamp—visithim alone.”“That would be contrary to all custom.”“Your case is not an ordinary one.”“And what is your reason for advising me to go alone?”“Because then the affair will rest between you and Beauchamp.”“Explain yourself.”“I will do so. If Beauchamp be disposed to retract, you ought at least togive him the opportunity of doing it of his own free will,—thesatisfaction to you will be the same. If, on the contrary, he refuses to do so,it will then be quite time enough to admit two strangers into yoursecret.”“They will not be strangers, they will be friends.”“Ah, but the friends of today are the enemies of tomorrow; Beauchamp, forinstance.”“So you recommend——”“I recommend you to be prudent.”“Then you advise me to go alone to Beauchamp?”“I do, and I will tell you why. When you wish to obtain some concessionfrom a man’s self-love, you must avoid even the appearance of wishing towound it.”“I believe you are right.”“I am glad of it.”“Then I will go alone.”“Go; but you would do better still by not going at all.”“That is impossible.”“Do so, then; it will be a wiser plan than the first which youproposed.”“But if, in spite of all my precautions, I am at last obliged to fight,will you not be my second?”“My dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo gravely, “you must haveseen before today that at all times and in all places I have been at yourdisposal, but the service which you have just demanded of me is one which it isout of my power to render you.”“Why?”“Perhaps you may know at some future period, and in the mean time Irequest you to excuse my declining to put you in possession of myreasons.”“Well, I will have Franz and Château-Renaud; they will be the very menfor it.”“Do so, then.”“But if I do fight, you will surely not object to giving me a lesson ortwo in shooting and fencing?”“That, too, is impossible.”“What a singular being you are!—you will not interfere inanything.”“You are right—that is the principle on which I wish to act.”“We will say no more about it, then. Good-bye, count.”Morcerf took his hat, and left the room. He found his carriage at the door, anddoing his utmost to restrain his anger he went at once to find Beauchamp, whowas in his office. It was a gloomy, dusty-looking apartment, such asjournalists’ offices have always been from time immemorial. The servantannounced M. Albert de Morcerf. Beauchamp repeated the name to himself, asthough he could scarcely believe that he had heard aright, and then gave ordersfor him to be admitted. Albert entered.Beauchamp uttered an exclamation of surprise on seeing his friend leap over andtrample under foot all the newspapers which were strewed about the room.“This way, this way, my dear Albert!” said he, holding out his handto the young man. “Are you out of your senses, or do you come peaceablyto take breakfast with me? Try and find a seat—there is one by thatgeranium, which is the only thing in the room to remind me that there are otherleaves in the world besides leaves of paper.”“Beauchamp,” said Albert, “it is of your journal that I cometo speak.”“Indeed? What do you wish to say about it?”“I desire that a statement contained in it should be rectified.”“To what do you refer? But pray sit down.”“Thank you,” said Albert, with a cold and formal bow.“Will you now have the kindness to explain the nature of the statementwhich has displeased you?”“An announcement has been made which implicates the honor of a member ofmy family.”“What is it?” said Beauchamp, much surprised; “surely youmust be mistaken.”“The story sent you from Yanina.”“Yanina?”“Yes; really you appear to be totally ignorant of the cause which bringsme here.”“Such is really the case, I assure you, upon my honor! Baptiste, give meyesterday’s paper,” cried Beauchamp.“Here, I have brought mine with me,” replied Albert.Beauchamp took the paper, and read the article to which Albert pointed in anundertone.“You see it is a serious annoyance,” said Morcerf, when Beauchamphad finished the perusal of the paragraph.“Is the officer referred to a relation of yours, then?” demandedthe journalist.“Yes,” said Albert, blushing.“Well, what do you wish me to do for you?” said Beauchamp mildly.“My dear Beauchamp, I wish you to contradict this statement.”Beauchamp looked at Albert with a benevolent expression.“Come,” said he, “this matter will want a good deal oftalking over; a retractation is always a serious thing, you know. Sit down, andI will read it again.”Albert resumed his seat, and Beauchamp read, with more attention than at first,the lines denounced by his friend.“Well,” said Albert in a determined tone, “you see that yourpaper has insulted a member of my family, and I insist on a retractation beingmade.”“You insist?”“Yes, I insist.”“Permit me to remind you that you are not in the Chamber, my dearviscount.”“Nor do I wish to be there,” replied the young man, rising.“I repeat that I am determined to have the announcement of yesterdaycontradicted. You have known me long enough,” continued Albert, bitinghis lips convulsively, for he saw that Beauchamp’s anger was beginning torise,—“you have been my friend, and therefore sufficiently intimatewith me to be aware that I am likely to maintain my resolution on thispoint.”“If I have been your friend, Morcerf, your present manner of speakingwould almost lead me to forget that I ever bore that title. But wait a moment,do not let us get angry, or at least not yet. You are irritated andvexed—tell me how this Fernand is related to you?”“He is merely my father,” said Albert—“M. FernandMondego, Count of Morcerf, an old soldier who has fought in twenty battles andwhose honorable scars they would denounce as badges of disgrace.”“Is it your father?” said Beauchamp; “that is quite anotherthing. Then I can well understand your indignation, my dear Albert. I will lookat it again;” and he read the paragraph for the third time, laying astress on each word as he proceeded. “But the paper nowhere identifiesthis Fernand with your father.”“No; but the connection will be seen by others, and therefore I will havethe article contradicted.”At the words I will, Beauchamp steadily raised his eyes toAlbert’s countenance, and then as gradually lowering them, he remainedthoughtful for a few moments.“You will retract this assertion, will you not, Beauchamp?” saidAlbert with increased though stifled anger.“Yes,” replied Beauchamp.“Immediately?” said Albert.“When I am convinced that the statement is false.”“What?”“The thing is worth looking into, and I will take pains to investigatethe matter thoroughly.”“But what is there to investigate, sir?” said Albert, enragedbeyond measure at Beauchamp’s last remark. “If you do not believethat it is my father, say so immediately; and if, on the contrary, you believeit to be him, state your reasons for doing so.”Beauchamp looked at Albert with the smile which was so peculiar to him, andwhich in its numerous modifications served to express every varied emotion ofhis mind.“Sir,” replied he, “if you came to me with the idea ofdemanding satisfaction, you should have gone at once to the point, and not haveentertained me with the idle conversation to which I have been patientlylistening for the last half hour. Am I to put this construction on yourvisit?”“Yes, if you will not consent to retract that infamous calumny.”“Wait a moment—no threats, if you please, M. Fernand Mondego,Vicomte de Morcerf; I never allow them from my enemies, and therefore shall notput up with them from my friends. You insist on my contradicting the articlerelating to General Fernand, an article with which, I assure you on my word ofhonor, I had nothing whatever to do?”“Yes, I insist on it,” said Albert, whose mind was beginning to getbewildered with the excitement of his feelings.“And if I refuse to retract, you wish to fight, do you?” saidBeauchamp in a calm tone.“Yes,” replied Albert, raising his voice.“Well,” said Beauchamp, “here is my answer, my dear sir. Thearticle was not inserted by me—I was not even aware of it; but you have,by the step you have taken, called my attention to the paragraph in question,and it will remain until it shall be either contradicted or confirmed bysomeone who has a right to do so.”“Sir,” said Albert, rising, “I will do myself the honor ofsending my seconds to you, and you will be kind enough to arrange with them theplace of meeting and the weapons.”“Certainly, my dear sir.”“And this evening, if you please, or tomorrow at the latest, we willmeet.”“No, no, I will be on the ground at the proper time; but in my opinion(and I have a right to dictate the preliminaries, as it is I who have receivedthe provocation)—in my opinion the time ought not to be yet. I know youto be well skilled in the management of the sword, while I am only moderatelyso; I know, too, that you are a good marksman—there we are about equal. Iknow that a duel between us two would be a serious affair, because you arebrave, and I am brave also. I do not therefore wish either to kill you, or tobe killed myself without a cause. Now, I am going to put a question to you, andone very much to the purpose too. Do you insist on this retractation so far asto kill me if I do not make it, although I have repeated more than once, andaffirmed on my honor, that I was ignorant of the thing with which you chargeme, and although I still declare that it is impossible for anyone but you torecognize the Count of Morcerf under the name of Fernand?”“I maintain my original resolution.”“Very well, my dear sir; then I consent to cut throats with you. But Irequire three weeks’ preparation; at the end of that time I shall comeand say to you, ‘The assertion is false, and I retract it,’ or‘The assertion is true,’ when I shall immediately draw the swordfrom its sheath, or the pistols from the case, whichever you please.”“Three weeks!” cried Albert; “they will pass as slowly asthree centuries when I am all the time suffering dishonor.”“Had you continued to remain on amicable terms with me, I should havesaid, ‘Patience, my friend;’ but you have constituted yourself myenemy, therefore I say, ‘What does that signify to me, sir?’”“Well, let it be three weeks then,” said Morcerf; “butremember, at the expiration of that time no delay or subterfuge will justifyyou in——”“M. Albert de Morcerf,” said Beauchamp, rising in his turn,“I cannot throw you out of window for three weeks—that is to say,for twenty-four days to come—nor have you any right to split my skullopen till that time has elapsed. Today is the 29th of August; the 21st ofSeptember will, therefore, be the conclusion of the term agreed on, and tillthat time arrives—and it is the advice of a gentleman which I am about togive you—till then we will refrain from growling and barking like twodogs chained within sight of each other.”When he had concluded his speech, Beauchamp bowed coldly to Albert, turned hisback upon him, and went to the press-room. Albert vented his anger on a pile ofnewspapers, which he sent flying all over the office by switching themviolently with his stick; after which ebullition he departed—not,however, without walking several times to the door of the press-room, as if hehad half a mind to enter.While Albert was lashing the front of his carriage in the same manner that hehad the newspapers which were the innocent agents of his discomfiture, as hewas crossing the barrier he perceived Morrel, who was walking with a quick stepand a bright eye. He was passing the Chinese Baths, and appeared to have comefrom the direction of the Porte Saint-Martin, and to be going towards theMadeleine.“Ah,” said Morcerf, “there goes a happy man!” And it sohappened Albert was not mistaken in his opinion. Chapter 79. TheLemonadeMorrel was, in fact,very happy. M. Noirtier had just sent for him, and he was in such haste to knowthe reason of his doing so that he had not stopped to take a cab, placinginfinitely more dependence on his own two legs than on the four legs of acab-horse. He had therefore set off at a furious rate from the Rue Meslay, andwas hastening with rapid strides in the direction of the Faubourg Saint-Honoré.Morrel advanced with a firm, manly tread, and poor Barrois followed him as hebest might. Morrel was only thirty-one, Barrois was sixty years of age; Morrelwas deeply in love, and Barrois was dying with heat and exertion. These twomen, thus opposed in age and interests, resembled two parts of a triangle,presenting the extremes of separation, yet nevertheless possessing their pointof union. This point of union was Noirtier, and it was he who had just sent forMorrel, with the request that the latter would lose no time in coming tohim—a command which Morrel obeyed to the letter, to the greatdiscomfiture of Barrois. On arriving at the house, Morrel was not even out ofbreath, for love lends wings to our desires; but Barrois, who had longforgotten what it was to love, was sorely fatigued by the expedition he hadbeen constrained to use.The old servant introduced Morrel by a private entrance, closed the door of thestudy, and soon the rustling of a dress announced the arrival of Valentine. Shelooked marvellously beautiful in her deep mourning dress, and Morrelexperienced such intense delight in gazing upon her that he felt as if he couldalmost have dispensed with the conversation of her grandfather.But the easy-chair of the old man was heard rolling along the floor, and hesoon made his appearance in the room. Noirtier acknowledged by a look ofextreme kindness and benevolence the thanks which Morrel lavished on him forhis timely intervention on behalf of Valentine and himself—anintervention which had saved them from despair. Morrel then cast on the invalidan interrogative look as to the new favor which he designed to bestow on him.Valentine was sitting at a little distance from them, timidly awaiting themoment when she should be obliged to speak. Noirtier fixed his eyes on her.“Am I to say what you told me?” asked Valentine. Noirtier made asign that she was to do so.“Monsieur Morrel,” said Valentine to the young man, who wasregarding her with the most intense interest, “my grandfather, M.Noirtier, had a thousand things to say, which he told me three days ago; andnow, he has sent for you, that I may repeat them to you. I will repeat them,then; and since he has chosen me as his interpreter, I will be faithful to thetrust, and will not alter a word of his intentions.”“Oh, I am listening with the greatest impatience,” replied theyoung man; “speak, I beg of you.”Valentine cast down her eyes; this was a good omen for Morrel, for he knew thatnothing but happiness could have the power of thus overcoming Valentine.“My grandfather intends leaving this house,” said she, “andBarrois is looking out for suitable apartments for him in another.”“But you, Mademoiselle de Villefort,—you, who are necessary to M.Noirtier’s happiness——”“I?” interrupted Valentine; “I shall not leave mygrandfather,—that is an understood thing between us. My apartment will beclose to his. Now, M. de Villefort must either give his consent to this plan orhis refusal; in the first case, I shall leave directly, and in the second, Ishall wait till I am of age, which will be in about ten months. Then I shall befree, I shall have an independent fortune, and”—“And what?” demanded Morrel.“And with my grandfather’s consent I shall fulfil the promise whichI have made you.”Valentine pronounced these last few words in such a low tone, that nothing butMorrel’s intense interest in what she was saying could have enabled himto hear them.“Have I not explained your wishes, grandpapa?” said Valentine,addressing Noirtier.“Yes,” looked the old man.“Once under my grandfather’s roof, M. Morrel can visit me in thepresence of my good and worthy protector, if we still feel that the union wecontemplated will be likely to insure our future comfort and happiness; in thatcase I shall expect M. Morrel to come and claim me at my own hands. But, alas,I have heard it said that hearts inflamed by obstacles to their desire grewcold in time of security; I trust we shall never find it so in ourexperience!”“Oh,” cried Morrel, almost tempted to throw himself on his kneesbefore Noirtier and Valentine, and to adore them as two superior beings,“what have I ever done in my life to merit such unboundedhappiness?”“Until that time,” continued the young girl in a calm andself-possessed tone of voice, “we will conform to circumstances, and beguided by the wishes of our friends, so long as those wishes do not tendfinally to separate us; in a word, and I repeat it, because it expresses all Iwish to convey,—we will wait.”“And I swear to make all the sacrifices which this word imposes,sir,” said Morrel, “not only with resignation, but withcheerfulness.”“Therefore,” continued Valentine, looking playfully at Maximilian,“no more inconsiderate actions—no more rash projects; for yousurely would not wish to compromise one who from this day regards herself asdestined, honorably and happily, to bear your name?”Morrel looked obedience to her commands. Noirtier regarded the lovers with alook of ineffable tenderness, while Barrois, who had remained in the room inthe character of a man privileged to know everything that passed, smiled on theyouthful couple as he wiped the perspiration from his bald forehead.“How hot you look, my good Barrois,” said Valentine.“Ah, I have been running very fast, mademoiselle, but I must do M. Morrelthe justice to say that he ran still faster.”Noirtier directed their attention to a waiter, on which was placed a decantercontaining lemonade and a glass. The decanter was nearly full, with theexception of a little, which had been already drunk by M. Noirtier.“Come, Barrois,” said the young girl, “take some of thislemonade; I see you are coveting a good draught of it.”“The fact is, mademoiselle,” said Barrois, “I am dying withthirst, and since you are so kind as to offer it me, I cannot say I should atall object to drinking your health in a glass of it.”“Take some, then, and come back immediately.”Barrois took away the waiter, and hardly was he outside the door, which in hishaste he forgot to shut, than they saw him throw back his head and empty to thevery dregs the glass which Valentine had filled. Valentine and Morrel wereexchanging their adieux in the presence of Noirtier when a ring was heard atthe door-bell. It was the signal of a visit. Valentine looked at her watch.“It is past noon,” said she, “and today is Saturday; I daresay it is the doctor, grandpapa.”Noirtier looked his conviction that she was right in her supposition.“He will come in here, and M. Morrel had better go,—do you notthink so, grandpapa?”“Yes,” signed the old man.“Barrois,” cried Valentine, “Barrois!”“I am coming, mademoiselle,” replied he.“Barrois will open the door for you,” said Valentine, addressingMorrel. “And now remember one thing, Monsieur Officer, that mygrandfather commands you not to take any rash or ill-advised step which wouldbe likely to compromise our happiness.”“I promised him to wait,” replied Morrel; “and I willwait.”At this moment Barrois entered. “Who rang?” asked Valentine.“Doctor d’Avrigny,” said Barrois, staggering as if he wouldfall.“What is the matter, Barrois?” said Valentine. The old man did notanswer, but looked at his master with wild staring eyes, while with his crampedhand he grasped a piece of furniture to enable him to stand upright.“He is going to fall!” cried Morrel.The rigors which had attacked Barrois gradually increased, the features of theface became quite altered, and the convulsive movement of the muscles appearedto indicate the approach of a most serious nervous disorder. Noirtier, seeingBarrois in this pitiable condition, showed by his looks all the variousemotions of sorrow and sympathy which can animate the heart of man. Barroismade some steps towards his master.“Ah, sir,” said he, “tell me what is the matter with me. I amsuffering—I cannot see. A thousand fiery darts are piercing my brain. Ah,don’t touch me, pray don’t.”By this time his haggard eyes had the appearance of being ready to start fromtheir sockets; his head fell back, and the lower extremities of the body beganto stiffen. Valentine uttered a cry of horror; Morrel took her in his arms, asif to defend her from some unknown danger.“M. d’Avrigny, M. d’Avrigny,” cried she, in a stifledvoice. “Help, help!”Barrois turned round and with a great effort stumbled a few steps, then fell atthe feet of Noirtier, and resting his hand on the knee of the invalid,exclaimed:“My master, my good master!”At this moment M. de Villefort, attracted by the noise, appeared on thethreshold. Morrel relaxed his hold of Valentine, and retreating to a distantcorner of the room remained half hidden behind a curtain. Pale as if he hadbeen gazing on a serpent, he fixed his terrified eye on the agonized sufferer.Noirtier, burning with impatience and terror, was in despair at his utterinability to help his old domestic, whom he regarded more in the light of afriend than a servant. One might by the fearful swelling of the veins of hisforehead and the contraction of the muscles round the eye, trace the terribleconflict which was going on between the living energetic mind and the inanimateand helpless body.Barrois, his features convulsed, his eyes suffused with blood, and his headthrown back, was lying at full length, beating the floor with his hands, whilehis legs had become so stiff, that they looked as if they would break ratherthan bend. A slight appearance of foam was visible around the mouth, and hebreathed painfully, and with extreme difficulty.Villefort seemed stupefied with astonishment, and remained gazing intently onthe scene before him without uttering a word. He had not seen Morrel. After amoment of dumb contemplation, during which his face became pale and his hairseemed to stand on end, he sprang towards the door, crying out:“Doctor, doctor! come instantly, pray come!”“Madame, madame!” cried Valentine, calling her step-mother, andrunning upstairs to meet her; “come quick, quick!—and bring yourbottle of smelling-salts with you.”“What is the matter?” said Madame de Villefort in a harsh andconstrained tone.“Oh! come! come!”“But where is the doctor?” exclaimed Villefort; “where ishe?”Madame de Villefort now deliberately descended the staircase. In one hand sheheld her handkerchief, with which she appeared to be wiping her face, and inthe other a bottle of English smelling-salts. Her first look on entering theroom was at Noirtier, whose face, independent of the emotion which such a scenecould not fail of producing, proclaimed him to be in possession of his usualhealth; her second glance was at the dying man. She turned pale, and her eyepassed quickly from the servant and rested on the master.“In the name of heaven, madame,” said Villefort, “where isthe doctor? He was with you just now. You see this is a fit of apoplexy, and hemight be saved if he could but be bled!”“Has he eaten anything lately?” asked Madame de Villefort, eludingher husband’s question.“Madame,” replied Valentine, “he has not even breakfasted. Hehas been running very fast on an errand with which my grandfather charged him,and when he returned, took nothing but a glass of lemonade.”“Ah,” said Madame de Villefort, “why did he not take wine?Lemonade was a very bad thing for him.”“Grandpapa’s bottle of lemonade was standing just by his side; poorBarrois was very thirsty, and was thankful to drink anything he couldfind.”Madame de Villefort started. Noirtier looked at her with a glance of the mostprofound scrutiny.“He has such a short neck,” said she.“Madame,” said Villefort, “I ask where is M. d’Avrigny?In God’s name answer me!”“He is with Edward, who is not quite well,” replied Madame deVillefort, no longer being able to avoid answering.Villefort rushed upstairs to fetch him.“Take this,” said Madame de Villefort, giving her smelling-bottleto Valentine. “They will, no doubt, bleed him; therefore I will retire,for I cannot endure the sight of blood;” and she followed her husbandupstairs. Morrel now emerged from his hiding-place, where he had remained quiteunperceived, so great had been the general confusion.“Go away as quick as you can, Maximilian,” said Valentine,“and stay till I send for you. Go.”Morrel looked towards Noirtier for permission to retire. The old man, who hadpreserved all his usual coolness, made a sign to him to do so. The young manpressed Valentine’s hand to his lips, and then left the house by a backstaircase.At the same moment that he quitted the room, Villefort and the doctor enteredby an opposite door. Barrois was now showing signs of returning consciousness.The crisis seemed past, a low moaning was heard, and he raised himself on oneknee. D’Avrigny and Villefort laid him on a couch.“What do you prescribe, doctor?” demanded Villefort.“Give me some water and ether. You have some in the house, have younot?”“Yes.”“Send for some oil of turpentine and tartar emetic.”Villefort immediately despatched a messenger. “And now let everyoneretire.”“Must I go too?” asked Valentine timidly.“Yes, mademoiselle, you especially,” replied the doctor abruptly.Valentine looked at M. d’Avrigny with astonishment, kissed hergrandfather on the forehead, and left the room. The doctor closed the doorafter her with a gloomy air.“Look, look, doctor,” said Villefort, “he is quite cominground again; I really do not think, after all, it is anything ofconsequence.”M. d’Avrigny answered by a melancholy smile.“How do you feel, Barrois?” asked he.“A little better, sir.”“Will you drink some of this ether and water?”“I will try; but don’t touch me.”“Why not?”“Because I feel that if you were only to touch me with the tip of yourfinger the fit would return.”“Drink.”Barrois took the glass, and, raising it to his purple lips, took about half ofthe liquid offered him.“Where do you suffer?” asked the doctor.“Everywhere. I feel cramps over my whole body.”“Do you find any dazzling sensation before the eyes?”“Yes.”“Any noise in the ears?”“Frightful.”“When did you first feel that?”“Just now.”“Suddenly?”“Yes, like a clap of thunder.”“Did you feel nothing of it yesterday or the day before?”“Nothing.”“No drowsiness?”“None.”“What have you eaten today?”“I have eaten nothing; I only drank a glass of my master’slemonade—that’s all.” And Barrois turned towards Noirtier,who, immovably fixed in his armchair, was contemplating this terrible scenewithout allowing a word or a movement to escape him.“Where is this lemonade?” asked the doctor eagerly.“Downstairs in the decanter.”“Whereabouts downstairs?”“In the kitchen.”“Shall I go and fetch it, doctor?” inquired Villefort.“No, stay here and try to make Barrois drink the rest of this glass ofether and water. I will go myself and fetch the lemonade.”D’Avrigny bounded towards the door, flew down the back staircase, andalmost knocked down Madame de Villefort, in his haste, who was herself goingdown to the kitchen. She cried out, but d’Avrigny paid no attention toher; possessed with but one idea, he cleared the last four steps with a bound,and rushed into the kitchen, where he saw the decanter about three parts emptystill standing on the waiter, where it had been left. He darted upon it as aneagle would seize upon its prey. Panting with loss of breath, he returned tothe room he had just left. Madame de Villefort was slowly ascending the stepswhich led to her room.“Is this the decanter you spoke of?” asked d’Avrigny.“Yes, doctor.”“Is this the same lemonade of which you partook?”“I believe so.”“What did it taste like?”“It had a bitter taste.”The doctor poured some drops of the lemonade into the palm of his hand, put hislips to it, and after having rinsed his mouth as a man does when he is tastingwine, he spat the liquor into the fireplace.“It is no doubt the same,” said he. “Did you drink some too,M. Noirtier?”“Yes.”“And did you also discover a bitter taste?”“Yes.”“Oh, doctor,” cried Barrois, “the fit is coming on again. Oh,do something for me.” The doctor flew to his patient.“That emetic, Villefort—see if it is coming.”Villefort sprang into the passage, exclaiming, “The emetic! theemetic!—is it come yet?” No one answered. The most profound terrorreigned throughout the house.“If I had anything by means of which I could inflate the lungs,”said d’Avrigny, looking around him, “perhaps I might preventsuffocation. But there is nothing which would do!—nothing!”“Oh, sir,” cried Barrois, “are you going to let me diewithout help? Oh, I am dying! Oh, save me!”“A pen, a pen!” said the doctor. There was one lying on the table;he endeavored to introduce it into the mouth of the patient, who, in the midstof his convulsions, was making vain attempts to vomit; but the jaws were soclenched that the pen could not pass them. This second attack was much moreviolent than the first, and he had slipped from the couch to the ground, wherehe was writhing in agony. The doctor left him in this paroxysm, knowing that hecould do nothing to alleviate it, and, going up to Noirtier, said abruptly:“How do you find yourself?—well?”“Yes.”“Have you any weight on the chest; or does your stomach feel light andcomfortable—eh?”“Yes.”“Then you feel pretty much as you generally do after you have had thedose which I am accustomed to give you every Sunday?”“Yes.”“Did Barrois make your lemonade?”“Yes.”“Was it you who asked him to drink some of it?”“No.”“Was it M. de Villefort?”“No.”“Madame?”“No.”“It was your granddaughter, then, was it not?”“Yes.”A groan from Barrois, accompanied by a yawn which seemed to crack the veryjawbones, attracted the attention of M. d’Avrigny; he left M. Noirtier,and returned to the sick man.“Barrois,” said the doctor, “can you speak?” Barroismuttered a few unintelligible words. “Try and make an effort to do so, mygood man.” said d’Avrigny. Barrois reopened his bloodshot eyes.“Who made the lemonade?”“I did.”“Did you bring it to your master directly it was made?”“No.”“You left it somewhere, then, in the meantime?”“Yes; I left it in the pantry, because I was called away.”“Who brought it into this room, then?”“Mademoiselle Valentine.” D’Avrigny struck his forehead withhis hand.“Gracious heaven,” exclaimed he.“Doctor, doctor!” cried Barrois, who felt another fit coming.“Will they never bring that emetic?” asked the doctor.“Here is a glass with one already prepared,” said Villefort,entering the room.“Who prepared it?”“The chemist who came here with me.”“Drink it,” said the doctor to Barrois.“Impossible, doctor; it is too late; my throat is closing up. I amchoking! Oh, my heart! Ah, my head!—Oh, what agony!—Shall I sufferlike this long?”“No, no, friend,” replied the doctor, “you will soon cease tosuffer.”“Ah, I understand you,” said the unhappy man. “My God, havemercy upon me!” and, uttering a fearful cry, Barrois fell back as if hehad been struck by lightning. D’Avrigny put his hand to his heart, andplaced a glass before his lips.“Well?” said Villefort.“Go to the kitchen and get me some syrup of violets.”Villefort went immediately.“Do not be alarmed, M. Noirtier,” said d’Avrigny; “I amgoing to take my patient into the next room to bleed him; this sort of attackis very frightful to witness.”And taking Barrois under the arms, he dragged him into an adjoining room; butalmost immediately he returned to fetch the lemonade. Noirtier closed his righteye.“You want Valentine, do you not? I will tell them to send her toyou.”Villefort returned, and d’Avrigny met him in the passage.“Well, how is he now?” asked he.“Come in here,” said d’Avrigny, and he took him into thechamber where the sick man lay.“Is he still in a fit?” said the procureur.“He is dead.”Villefort drew back a few steps, and, clasping his hands, exclaimed, with realamazement and sympathy, “Dead?—and so soon too!”“Yes, it is very soon,” said the doctor, looking at the corpsebefore him; “but that ought not to astonish you; Monsieur and Madame deSaint-Méran died as soon. People die very suddenly in your house, M. deVillefort.”“What?” cried the magistrate, with an accent of horror andconsternation, “are you still harping on that terrible idea?”“Still, sir; and I shall always do so,” replied d’Avrigny,“for it has never for one instant ceased to retain possession of my mind;and that you may be quite sure I am not mistaken this time, listen well to whatI am going to say, M. de Villefort.”The magistrate trembled convulsively.“There is a poison which destroys life almost without leaving anyperceptible traces. I know it well; I have studied it in all its forms and inthe effects which it produces. I recognized the presence of this poison in thecase of poor Barrois as well as in that of Madame de Saint-Méran. There is away of detecting its presence. It restores the blue color of litmus-paperreddened by an acid, and it turns syrup of violets green. We have nolitmus-paper, but, see, here they come with the syrup of violets.”The doctor was right; steps were heard in the passage. M. d’Avrignyopened the door, and took from the hands of the chambermaid a cup whichcontained two or three spoonfuls of the syrup, he then carefully closed thedoor.“Look,” said he to the procureur, whose heart beat so loudly thatit might almost be heard, “here is in this cup some syrup of violets, andthis decanter contains the remainder of the lemonade of which M. Noirtier andBarrois partook. If the lemonade be pure and inoffensive, the syrup will retainits color; if, on the contrary, the lemonade be drugged with poison, the syrupwill become green. Look closely!”The doctor then slowly poured some drops of the lemonade from the decanter intothe cup, and in an instant a light cloudy sediment began to form at the bottomof the cup; this sediment first took a blue shade, then from the color ofsapphire it passed to that of opal, and from opal to emerald. Arrived at thislast hue, it changed no more. The result of the experiment left no doubtwhatever on the mind.“The unfortunate Barrois has been poisoned,” said d’Avrigny,“and I will maintain this assertion before God and man.”Villefort said nothing, but he clasped his hands, opened his haggard eyes, and,overcome with his emotion, sank into a chair. Chapter 80. TheAccusationM. d’Avrigny soonrestored the magistrate to consciousness, who had looked like a second corpsein that chamber of death.“Oh, death is in my house!” cried Villefort.“Say, rather, crime!” replied the doctor.“M. d’Avrigny,” cried Villefort, “I cannot tell you allI feel at this moment,—terror, grief, madness.”“Yes,” said M. d’Avrigny, with an imposing calmness,“but I think it is now time to act. I think it is time to stop thistorrent of mortality. I can no longer bear to be in possession of these secretswithout the hope of seeing the victims and society generally revenged.”Villefort cast a gloomy look around him. “In my house,” murmuredhe, “in my house!”“Come, magistrate,” said M. d’Avrigny, “show yourself aman; as an interpreter of the law, do honor to your profession by sacrificingyour selfish interests to it.”“You make me shudder, doctor. Do you talk of a sacrifice?”“I do.”“Do you then suspect anyone?”“I suspect no one; death raps at your door—it enters—it goes,not blindfolded, but circumspectly, from room to room. Well, I follow itscourse, I track its passage; I adopt the wisdom of the ancients, and feel myway, for my friendship for your family and my respect for you are as a twofoldbandage over my eyes; well——”“Oh, speak, speak, doctor; I shall have courage.”“Well, sir, you have in your establishment, or in your family, perhaps,one of the frightful monstrosities of which each century produces only one.Locusta and Agrippina, living at the same time, were an exception, and provedthe determination of Providence to effect the entire ruin of the Roman empire,sullied by so many crimes. Brunhilda and Fredegund were the results of thepainful struggle of civilization in its infancy, when man was learning tocontrol mind, were it even by an emissary from the realms of darkness. Allthese women had been, or were, beautiful. The same flower of innocence hadflourished, or was still flourishing, on their brow, that is seen on the browof the culprit in your house.”Villefort shrieked, clasped his hands, and looked at the doctor with asupplicating air. But the latter went on without pity:“‘Seek whom the crime will profit,’ says an axiom ofjurisprudence.”“Doctor,” cried Villefort, “alas, doctor, how often hasman’s justice been deceived by those fatal words. I know not why, but Ifeel that this crime——”“You acknowledge, then, the existence of the crime?”“Yes, I see too plainly that it does exist. But it seems that it isintended to affect me personally. I fear an attack myself, after all thesedisasters.”“Oh, man!” murmured d’Avrigny, “the most selfish of allanimals, the most personal of all creatures, who believes the earth turns, thesun shines, and death strikes for him alone,—an ant cursing God from thetop of a blade of grass! And have those who have lost their lives lostnothing?—M. de Saint-Méran, Madame de Saint-Méran, M.Noirtier——”“How? M. Noirtier?”“Yes; think you it was the poor servant’s life was coveted? No, no;like Shakespeare’s Polonius, he died for another. It was Noirtier thelemonade was intended for—it is Noirtier, logically speaking, who drankit. The other drank it only by accident, and, although Barrois is dead, it wasNoirtier whose death was wished for.”“But why did it not kill my father?”“I told you one evening in the garden after Madame de Saint-Méran’sdeath—because his system is accustomed to that very poison, and the dosewas trifling to him, which would be fatal to another; because no one knows, noteven the assassin, that, for the last twelve months, I have given M. Noirtierbrucine for his paralytic affection, while the assassin is not ignorant, for hehas proved that brucine is a violent poison.”“Oh, have pity—have pity!” murmured Villefort, wringing hishands.“Follow the culprit’s steps; he first kills M. deSaint-Méran——”“Oh, doctor!”“I would swear to it; what I heard of his symptoms agrees too well withwhat I have seen in the other cases.” Villefort ceased to contend; heonly groaned. “He first kills M. de Saint-Méran,” repeated thedoctor, “then Madame de Saint-Méran,—a double fortune toinherit.” Villefort wiped the perspiration from his forehead.“Listen attentively.”“Alas,” stammered Villefort, “I do not lose a singleword.”“M. Noirtier,” resumed M. d’Avrigny in the same pitilesstone,—“M. Noirtier had once made a will against you—againstyour family—in favor of the poor, in fact; M. Noirtier is spared, becausenothing is expected from him. But he has no sooner destroyed his first will andmade a second, than, for fear he should make a third, he is struck down. Thewill was made the day before yesterday, I believe; you see there has been notime lost.”“Oh, mercy, M. d’Avrigny!”“No mercy, sir! The physician has a sacred mission on earth; and tofulfil it he begins at the source of life, and goes down to the mysteriousdarkness of the tomb. When crime has been committed, and God, doubtless inanger, turns away his face, it is for the physician to bring the culprit tojustice.”“Have mercy on my child, sir,” murmured Villefort.“You see it is yourself who have first named her—you, herfather.”“Have pity on Valentine! Listen, it is impossible. I would as willinglyaccuse myself! Valentine, whose heart is pure as a diamond or a lily!”“No pity, procureur; the crime is fragrant. Mademoiselle herself packedall the medicines which were sent to M. de Saint-Méran; and M. de Saint-Méranis dead. Mademoiselle de Villefort prepared all the cooling draughts whichMadame de Saint-Méran took, and Madame de Saint-Méran is dead. Mademoiselle deVillefort took from the hands of Barrois, who was sent out, the lemonade whichM. Noirtier had every morning, and he has escaped by a miracle. Mademoiselle deVillefort is the culprit—she is the poisoner! To you, as the king’sattorney, I denounce Mademoiselle de Villefort, do your duty.”“Doctor, I resist no longer—I can no longer defend myself—Ibelieve you; but, for pity’s sake, spare my life, my honor!”“M. de Villefort,” replied the doctor, with increased vehemence,“there are occasions when I dispense with all foolish humancircumspection. If your daughter had committed only one crime, and I saw hermeditating another, I would say ‘Warn her, punish her, let her pass theremainder of her life in a convent, weeping and praying.’ If she hadcommitted two crimes, I would say, ‘Here, M. de Villefort, is a poisonthat the prisoner is not acquainted with,—one that has no known antidote,quick as thought, rapid as lightning, mortal as the thunderbolt; give her thatpoison, recommending her soul to God, and save your honor and your life, for itis yours she aims at; and I can picture her approaching your pillow with herhypocritical smiles and her sweet exhortations. Woe to you, M. de Villefort, ifyou do not strike first!’ This is what I would say had she only killedtwo persons but she has seen three deaths,—has contemplated threemurdered persons,—has knelt by three corpses! To the scaffold with thepoisoner—to the scaffold! Do you talk of your honor? Do what I tell you,and immortality awaits you!”Villefort fell on his knees.“Listen,” said he; “I have not the strength of mind you have,or rather that which you would not have, if instead of my daughter Valentineyour daughter Madeleine were concerned.” The doctor turned pale.“Doctor, every son of woman is born to suffer and to die; I am content tosuffer and to await death.”“Beware,” said M. d’Avrigny, “it may come slowly; youwill see it approach after having struck your father, your wife, perhaps yourson.”Villefort, suffocating, pressed the doctor’s arm.“Listen,” cried he; “pity me—help me! No, my daughteris not guilty. If you drag us both before a tribunal I will still say,‘No, my daughter is not guilty;—there is no crime in my house. Iwill not acknowledge a crime in my house; for when crime enters a dwelling, itis like death—it does not come alone.’ Listen. What does it signifyto you if I am murdered? Are you my friend? Are you a man? Have you a heart?No, you are a physician! Well, I tell you I will not drag my daughter before atribunal, and give her up to the executioner! The bare idea would killme—would drive me like a madman to dig my heart out with my finger-nails!And if you were mistaken, doctor—if it were not my daughter—if Ishould come one day, pale as a spectre, and say to you, ‘Assassin, youhave killed my child!’—hold—if that should happen, although Iam a Christian, M. d’Avrigny, I should kill myself.”“Well,” said the doctor, after a moment’s silence, “Iwill wait.”Villefort looked at him as if he had doubted his words.“Only,” continued M. d’Avrigny, with a slow and solemn tone,“if anyone falls ill in your house, if you feel yourself attacked, do notsend for me, for I will come no more. I will consent to share this dreadfulsecret with you, but I will not allow shame and remorse to grow and increase inmy conscience, as crime and misery will in your house.”“Then you abandon me, doctor?”“Yes, for I can follow you no farther, and I only stop at the foot of thescaffold. Some further discovery will be made, which will bring this dreadfultragedy to a close. Adieu.”“I entreat you, doctor!”“All the horrors that disturb my thoughts make your house odious andfatal. Adieu, sir.”“One word—one single word more, doctor! You go, leaving me in allthe horror of my situation, after increasing it by what you have revealed tome. But what will be reported of the sudden death of the poor oldservant?”“True,” said M. d’Avrigny; “we will return.”The doctor went out first, followed by M. de Villefort. The terrified servantswere on the stairs and in the passage where the doctor would pass.“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, so loud that all mighthear, “poor Barrois has led too sedentary a life of late; accustomedformerly to ride on horseback, or in the carriage, to the four corners ofEurope, the monotonous walk around that armchair has killed him—his bloodhas thickened. He was stout, had a short, thick neck; he was attacked withapoplexy, and I was called in too late. By the way,” added he in a lowtone, “take care to throw away that cup of syrup of violets in theashes.”The doctor, without shaking hands with Villefort, without adding a word to whathe had said, went out, amid the tears and lamentations of the whole household.The same evening all Villefort’s servants, who had assembled in thekitchen, and had a long consultation, came to tell Madame de Villefort thatthey wished to leave. No entreaty, no proposition of increased wages, couldinduce them to remain; to every argument they replied, “We must go, fordeath is in this house.”They all left, in spite of prayers and entreaties, testifying their regret atleaving so good a master and mistress, and especially Mademoiselle Valentine,so good, so kind, and so gentle.Villefort looked at Valentine as they said this. She was in tears, and, strangeas it was, in spite of the emotions he felt at the sight of these tears, helooked also at Madame de Villefort, and it appeared to him as if a slightgloomy smile had passed over her thin lips, like a meteor seen passinginauspiciously between two clouds in a stormy sky. Chapter 81. The Room of theRetired BakerThe evening of the dayon which the Count of Morcerf had left Danglars’ house with feelings ofshame and anger at the rejection of the projected alliance, M. AndreaCavalcanti, with curled hair, moustaches in perfect order, and white gloveswhich fitted admirably, had entered the courtyard of the banker’s housein Rue de la Chaussée d’Antin. He had not been more than ten minutes inthe drawing-room before he drew Danglars aside into the recess of a bow-window,and, after an ingenious preamble, related to him all his anxieties and caressince his noble father’s departure. He acknowledged the extreme kindnesswhich had been shown him by the banker’s family, in which he had beenreceived as a son, and where, besides, his warmest affections had found anobject on which to centre in Mademoiselle Danglars.Danglars listened with the most profound attention; he had expected thisdeclaration for the last two or three days, and when at last it came his eyesglistened as much as they had lowered on listening to Morcerf. He would not,however, yield immediately to the young man’s request, but made a fewconscientious objections.“Are you not rather young, M. Andrea, to think of marrying?”“I think not, sir,” replied M. Cavalcanti; “in Italy thenobility generally marry young. Life is so uncertain, that we ought to securehappiness while it is within our reach.”“Well, sir,” said Danglars, “in case your proposals, which dome honor, are accepted by my wife and daughter, by whom shall the preliminaryarrangements be settled? So important a negotiation should, I think, beconducted by the respective fathers of the young people.”“Sir, my father is a man of great foresight and prudence. Thinking that Imight wish to settle in France, he left me at his departure, together with thepapers establishing my identity, a letter promising, if he approved of mychoice, 150,000 livres per annum from the day I was married. So far as I canjudge, I suppose this to be a quarter of my father’s revenue.”“I,” said Danglars, “have always intended giving my daughter500,000 francs as her dowry; she is, besides, my sole heiress.”“All would then be easily arranged if the baroness and her daughter arewilling. We should command an annuity of 175,000 livres. Supposing, also, Ishould persuade the marquis to give me my capital, which is not likely, butstill is possible, we would place these two or three millions in your hands,whose talent might make it realize ten per cent.”“I never give more than four per cent, and generally only three and ahalf; but to my son-in-law I would give five, and we would share theprofits.”“Very good, father-in-law,” said Cavalcanti, yielding to hislow-born nature, which would escape sometimes through the aristocratic glosswith which he sought to conceal it. Correcting himself immediately, he said,“Excuse me, sir; hope alone makes me almost mad,—what will notreality do?”“But,” said Danglars, who, on his part, did not perceive how soonthe conversation, which was at first disinterested, was turning to a businesstransaction, “there is, doubtless, a part of your fortune your fathercould not refuse you?”“Which?” asked the young man.“That you inherit from your mother.”“Truly, from my mother, Leonora Corsinari.”“How much may it amount to?”“Indeed, sir,” said Andrea, “I assure you I have never giventhe subject a thought, but I suppose it must have been at least twomillions.”Danglars felt as much overcome with joy as the miser who finds a lost treasure,or as the shipwrecked mariner who feels himself on solid ground instead of inthe abyss which he expected would swallow him up.“Well, sir,” said Andrea, bowing to the banker respectfully,“may I hope?”“You may not only hope,” said Danglars, “but consider it asettled thing, if no obstacle arises on your part.”“I am, indeed, rejoiced,” said Andrea.“But,” said Danglars thoughtfully, “how is it that yourpatron, M. de Monte Cristo, did not make his proposal for you?”Andrea blushed imperceptibly.“I have just left the count, sir,” said he; “he is,doubtless, a delightful man but inconceivably peculiar in his ideas. He esteemsme highly. He even told me he had not the slightest doubt that my father wouldgive me the capital instead of the interest of my property. He has promised touse his influence to obtain it for me; but he also declared that he never hadtaken on himself the responsibility of making proposals for another, and henever would. I must, however, do him the justice to add that he assured me ifever he had regretted the repugnance he felt to such a step it was on thisoccasion, because he thought the projected union would be a happy and suitableone. Besides, if he will do nothing officially, he will answer any questionsyou propose to him. And now,” continued he, with one of his most charmingsmiles, “having finished talking to the father-in-law, I must addressmyself to the banker.”“And what may you have to say to him?” said Danglars, laughing inhis turn.“That the day after tomorrow I shall have to draw upon you for about fourthousand francs; but the count, expecting my bachelor’s revenue could notsuffice for the coming month’s outlay, has offered me a draft for twentythousand francs. It bears his signature, as you see, which isall-sufficient.”“Bring me a million such as that,” said Danglars, “I shall bewell pleased,” putting the draft in his pocket. “Fix your own hourfor tomorrow, and my cashier shall call on you with a check for eighty thousandfrancs.”“At ten o’clock then, if you please; I should like it early, as Iam going into the country tomorrow.”“Very well, at ten o’clock; you are still at the Hôtel desPrinces?”“Yes.”The following morning, with the banker’s usual punctuality, the eightythousand francs were placed in the young man’s hands, as he was on thepoint of starting, after having left two hundred francs for Caderousse. He wentout chiefly to avoid this dangerous enemy, and returned as late as possible inthe evening.But scarcely had he stepped out of his carriage when the porter met him with aparcel in his hand.“Sir,” said he, “that man has been here.”“What man?” said Andrea carelessly, apparently forgetting him whomhe but too well recollected.“Him to whom your excellency pays that little annuity.”“Oh,” said Andrea, “my father’s old servant. Well, yougave him the two hundred francs I had left for him?”“Yes, your excellency.” Andrea had expressed a wish to be thusaddressed. “But,” continued the porter, “he would not takethem.”Andrea turned pale, but as it was dark his pallor was not perceptible.“What? he would not take them?” said he with slight emotion.“No, he wished to speak to your excellency; I told him you were gone out,and after some dispute he believed me and gave me this letter, which he hadbrought with him already sealed.”“Give it me,” said Andrea, and he read by the light of hiscarriage-lamp:“‘You know where I live; I expect you tomorrow morning at nineo’clock.’”Andrea examined it carefully, to ascertain if the letter had been opened, or ifany indiscreet eyes had seen its contents; but it was so carefully folded, thatno one could have read it, and the seal was perfect.“Very well,” said he. “Poor man, he is a worthycreature.” He left the porter to ponder on these words, not knowing whichmost to admire, the master or the servant.“Take out the horses quickly, and come up to me,” said Andrea tohis groom. In two seconds the young man had reached his room and burntCaderousse’s letter. The servant entered just as he had finished.“You are about my height, Pierre,” said he.“I have that honor, your excellency.”“You had a new livery yesterday?”“Yes, sir.”“I have an engagement with a pretty little girl for this evening, and donot wish to be known; lend me your livery till tomorrow. I may sleep, perhaps,at an inn.”Pierre obeyed. Five minutes after, Andrea left the hotel, completely disguised,took a cabriolet, and ordered the driver to take him to the Cheval Rouge, atPicpus. The next morning he left that inn as he had left the Hôtel des Princes,without being noticed, walked down the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, along theboulevard to Rue Ménilmontant, and stopping at the door of the third house onthe left looked for someone of whom to make inquiry in the porter’sabsence.“For whom are you looking, my fine fellow?” asked the fruiteress onthe opposite side.“Monsieur Pailletin, if you please, my good woman,” replied Andrea.“A retired baker?” asked the fruiteress.“Exactly.”“He lives at the end of the yard, on the left, on the third story.”Andrea went as she directed him, and on the third floor he found a hare’spaw, which, by the hasty ringing of the bell, it was evident he pulled withconsiderable ill-temper. A moment after Caderousse’s face appeared at thegrating in the door.“Ah! you are punctual,” said he, as he drew back the door.“Confound you and your punctuality!” said Andrea, throwing himselfinto a chair in a manner which implied that he would rather have flung it atthe head of his host.“Come, come, my little fellow, don’t be angry. See, I have thoughtabout you—look at the good breakfast we are going to have; nothing butwhat you are fond of.”Andrea, indeed, inhaled the scent of something cooking which was not unwelcometo him, hungry as he was; it was that mixture of fat and garlic peculiar toProvençal kitchens of an inferior order, added to that of dried fish, and aboveall, the pungent smell of musk and cloves. These odors escaped from two deepdishes which were covered and placed on a stove, and from a copper pan placedin an old iron pot. In an adjoining room Andrea saw also a tolerably cleantable prepared for two, two bottles of wine sealed, the one with green, theother with yellow, a supply of brandy in a decanter, and a measure of fruit ina cabbage-leaf, cleverly arranged on an earthenware plate.“What do you think of it, my little fellow?” said Caderousse.“Ay, that smells good! You know I used to be a good cook; do yourecollect how you used to lick your fingers? You were among the first whotasted any of my dishes, and I think you relished them tolerably.” Whilespeaking, Caderousse went on peeling a fresh supply of onions.“But,” said Andrea, ill-temperedly, “by my faith, if it wasonly to breakfast with you, that you disturbed me, I wish the devil had takenyou!”“My boy,” said Caderousse sententiously, “one can talk whileeating. And then, you ungrateful being, you are not pleased to see an oldfriend? I am weeping with joy.”He was truly crying, but it would have been difficult to say whether joy or theonions produced the greatest effect on the lachrymal glands of the oldinnkeeper of the Pont-du-Gard.“Hold your tongue, hypocrite,” said Andrea; “you loveme!”“Yes, I do, or may the devil take me. I know it is a weakness,”said Caderousse, “but it overpowers me.”“And yet it has not prevented your sending for me to play me sometrick.”“Come,” said Caderousse, wiping his large knife on his apron,“if I did not like you, do you think I should endure the wretched lifeyou lead me? Think for a moment. You have your servant’s clotheson—you therefore keep a servant; I have none, and am obliged to preparemy own meals. You abuse my cookery because you dine at the table d’hôteof the Hôtel des Princes, or the Café de Paris. Well, I too could keep aservant; I too could have a tilbury; I too could dine where I like; but why doI not? Because I would not annoy my little Benedetto. Come, just acknowledgethat I could, eh?”This address was accompanied by a look which was by no means difficult tounderstand.“Well,” said Andrea, “admitting your love, why do you want meto breakfast with you?”“That I may have the pleasure of seeing you, my little fellow.”“What is the use of seeing me after we have made all ourarrangements?”“Eh, dear friend,” said Caderousse, “are wills ever madewithout codicils? But you first came to breakfast, did you not? Well, sit down,and let us begin with these pilchards, and this fresh butter; which I have puton some vine-leaves to please you, wicked one. Ah, yes; you look at my room, myfour straw chairs, my images, three francs each. But what do you expect? Thisis not the Hôtel des Princes.”“Come, you are growing discontented, you are no longer happy; you, whoonly wish to live like a retired baker.”Caderousse sighed.“Well, what have you to say? you have seen your dream realized.”“I can still say it is a dream; a retired baker, my poor Benedetto, isrich—he has an annuity.”“Well, you have an annuity.”“I have?”“Yes, since I bring you your two hundred francs.”Caderousse shrugged his shoulders.“It is humiliating,” said he, “thus to receive money givengrudgingly,—an uncertain supply which may soon fail. You see I am obligedto economize, in case your prosperity should cease. Well, my friend, fortune isinconstant, as the chaplain of the regiment said. I know your prosperity isgreat, you rascal; you are to marry the daughter of Danglars.”“What? of Danglars?”“Yes, to be sure; must I say Baron Danglars? I might as well say CountBenedetto. He was an old friend of mine and if he had not so bad a memory heought to invite me to your wedding, seeing he came to mine. Yes, yes, to mine;gad, he was not so proud then,—he was an under-clerk to the good M.Morrel. I have dined many times with him and the Count of Morcerf, so you see Ihave some high connections and were I to cultivate them a little, we might meetin the same drawing-rooms.”“Come, your jealousy represents everything to you in the wronglight.”“That is all very fine, Benedetto mio, but I know what I am saying.Perhaps I may one day put on my best coat, and presenting myself at the greatgate, introduce myself. Meanwhile let us sit down and eat.”Caderousse set the example and attacked the breakfast with good appetite,praising each dish he set before his visitor. The latter seemed to haveresigned himself; he drew the corks, and partook largely of the fish with thegarlic and fat.“Ah, mate,” said Caderousse, “you are getting on better termswith your old landlord!”“Faith, yes,” replied Andrea, whose hunger prevailed over everyother feeling.“So you like it, you rogue?”“So much that I wonder how a man who can cook thus can complain of hardliving.”“Do you see,” said Caderousse, “all my happiness is marred byone thought?”“What is that?”“That I am dependent on another, I who have always gained my ownlivelihood honestly.”“Do not let that disturb you, I have enough for two.”“No, truly; you may believe me if you will; at the end of every month Iam tormented by remorse.”“Good Caderousse!”“So much so, that yesterday I would not take the two hundredfrancs.”“Yes, you wished to speak to me; but was it indeed remorse, tellme?”“True remorse; and, besides, an idea had struck me.”Andrea shuddered; he always did so at Caderousse’s ideas.“It is miserable—do you see?—always to wait till the end ofthe month.”“Oh,” said Andrea philosophically, determined to watch hiscompanion narrowly, “does not life pass in waiting? Do I, for instance,fare better? Well, I wait patiently, do I not?”“Yes; because instead of expecting two hundred wretched francs, youexpect five or six thousand, perhaps ten, perhaps even twelve, for you takecare not to let anyone know the utmost. Down there, you always had littlepresents and Christmas-boxes, which you tried to hide from your poor friendCaderousse. Fortunately he is a cunning fellow, that friend Caderousse.”“There you are beginning again to ramble, to talk again and again of thepast! But what is the use of teasing me with going all over that again?”“Ah, you are only one-and-twenty, and can forget the past; I am fifty,and am obliged to recollect it. But let us return to business.”“Yes.”“I was going to say, if I were in your place——”“Well.”“I would realize——”“How would you realize?”“I would ask for six months’ in advance, under pretence of beingable to purchase a farm, then with my six months I would decamp.”“Well, well,” said Andrea, “that isn’t a badidea.”“My dear friend,” said Caderousse, “eat of my bread, and takemy advice; you will be none the worse off, physically or morally.”“But,” said Andrea, “why do you not act on the advice yougave me? Why do you not realize a six months’, a year’s advanceeven, and retire to Brussels? Instead of living the retired baker, you mightlive as a bankrupt, using his privileges; that would be very good.”“But how the devil would you have me retire on twelve hundredfrancs?”“Ah, Caderousse,” said Andrea, “how covetous you are! Twomonths ago you were dying with hunger.”“The appetite grows by what it feeds on,” said Caderousse, grinningand showing his teeth, like a monkey laughing or a tiger growling.“And,” added he, biting off with his large white teeth an enormousmouthful of bread, “I have formed a plan.”Caderousse’s plans alarmed Andrea still more than his ideas; ideas werebut the germ, the plan was reality.“Let me see your plan; I dare say it is a pretty one.”“Why not? Who formed the plan by which we left the establishment ofM——! eh? was it not I? and it was no bad one I believe, since herewe are!”“I do not say,” replied Andrea, “that you never make a goodone; but let us see your plan.”“Well,” pursued Caderousse, “can you without expending onesou, put me in the way of getting fifteen thousand francs? No, fifteen thousandare not enough,—I cannot again become an honest man with less than thirtythousand francs.”“No,” replied Andrea, dryly, “no, I cannot.”“I do not think you understand me,” replied Caderousse, calmly;“I said without your laying out a sou.”“Do you want me to commit a robbery, to spoil all my goodfortune—and yours with mine—and both of us to be dragged down thereagain?”“It would make very little difference to me,” said Caderousse,“if I were retaken, I am a poor creature to live alone, and sometimespine for my old comrades; not like you, heartless creature, who would be gladnever to see them again.”Andrea did more than tremble this time, he turned pale.“Come, Caderousse, no nonsense!” said he.“Don’t alarm yourself, my little Benedetto, but just point out tome some means of gaining those thirty thousand francs without your assistance,and I will contrive it.”“Well, I’ll see—I’ll try to contrive some way,”said Andrea.“Meanwhile you will raise my monthly allowance to five hundred francs, mylittle fellow? I have a fancy, and mean to get a housekeeper.”“Well, you shall have your five hundred francs,” said Andrea;“but it is very hard for me, my poor Caderousse—you takeadvantage——”“Bah,” said Caderousse, “when you have access to countlessstores.”One would have said Andrea anticipated his companion’s words, so did hiseye flash like lightning, but it was but for a moment.“True,” he replied, “and my protector is very kind.”“That dear protector,” said Caderousse; “and how much does hegive you monthly?”“Five thousand francs.”“As many thousands as you give me hundreds! Truly, it is only bastardswho are thus fortunate. Five thousand francs per month! What the devil can youdo with all that?”“Oh, it is no trouble to spend that; and I am like you, I wantcapital.”“Capital?—yes—I understand—everyone would likecapital.”“Well, and I shall get it.”“Who will give it to you—your prince?”“Yes, my prince. But unfortunately I must wait.”“You must wait for what?” asked Caderousse.“For his death.”“The death of your prince?”“Yes.”“How so?”“Because he has made his will in my favor.”“Indeed?”“On my honor.”“For how much?”“For five hundred thousand.”“Only that? It’s little enough.”“But so it is.”“No, it cannot be!”“Are you my friend, Caderousse?”“Yes, in life or death.”“Well, I will tell you a secret.”“What is it?”“But remember——”“Ah! pardieu! mute as a carp.”“Well, I think——”Andrea stopped and looked around.“You think? Do not fear; pardieu! we are alone.”“I think I have discovered my father.”“Your true father?”“Yes.”“Not old Cavalcanti?”“No, for he has gone again; the true one, as you say.”“And that father is——”“Well, Caderousse, it is Monte Cristo.”“Bah!”“Yes, you understand, that explains all. He cannot acknowledge me openly,it appears, but he does it through M. Cavalcanti, and gives him fifty thousandfrancs for it.”“Fifty thousand francs for being your father? I would have done it forhalf that, for twenty thousand, for fifteen thousand; why did you not think ofme, ungrateful man?”“Did I know anything about it, when it was all done when I was downthere?”“Ah, truly? And you say that by his will——”“He leaves me five hundred thousand livres.”“Are you sure of it?”“He showed it me; but that is not all—there is a codicil, as I saidjust now.”“Probably.”“And in that codicil he acknowledges me.”“Oh, the good father, the brave father, the very honest father!”said Caderousse, twirling a plate in the air between his two hands.“Now, say if I conceal anything from you?”“No, and your confidence makes you honorable in my opinion; and yourprincely father, is he rich, very rich?”“Yes, he is that; he does not himself know the amount of hisfortune.”“Is it possible?”“It is evident enough to me, who am always at his house. The other day abanker’s clerk brought him fifty thousand francs in a portfolio about thesize of your plate; yesterday his banker brought him a hundred thousand francsin gold.”Caderousse was filled with wonder; the young man’s words sounded to himlike metal, and he thought he could hear the rushing of cascades of louis.“And you go into that house?” cried he briskly.“When I like.”Caderousse was thoughtful for a moment. It was easy to perceive he wasrevolving some unfortunate idea in his mind. Then suddenly,—“How I should like to see all that,” cried he; “how beautifulit must be!”“It is, in fact, magnificent,” said Andrea.“And does he not live in the Champs-Élysées?”“Yes, No. 30.”“Ah,” said Caderousse, “No. 30.”“Yes, a fine house standing alone, between a courtyard and agarden,—you must know it.”“Possibly; but it is not the exterior I care for, it is the interior.What beautiful furniture there must be in it!”“Have you ever seen the Tuileries?”“No.”“Well, it surpasses that.”“It must be worth one’s while to stoop, Andrea, when that good M.Monte Cristo lets fall his purse.”“It is not worthwhile to wait for that,” said Andrea; “moneyis as plentiful in that house as fruit in an orchard.”“But you should take me there one day with you.”“How can I? On what plea?”“You are right; but you have made my mouth water. I must absolutely seeit; I shall find a way.”“No nonsense, Caderousse!”“I will offer myself as floor-polisher.”“The rooms are all carpeted.”“Well, then, I must be contented to imagine it.”“That is the best plan, believe me.”“Try, at least, to give me an idea of what it is.”“How can I?”“Nothing is easier. Is it large?”“Middling.”“How is it arranged?”“Faith, I should require pen, ink, and paper to make a plan.”“They are all here,” said Caderousse, briskly. He fetched from anold secretaire a sheet of white paper and pen and ink. “Here,” saidCaderousse, “draw me all that on the paper, my boy.”Andrea took the pen with an imperceptible smile and began.“The house, as I said, is between the court and the garden; in this way,do you see?” Andrea drew the garden, the court and the house.“High walls?”“Not more than eight or ten feet.”“That is not prudent,” said Caderousse.“In the court are orange-trees in pots, turf, and clumps offlowers.”“And no steel-traps?”“No.”“The stables?”“Are on either side of the gate, which you see there.” And Andreacontinued his plan.“Let us see the ground floor,” said Caderousse.“On the ground floor, dining-room, two drawing-rooms, billiard-room,staircase in the hall, and a little back staircase.”“Windows?”“Magnificent windows, so beautiful, so large, that I believe a man ofyour size should pass through each frame.”“Why the devil have they any stairs with such windows?”“Luxury has everything.”“But shutters?”“Yes, but they are never used. That Count of Monte Cristo is an original,who loves to look at the sky even at night.”“And where do the servants sleep?”“Oh, they have a house to themselves. Picture to yourself a prettycoach-house at the right-hand side where the ladders are kept. Well, over thatcoach-house are the servants’ rooms, with bells corresponding with thedifferent apartments.”“Ah, diable! bells did you say?”“What do you mean?”“Oh, nothing! I only say they cost a load of money to hang, and what isthe use of them, I should like to know?”“There used to be a dog let loose in the yard at night, but it has beentaken to the house at Auteuil, to that you went to, you know.”“Yes.”“I was saying to him only yesterday, ‘You are imprudent, MonsieurCount; for when you go to Auteuil and take your servants the house is leftunprotected.’ ‘Well,’ said he, ‘what next?’‘Well, next, some day you will be robbed.’”“What did he answer?”“He quietly said, ‘What do I care if I am?’”“Andrea, he has some secretaire with a spring.”“How do you know?”“Yes, which catches the thief in a trap and plays a tune. I was toldthere were such at the last exhibition.”“He has simply a mahogany secretaire, in which the key is alwayskept.”“And he is not robbed?”“No; his servants are all devoted to him.”“There ought to be some money in that secretaire?”“There may be. No one knows what there is.”“And where is it?”“On the first floor.”“Sketch me the plan of that floor, as you have done of the ground floor,my boy.”“That is very simple.” Andrea took the pen. “On the firststory, do you see, there is the anteroom and the drawing-room; to the right ofthe drawing-room, a library and a study; to the left, a bedroom and adressing-room. The famous secretaire is in the dressing-room.”“Is there a window in the dressing-room?”“Two,—one here and one there.” Andrea sketched two windows inthe room, which formed an angle on the plan, and appeared as a small squareadded to the rectangle of the bedroom. Caderousse became thoughtful.“Does he often go to Auteuil?” added he.“Two or three times a week. Tomorrow, for instance, he is going to spendthe day and night there.”“Are you sure of it?”“He has invited me to dine there.”“There’s a life for you,” said Caderousse; “a townhouse and a country house.”“That is what it is to be rich.”“And shall you dine there?”“Probably.”“When you dine there, do you sleep there?”“If I like; I am at home there.”Caderousse looked at the young man, as if to get at the truth from the bottomof his heart. But Andrea drew a cigar-case from his pocket, took a Havana,quietly lit it, and began smoking.“When do you want your twelve hundred francs?” said he toCaderousse.“Now, if you have them.” Andrea took five-and-twenty louis from hispocket.“Yellow boys?” said Caderousse; “no, I thank you.”“Oh, you despise them.”“On the contrary, I esteem them, but will not have them.”“You can change them, idiot; gold is worth five sous.”“Exactly; and he who changes them will follow friend Caderousse, layhands on him, and demand what farmers pay him their rent in gold. No nonsense,my good fellow; silver simply, round coins with the head of some monarch orother on them. Anybody may possess a five-franc piece.”“But do you suppose I carry five hundred francs about with me? I shouldwant a porter.”“Well, leave them with your porter; he is to be trusted. I will call forthem.”“Today?”“No, tomorrow; I shall not have time today.”“Well, tomorrow I will leave them when I go to Auteuil.”“May I depend on it?”“Certainly.”“Because I shall secure my housekeeper on the strength of it.”“Now see here, will that be all? Eh? And will you not torment me anymore?”“Never.”Caderousse had become so gloomy that Andrea feared he should be obliged tonotice the change. He redoubled his gayety and carelessness.“How sprightly you are,” said Caderousse; “One would say youwere already in possession of your property.”“No, unfortunately; but when I do obtain it——”“Well?”“I shall remember old friends, I can tell you that.”“Yes, since you have such a good memory.”“What do you want? It looks as if you were trying to fleece me?”“I? What an idea! I, who am going to give you another piece of goodadvice.”“What is it?”“To leave behind you the diamond you have on your finger. We shall bothget into trouble. You will ruin both yourself and me by your folly.”“How so?” said Andrea.“How? You put on a livery, you disguise yourself as a servant, and yetkeep a diamond on your finger worth four or five thousand francs.”“You guess well.”“I know something of diamonds; I have had some.”“You do well to boast of it,” said Andrea, who, without becomingangry, as Caderousse feared, at this new extortion, quietly resigned the ring.Caderousse looked so closely at it that Andrea well knew that he was examiningto see if all the edges were perfect.“It is a false diamond,” said Caderousse.“You are joking now,” replied Andrea.“Do not be angry, we can try it.” Caderousse went to the window,touched the glass with it, and found it would cut.“Confiteor!” said Caderousse, putting the diamond on hislittle finger; “I was mistaken; but those thieves of jewellers imitate sowell that it is no longer worthwhile to rob a jeweller’s shop—it isanother branch of industry paralyzed.”“Have you finished?” said Andrea,—“do you want anythingmore?—will you have my waistcoat or my hat? Make free, now you havebegun.”“No; you are, after all, a good companion; I will not detain you, andwill try to cure myself of my ambition.”“But take care the same thing does not happen to you in selling thediamond you feared with the gold.”“I shall not sell it—do not fear.”“Not at least till the day after tomorrow,” thought the young man.“Happy rogue,” said Caderousse; “you are going to find yourservants, your horses, your carriage, and your betrothed!”“Yes,” said Andrea.“Well, I hope you will make a handsome wedding-present the day you marryMademoiselle Danglars.”“I have already told you it is a fancy you have taken in yourhead.”“What fortune has she?”“But I tell you——”“A million?”Andrea shrugged his shoulders.“Let it be a million,” said Caderousse; “you can never haveso much as I wish you.”“Thank you,” said the young man.“Oh, I wish it you with all my heart!” added Caderousse with hishoarse laugh. “Stop, let me show you the way.”“It is not worthwhile.”“Yes, it is.”“Why?”“Because there is a little secret, a precaution I thought it desirable totake, one of Huret & Fichet’s locks, revised and improved by GaspardCaderousse; I will manufacture you a similar one when you are acapitalist.”“Thank you,” said Andrea; “I will let you know a weekbeforehand.”They parted. Caderousse remained on the landing until he had not only seenAndrea go down the three stories, but also cross the court. Then he returnedhastily, shut his door carefully, and began to study, like a clever architect,the plan Andrea had left him.“Dear Benedetto,” said he, “I think he will not be sorry toinherit his fortune, and he who hastens the day when he can touch his fivehundred thousand will not be his worst friend.” Chapter 82. TheBurglaryThe day following thaton which the conversation we have related took place, the Count of Monte Cristoset out for Auteuil, accompanied by Ali and several attendants, and also takingwith him some horses whose qualities he was desirous of ascertaining. He wasinduced to undertake this journey, of which the day before he had not eventhought and which had not occurred to Andrea either, by the arrival ofBertuccio from Normandy with intelligence respecting the house and sloop. Thehouse was ready, and the sloop which had arrived a week before lay at anchor ina small creek with her crew of six men, who had observed all the requisiteformalities and were ready again to put to sea.The count praised Bertuccio’s zeal, and ordered him to prepare for aspeedy departure, as his stay in France would not be prolonged more than amonth.“Now,” said he, “I may require to go in one night from Paristo Tréport; let eight fresh horses be in readiness on the road, which willenable me to go fifty leagues in ten hours.”“Your highness had already expressed that wish,” said Bertuccio,“and the horses are ready. I have bought them, and stationed them myselfat the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where no one generallystops.”“That’s well,” said Monte Cristo; “I remain here a dayor two—arrange accordingly.”As Bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite orders, Baptistinopened the door: he held a letter on a silver waiter.“What are you doing here?” asked the count, seeing him covered withdust; “I did not send for you, I think?”Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the letter.“Important and urgent,” said he.The count opened the letter, and read:“‘M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enterhis house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some paperssupposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room. The count’swell-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the police, whoseinterference might seriously affect him who sends this advice. The count, byany opening from the bedroom, or by concealing himself in the dressing-room,would be able to defend his property himself. Many attendants or apparentprecautions would prevent the villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristowould lose the opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed tohim who now sends this warning to the count,—a warning he might not beable to send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another bemade.’”The count’s first idea was that this was an artifice—a grossdeception, to draw his attention from a minor danger in order to expose him toa greater. He was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary ofpolice, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps becauseof that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it might be somepersonal enemy, whom he alone should recognize and over whom, if such were thecase, he alone would gain any advantage, as Fiesco[17]had done over the Moor who would have killed him. We know the count’svigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible, with that energywhich marks the great man.From his past life, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the count hadacquired an inconceivable relish for the contests in which he had engaged,sometimes against nature, that is to say, against God, and sometimes againstthe world, that is, against the devil.“They do not want my papers,” said Monte Cristo, “they wantto kill me; they are no robbers, but assassins. I will not allow the prefect ofpolice to interfere with my private affairs. I am rich enough, forsooth, todistribute his authority on this occasion.”The count recalled Baptistin, who had left the room after delivering theletter.“Return to Paris,” said he; “assemble the servants who remainthere. I want all my household at Auteuil.”“But will no one remain in the house, my lord?” asked Baptistin.“Yes, the porter.”“My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance from thehouse.”“Well?”“The house might be stripped without his hearing the least noise.”“By whom?”“By thieves.”“You are a fool, M. Baptistin. Thieves might strip the house—itwould annoy me less than to be disobeyed.” Baptistin bowed.“You understand me?” said the count. “Bring your comradeshere, one and all; but let everything remain as usual, only close the shuttersof the ground floor.”“And those of the first floor?”“You know they are never closed. Go!”The count signified his intention of dining alone, and that no one but Alishould attend him. Having dined with his usual tranquillity and moderation, thecount, making a signal to Ali to follow him, went out by the side-gate and onreaching the Bois de Boulogne turned, apparently without design towards Parisand at twilight; found himself opposite his house in the Champs-Élysées. Allwas dark; one solitary, feeble light was burning in the porter’s lodge,about forty paces distant from the house, as Baptistin had said.Monte Cristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizing glance which wasso rarely deceived, looked up and down the avenue, examined the passers-by, andcarefully looked down the neighboring streets, to see that no one wasconcealed. Ten minutes passed thus, and he was convinced that no one waswatching him. He hastened to the side-door with Ali, entered hurriedly, and bythe servants’ staircase, of which he had the key, gained his bedroomwithout opening or disarranging a single curtain, without even the porterhaving the slightest suspicion that the house, which he supposed empty,contained its chief occupant.Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop; then he passed intothe dressing-room, which he examined. Everything appeared as usual—theprecious secretaire in its place, and the key in the secretaire. He doublelocked it, took the key, returned to the bedroom door, removed the doublestaple of the bolt, and went in. Meanwhile Ali had procured the arms the countrequired—namely, a short carbine and a pair of double-barrelled pistols,with which as sure an aim might be taken as with a single-barrelled one. Thusarmed, the count held the lives of five men in his hands. It was abouthalf-past nine.The count and Ali ate in haste a crust of bread and drank a glass of Spanishwine; then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable panels, which enabledhim to see into the adjoining room. He had within his reach his pistols andcarbine, and Ali, standing near him, held one of the small Arabian hatchets,whose form has not varied since the Crusades. Through one of the windows of thebedroom, on a line with that in the dressing-room, the count could see into thestreet.Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali, thanks to his wildnature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement, coulddistinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees. The littlelight in the lodge had long been extinct. It might be expected that the attack,if indeed an attack was projected, would be made from the staircase of theground floor, and not from a window; in Monte Cristo’s opinion, thevillains sought his life, not his money. It would be his bedroom they wouldattack, and they must reach it by the back staircase, or by the window in thedressing-room.The clock of the Invalides struck a quarter to twelve; the west wind bore onits moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a slight noise in thedressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding, was followed bya second, then a third; at the fourth, the count knew what to expect. A firmand well-practised hand was engaged in cutting the four sides of a pane ofglass with a diamond. The count felt his heart beat more rapidly.Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril, theyunderstand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of the frame, theenormous difference between a dream and a reality, between the project and theexecution. However, Monte Cristo only made a sign to apprise Ali, who,understanding that danger was approaching from the other side, drew nearer tohis master. Monte Cristo was eager to ascertain the strength and number of hisenemies.The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which thecount could see into the dressing-room. He fixed his eyes on thatwindow—he distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the panesbecame quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside, then thesquare cracked without falling. Through the opening an arm was passed to findthe fastening, then a second; the window turned on its hinges, and a manentered. He was alone.“That’s a daring rascal,” whispered the count.At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. He turned; Ali pointedto the window of the room in which they were, facing the street.“I see!” said he, “there are two of them; one does the workwhile the other stands guard.” He made a sign to Ali not to lose sight ofthe man in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms stretched outbefore him. At last he appeared to have made himself familiar with hissurroundings. There were two doors; he bolted them both.When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he was comingin, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the sound of the boltssliding in their copper rings. It was only a precaution. The nocturnal visitor,ignorant of the fact that the count had removed the staples, might now thinkhimself at home, and pursue his purpose with full security. Alone and free toact as he wished, the man then drew from his pocket something which the countcould not discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to the secretaire,felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation found that the key was missing.But the glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for all emergencies.The count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of skeleton keys, such as thelocksmith brings when called to force a lock, and which thieves callnightingales, doubtless from the music of their nightly song when they grindagainst the bolt.“Ah, ha,” whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment,“he is only a thief.”But the man in the dark could not find the right key. He reached the instrumenthe had placed on the stand, touched a spring, and immediately a pale light,just bright enough to render objects distinct, was reflected on his hands andcountenance.“By heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting back, “itis——”Ali raised his hatchet.“Don’t stir,” whispered Monte Cristo, “and put downyour hatchet; we shall require no arms.”Then he added some words in a low tone, for the exclamation which surprise haddrawn from the count, faint as it had been, had startled the man who remainedin the pose of the old knife-grinder.It was an order the count had just given, for immediately Ali went noiselessly,and returned, bearing a black dress and a three-cornered hat. Meanwhile MonteCristo had rapidly taken off his greatcoat, waistcoat, and shirt, and one mightdistinguish by the glimmering through the open panel that he wore a plianttunic of steel mail, of which the last in France, where daggers are no longerdreaded, was worn by King Louis XVI., who feared the dagger at his breast, andwhose head was cleft with a hatchet. The tunic soon disappeared under a longcassock, as did his hair under a priest’s wig; the three-cornered hatover this effectually transformed the count into an abbé.The man, hearing nothing more, stood erect, and while Monte Cristo wascompleting his disguise had advanced straight to the secretaire, whose lock wasbeginning to crack under his nightingale.“Try again,” whispered the count, who depended on the secretspring, which was unknown to the picklock, clever as he mightbe—“try again, you have a few minutes’ work there.”And he advanced to the window. The man whom he had seen seated on a fence hadgot down, and was still pacing the street; but, strange as it appeared, hecared not for those who might pass from the avenue of the Champs-Élysées or bythe Faubourg Saint-Honoré; his attention was engrossed with what was passing atthe count’s, and his only aim appeared to be to discern every movement inthe dressing-room.Monte Cristo suddenly struck his finger on his forehead and a smile passed overhis lips; then drawing near to Ali, he whispered:“Remain here, concealed in the dark, and whatever noise you hear,whatever passes, only come in or show yourself if I call you.”Ali bowed in token of strict obedience. Monte Cristo then drew a lighted taperfrom a closet, and when the thief was deeply engaged with his lock, silentlyopened the door, taking care that the light should shine directly on his face.The door opened so quietly that the thief heard no sound; but, to hisastonishment, the room was suddenly illuminated. He turned.“Ah, good-evening, my dear M. Caderousse,” said Monte Cristo;“what are you doing here, at such an hour?”“The Abbé Busoni!” exclaimed Caderousse; and, not knowing how thisstrange apparition could have entered when he had bolted the doors, he let fallhis bunch of keys, and remained motionless and stupefied. The count placedhimself between Caderousse and the window, thus cutting off from the thief hisonly chance of retreat.“The Abbé Busoni!” repeated Caderousse, fixing his haggard gaze onthe count.“Yes, undoubtedly, the Abbé Busoni himself,” replied Monte Cristo.“And I am very glad you recognize me, dear M. Caderousse; it proves youhave a good memory, for it must be about ten years since we last met.”This calmness of Busoni, combined with his irony and boldness, staggeredCaderousse.“The abbé, the abbé!” murmured he, clenching his fists, and histeeth chattering.“So you would rob the Count of Monte Cristo?” continued the falseabbé.“Reverend sir,” murmured Caderousse, seeking to regain the window,which the count pitilessly blocked—“reverend sir, I don’tknow—believe me—I take my oath——”“A pane of glass out,” continued the count, “a dark lantern,a bunch of false keys, a secretaire half forced—it is tolerablyevident——”Caderousse was choking; he looked around for some corner to hide in, some wayof escape.“Come, come,” continued the count, “I see you are still thesame,—an assassin.”“Reverend sir, since you know everything, you know it was not I—itwas La Carconte; that was proved at the trial, since I was only condemned tothe galleys.”“Is your time, then, expired, since I find you in a fair way to returnthere?”“No, reverend sir; I have been liberated by someone.”“That someone has done society a great kindness.”“Ah,” said Caderousse, “I had promised——”“And you are breaking your promise!” interrupted Monte Cristo.“Alas, yes!” said Caderousse very uneasily.“A bad relapse, that will lead you, if I mistake not, to the Place deGrève. So much the worse, so much the worse—diavolo! as they sayin my country.”“Reverend sir, I am impelled——”“Every criminal says the same thing.”“Poverty——”“Pshaw!” said Busoni disdainfully; “poverty may make a manbeg, steal a loaf of bread at a baker’s door, but not cause him to open asecretaire in a house supposed to be inhabited. And when the jeweller Johanneshad just paid you 45,000 francs for the diamond I had given you, and you killedhim to get the diamond and the money both, was that also poverty?”“Pardon, reverend sir,” said Caderousse; “you have saved mylife once, save me again!”“That is but poor encouragement.”“Are you alone, reverend sir, or have you there soldiers ready to seizeme?”“I am alone,” said the abbé, “and I will again have pity onyou, and will let you escape, at the risk of the fresh miseries my weakness maylead to, if you tell me the truth.”“Ah, reverend sir,” cried Caderousse, clasping his hands, anddrawing nearer to Monte Cristo, “I may indeed say you are mydeliverer!”“You mean to say you have been freed from confinement?”“Yes, that is true, reverend sir.”“Who was your liberator?”“An Englishman.”“What was his name?”“Lord Wilmore.”“I know him; I shall know if you lie.”“Ah, reverend sir, I tell you the simple truth.”“Was this Englishman protecting you?”“No, not me, but a young Corsican, my companion.”“What was this young Corsican’s name?”“Benedetto.”“Is that his Christian name?”“He had no other; he was a foundling.”“Then this young man escaped with you?”“He did.”“In what way?”“We were working at Saint-Mandrier, near Toulon. Do you knowSaint-Mandrier?”“I do.”“In the hour of rest, between noon and oneo’clock——”“Galley-slaves having a nap after dinner! We may well pity the poorfellows!” said the abbé.“Nay,” said Caderousse, “one can’t alwayswork—one is not a dog.”“So much the better for the dogs,” said Monte Cristo.“While the rest slept, then, we went away a short distance; we severedour fetters with a file the Englishman had given us, and swam away.”“And what is become of this Benedetto?”“I don’t know.”“You ought to know.”“No, in truth; we parted at Hyères.” And, to give more weight tohis protestation, Caderousse advanced another step towards the abbé, whoremained motionless in his place, as calm as ever, and pursuing hisinterrogation.“You lie,” said the Abbé Busoni, with a tone of irresistibleauthority.“Reverend sir!”“You lie! This man is still your friend, and you, perhaps, make use ofhim as your accomplice.”“Oh, reverend sir!”“Since you left Toulon what have you lived on? Answer me!”“On what I could get.”“You lie,” repeated the abbé a third time, with a still moreimperative tone. Caderousse, terrified, looked at the count. “You havelived on the money he has given you.”“True,” said Caderousse; “Benedetto has become the son of agreat lord.”“How can he be the son of a great lord?”“A natural son.”“And what is that great lord’s name?”“The Count of Monte Cristo, the very same in whose house we are.”“Benedetto the count’s son?” replied Monte Cristo, astonishedin his turn.“Well, I should think so, since the count has found him a falsefather—since the count gives him four thousand francs a month, and leaveshim 500,000 francs in his will.”“Ah, yes,” said the factitious abbé, who began to understand;“and what name does the young man bear meanwhile?”“Andrea Cavalcanti.”“Is it, then, that young man whom my friend the Count of Monte Cristo hasreceived into his house, and who is going to marry MademoiselleDanglars?”“Exactly.”“And you suffer that, you wretch!—you, who know his life and hiscrime?”“Why should I stand in a comrade’s way?” said Caderousse.“You are right; it is not you who should apprise M. Danglars, it isI.”“Do not do so, reverend sir.”“Why not?”“Because you would bring us to ruin.”“And you think that to save such villains as you I will become an abettorof their plot, an accomplice in their crimes?”“Reverend sir,” said Caderousse, drawing still nearer.“I will expose all.”“To whom?”“To M. Danglars.”“By Heaven!” cried Caderousse, drawing from his waistcoat an openknife, and striking the count in the breast, “you shall disclose nothing,reverend sir!”To Caderousse’s great astonishment, the knife, instead of piercing thecount’s breast, flew back blunted. At the same moment the count seizedwith his left hand the assassin’s wrist, and wrung it with such strengththat the knife fell from his stiffened fingers, and Caderousse uttered a cry ofpain. But the count, disregarding his cry, continued to wring thebandit’s wrist, until, his arm being dislocated, he fell first on hisknees, then flat on the floor.The count then placed his foot on his head, saying, “I know not whatrestrains me from crushing thy skull, rascal.”“Ah, mercy—mercy!” cried Caderousse.The count withdrew his foot.“Rise!” said he. Caderousse rose.“What a wrist you have, reverend sir!” said Caderousse, strokinghis arm, all bruised by the fleshy pincers which had held it; “what awrist!”“Silence! God gives me strength to overcome a wild beast like you; in thename of that God I act,—remember that, wretch,—and to spare thee atthis moment is still serving him.”“Oh!” said Caderousse, groaning with pain.“Take this pen and paper, and write what I dictate.”“I don’t know how to write, reverend sir.”“You lie! Take this pen, and write!”Caderousse, awed by the superior power of the abbé, sat down and wrote:“Sir,—The man whom you are receiving at your house, and to whom youintend to marry your daughter, is a felon who escaped with me from confinementat Toulon. He was No. 59, and I No. 58. He was called Benedetto, but he isignorant of his real name, having never known his parents.”“Sign it!” continued the count.“But would you ruin me?”“If I sought your ruin, fool, I should drag you to the first guard-house;besides, when that note is delivered, in all probability you will have no moreto fear. Sign it, then!”Caderousse signed it.“The address, ‘To monsieur the Baron Danglars, banker, Rue de laChaussée d’Antin.’”Caderousse wrote the address. The abbé took the note.“Now,” said he, “that suffices—begone!”“Which way?”“The way you came.”“You wish me to get out at that window?”“You got in very well.”“Oh, you have some design against me, reverend sir.”“Idiot! what design can I have?”“Why, then, not let me out by the door?”“What would be the advantage of waking the porter?”“Ah, reverend sir, tell me, do you wish me dead?”“I wish what God wills.”“But swear that you will not strike me as I go down.”“Cowardly fool!”“What do you intend doing with me?”“I ask you what can I do? I have tried to make you a happy man, and youhave turned out a murderer.”“Oh, monsieur,” said Caderousse, “make one moreattempt—try me once more!”“I will,” said the count. “Listen—you know if I may berelied on.”“Yes,” said Caderousse.“If you arrive safely at home——”“What have I to fear, except from you?”“If you reach your home safely, leave Paris, leave France, and whereveryou may be, so long as you conduct yourself well, I will send you a smallannuity; for, if you return home safely, then——”“Then?” asked Caderousse, shuddering.“Then I shall believe God has forgiven you, and I will forgive youtoo.”“As true as I am a Christian,” stammered Caderousse, “youwill make me die of fright!”“Now begone,” said the count, pointing to the window.Caderousse, scarcely yet relying on this promise, put his legs out of thewindow and stood on the ladder.“Now go down,” said the abbé, folding his arms. Understanding hehad nothing more to fear from him, Caderousse began to go down. Then the countbrought the taper to the window, that it might be seen in the Champs-Élyséesthat a man was getting out of the window while another held a light.“What are you doing, reverend sir? Suppose a watchman should pass?”And he blew out the light. He then descended, but it was only when he felt hisfoot touch the ground that he was satisfied of his safety.Monte Cristo returned to his bedroom, and, glancing rapidly from the garden tothe street, he saw first Caderousse, who after walking to the end of thegarden, fixed his ladder against the wall at a different part from where hecame in. The count then looking over into the street, saw the man who appearedto be waiting run in the same direction, and place himself against the angle ofthe wall where Caderousse would come over. Caderousse climbed the ladderslowly, and looked over the coping to see if the street was quiet. No one couldbe seen or heard. The clock of the Invalides struck one. Then Caderousse satastride the coping, and drawing up his ladder passed it over the wall; then hebegan to descend, or rather to slide down by the two stanchions, which he didwith an ease which proved how accustomed he was to the exercise. But, oncestarted, he could not stop. In vain did he see a man start from the shadow whenhe was halfway down—in vain did he see an arm raised as he touched theground.Before he could defend himself that arm struck him so violently in the backthat he let go the ladder, crying, “Help!” A second blow struck himalmost immediately in the side, and he fell, calling, “Help,murder!” Then, as he rolled on the ground, his adversary seized him bythe hair, and struck him a third blow in the chest.This time Caderousse endeavored to call again, but he could only utter a groan,and he shuddered as the blood flowed from his three wounds. The assassin,finding that he no longer cried out, lifted his head up by the hair; his eyeswere closed, and the mouth was distorted. The murderer, supposing him dead, letfall his head and disappeared.Then Caderousse, feeling that he was leaving him, raised himself on his elbow,and with a dying voice cried with great effort:“Murder! I am dying! Help, reverend sir,—help!”This mournful appeal pierced the darkness. The door of the back-staircaseopened, then the side-gate of the garden, and Ali and his master were on thespot with lights. Chapter 83. The Hand ofGodCaderousse continued tocall piteously, “Help, reverend sir, help!”“What is the matter?” asked Monte Cristo.“Help,” cried Caderousse; “I am murdered!”“We are here;—take courage.”“Ah, it’s all over! You are come too late—you are come to seeme die. What blows, what blood!”He fainted. Ali and his master conveyed the wounded man into a room. MonteCristo motioned to Ali to undress him, and he then examined his dreadfulwounds.“My God!” he exclaimed, “thy vengeance is sometimes delayed,but only that it may fall the more effectually.” Ali looked at his masterfor further instructions. “Bring here immediately the king’sattorney, M. de Villefort, who lives in the Faubourg Saint-Honoré. As you passthe lodge, wake the porter, and send him for a surgeon.”Ali obeyed, leaving the abbé alone with Caderousse, who had not yet revived.When the wretched man again opened his eyes, the count looked at him with amournful expression of pity, and his lips moved as if in prayer. “Asurgeon, reverend sir—a surgeon!” said Caderousse.“I have sent for one,” replied the abbé.“I know he cannot save my life, but he may strengthen me to give myevidence.”“Against whom?”“Against my murderer.”“Did you recognize him?”“Yes; it was Benedetto.”“The young Corsican?”“Himself.”“Your comrade?”“Yes. After giving me the plan of this house, doubtless hoping I shouldkill the count and he thus become his heir, or that the count would kill me andI should be out of his way, he waylaid me, and has murdered me.”“I have also sent for the procureur.”“He will not come in time; I feel my life fast ebbing.”“Wait a moment,” said Monte Cristo. He left the room, and returnedin five minutes with a phial. The dying man’s eyes were all the timeriveted on the door, through which he hoped succor would arrive.“Hasten, reverend sir, hasten! I shall faint again!” Monte Cristoapproached, and dropped on his purple lips three or four drops of the contentsof the phial. Caderousse drew a deep breath. “Oh,” said he,“that is life to me; more, more!”“Two drops more would kill you,” replied the abbé.“Oh, send for someone to whom I can denounce the wretch!”“Shall I write your deposition? You can sign it.”“Yes, yes,” said Caderousse; and his eyes glistened at the thoughtof this posthumous revenge. Monte Cristo wrote:“I die, murdered by the Corsican Benedetto, my comrade in the galleys atToulon, No. 59.”“Quick, quick!” said Caderousse, “or I shall be unable tosign it.”Monte Cristo gave the pen to Caderousse, who collected all his strength, signedit, and fell back on his bed, saying:“You will relate all the rest, reverend sir; you will say he callshimself Andrea Cavalcanti. He lodges at the Hôtel des Princes. Oh, I amdying!” He again fainted. The abbé made him smell the contents of thephial, and he again opened his eyes. His desire for revenge had not forsakenhim.“Ah, you will tell all I have said, will you not, reverend sir?”“Yes, and much more.”“What more will you say?”“I will say he had doubtless given you the plan of this house, in thehope the count would kill you. I will say, likewise, he had apprised the count,by a note, of your intention, and, the count being absent, I read the note andsat up to await you.”“And he will be guillotined, will he not?” said Caderousse.“Promise me that, and I will die with that hope.”“I will say,” continued the count, “that he followed andwatched you the whole time, and when he saw you leave the house, ran to theangle of the wall to conceal himself.”“Did you see all that?”“Remember my words: ‘If you return home safely, I shall believe Godhas forgiven you, and I will forgive you also.’”“And you did not warn me!” cried Caderousse, raising himself on hiselbows. “You knew I should be killed on leaving this house, and did notwarn me!”“No; for I saw God’s justice placed in the hands of Benedetto, andshould have thought it sacrilege to oppose the designs of Providence.”“God’s justice! Speak not of it, reverend sir. If God were just,you know how many would be punished who now escape.”“Patience,” said the abbé, in a tone which made the dying manshudder; “have patience!”Caderousse looked at him with amazement.“Besides,” said the abbé, “God is merciful to all, as he hasbeen to you; he is first a father, then a judge.”“Do you then believe in God?” said Caderousse.“Had I been so unhappy as not to believe in him until now,” saidMonte Cristo, “I must believe on seeing you.”Caderousse raised his clenched hands towards heaven.“Listen,” said the abbé, extending his hand over the wounded man,as if to command him to believe; “this is what the God in whom, on yourdeath-bed, you refuse to believe, has done for you—he gave you health,strength, regular employment, even friends—a life, in fact, which a manmight enjoy with a calm conscience. Instead of improving these gifts, rarelygranted so abundantly, this has been your course—you have given yourselfup to sloth and drunkenness, and in a fit of intoxication have ruined your bestfriend.”“Help!” cried Caderousse; “I require a surgeon, not a priest;perhaps I am not mortally wounded—I may not die; perhaps they can yetsave my life.”“Your wounds are so far mortal that, without the three drops I gave you,you would now be dead. Listen, then.”“Ah,” murmured Caderousse, “what a strange priest you are;you drive the dying to despair, instead of consoling them.”“Listen,” continued the abbé. “When you had betrayed yourfriend, God began not to strike, but to warn you. Poverty overtook you. You hadalready passed half your life in coveting that which you might have honorablyacquired; and already you contemplated crime under the excuse of want, when Godworked a miracle in your behalf, sending you, by my hands, afortune—brilliant, indeed, for you, who had never possessed any. But thisunexpected, unhoped-for, unheard-of fortune sufficed you no longer when youonce possessed it; you wished to double it, and how?—by a murder! Yousucceeded, and then God snatched it from you, and brought you tojustice.”“It was not I who wished to kill the Jew,” said Caderousse;“it was La Carconte.”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “and God,—I cannot say injustice, for his justice would have slain you,—but God, in his mercy,spared your life.”“Pardieu! to transport me for life, how merciful!”“You thought it a mercy then, miserable wretch! The coward who feareddeath rejoiced at perpetual disgrace; for like all galley-slaves, you said,‘I may escape from prison, I cannot from the grave.’ And you saidtruly; the way was opened for you unexpectedly. An Englishman visited Toulon,who had vowed to rescue two men from infamy, and his choice fell on you andyour companion. You received a second fortune, money and tranquillity wererestored to you, and you, who had been condemned to a felon’s life, mightlive as other men. Then, wretched creature, then you tempted God a third time.‘I have not enough,’ you said, when you had more than you beforepossessed, and you committed a third crime, without reason, without excuse. Godis wearied; he has punished you.”Caderousse was fast sinking. “Give me drink,” said he: “Ithirst—I burn!” Monte Cristo gave him a glass of water. “Andyet that villain, Benedetto, will escape!”“No one, I tell you, will escape; Benedetto will be punished.”“Then, you, too, will be punished, for you did not do your duty as apriest—you should have prevented Benedetto from killing me.”“I?” said the count, with a smile which petrified the dying man,“when you had just broken your knife against the coat of mail whichprotected my breast! Yet perhaps if I had found you humble and penitent, Imight have prevented Benedetto from killing you; but I found you proud andblood-thirsty, and I left you in the hands of God.”“I do not believe there is a God,” howled Caderousse; “you donot believe it; you lie—you lie!”“Silence,” said the abbé; “you will force the last drop ofblood from your veins. What! you do not believe in God when he is striking youdead? you will not believe in him, who requires but a prayer, a word, a tear,and he will forgive? God, who might have directed the assassin’s daggerso as to end your career in a moment, has given you this quarter of an hour forrepentance. Reflect, then, wretched man, and repent.”“No,” said Caderousse, “no; I will not repent. There is noGod; there is no Providence—all comes by chance.”“There is a Providence; there is a God,” said Monte Cristo,“of whom you are a striking proof, as you lie in utter despair, denyinghim, while I stand before you, rich, happy, safe and entreating that God inwhom you endeavor not to believe, while in your heart you still believe inhim.”“But who are you, then?” asked Caderousse, fixing his dying eyes onthe count.“Look well at me!” said Monte Cristo, putting the light near hisface.“Well, the abbé—the Abbé Busoni.” Monte Cristo took off thewig which disfigured him, and let fall his black hair, which added so much tothe beauty of his pallid features.“Oh?” said Caderousse, thunderstruck, “but for that blackhair, I should say you were the Englishman, Lord Wilmore.”“I am neither the Abbé Busoni nor Lord Wilmore,” said Monte Cristo;“think again,—do you not recollect me?”There was a magic effect in the count’s words, which once more revivedthe exhausted powers of the miserable man.“Yes, indeed,” said he; “I think I have seen you and knownyou formerly.”“Yes, Caderousse, you have seen me; you knew me once.”“Who, then, are you? and why, if you knew me, do you let me die?”“Because nothing can save you; your wounds are mortal. Had it beenpossible to save you, I should have considered it another proof of God’smercy, and I would again have endeavored to restore you, I swear by myfather’s tomb.”“By your father’s tomb!” said Caderousse, supported by asupernatural power, and half-raising himself to see more distinctly the man whohad just taken the oath which all men hold sacred; “who, then, areyou?”The count had watched the approach of death. He knew this was the laststruggle. He approached the dying man, and, leaning over him with a calm andmelancholy look, he whispered, “I am—I am——”And his almost closed lips uttered a name so low that the count himselfappeared afraid to hear it. Caderousse, who had raised himself on his knees,and stretched out his arm, tried to draw back, then clasping his hands, andraising them with a desperate effort, “Oh, my God, my God!” saidhe, “pardon me for having denied thee; thou dost exist, thou art indeedman’s father in heaven, and his judge on earth. My God, my Lord, I havelong despised thee! Pardon me, my God; receive me, Oh, my Lord!”Caderousse sighed deeply, and fell back with a groan. The blood no longerflowed from his wounds. He was dead.“One!” said the count mysteriously, his eyes fixed on thecorpse, disfigured by so awful a death.Ten minutes afterwards the surgeon and the procureur arrived, the oneaccompanied by the porter, the other by Ali, and were received by the AbbéBusoni, who was praying by the side of the corpse. Chapter 84. BeauchampThe daring attempt torob the count was the topic of conversation throughout Paris for the nextfortnight. The dying man had signed a deposition declaring Benedetto to be theassassin. The police had orders to make the strictest search for the murderer.Caderousse’s knife, dark lantern, bunch of keys, and clothing, exceptingthe waistcoat, which could not be found, were deposited at the registry; thecorpse was conveyed to the morgue. The count told everyone that this adventurehad happened during his absence at Auteuil, and that he only knew what wasrelated by the Abbé Busoni, who that evening, by mere chance, had requested topass the night in his house, to examine some valuable books in his library.Bertuccio alone turned pale whenever Benedetto’s name was mentioned inhis presence, but there was no reason why anyone should notice his doing so.Villefort, being called on to prove the crime, was preparing his brief with thesame ardor that he was accustomed to exercise when required to speak incriminal cases.But three weeks had already passed, and the most diligent search had beenunsuccessful; the attempted robbery and the murder of the robber by his comradewere almost forgotten in anticipation of the approaching marriage ofMademoiselle Danglars to the Count Andrea Cavalcanti. It was expected that thiswedding would shortly take place, as the young man was received at thebanker’s as the betrothed.Letters had been despatched to M. Cavalcanti, as the count’s father, whohighly approved of the union, regretted his inability to leave Parma at thattime, and promised a wedding gift of a hundred and fifty thousand livres. Itwas agreed that the three millions should be intrusted to Danglars to invest;some persons had warned the young man of the circumstances of his futurefather-in-law, who had of late sustained repeated losses; but with sublimedisinterestedness and confidence the young man refused to listen, or to expressa single doubt to the baron.The baron adored Count Andrea Cavalcanti; not so Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars.With an instinctive hatred of matrimony, she suffered Andrea’s attentionsin order to get rid of Morcerf; but when Andrea urged his suit, she betrayed anentire dislike to him. The baron might possibly have perceived it, but,attributing it to a caprice, feigned ignorance.The delay demanded by Beauchamp had nearly expired. Morcerf appreciated theadvice of Monte Cristo to let things die away of their own accord. No one hadtaken up the remark about the general, and no one had recognized in the officerwho betrayed the castle of Yanina the noble count in the House of Peers.Albert, however, felt no less insulted; the few lines which had irritated himwere certainly intended as an insult. Besides, the manner in which Beauchamphad closed the conference left a bitter recollection in his heart. He cherishedthe thought of the duel, hoping to conceal its true cause even from hisseconds. Beauchamp had not been seen since the day he visited Albert, and thoseof whom the latter inquired always told him he was out on a journey which woulddetain him some days. Where he was no one knew.One morning Albert was awakened by his valet de chambre, who announcedBeauchamp. Albert rubbed his eyes, ordered his servant to introduce him intothe small smoking-room on the ground floor, dressed himself quickly, and wentdown.He found Beauchamp pacing the room; on perceiving him Beauchamp stopped.“Your arrival here, without waiting my visit at your house today, lookswell, sir,” said Albert. “Tell me, may I shake hands with you,saying, ‘Beauchamp, acknowledge you have injured me, and retain myfriendship,’ or must I simply propose to you a choice of arms?”“Albert,” said Beauchamp, with a look of sorrow which stupefied theyoung man, “let us first sit down and talk.”“Rather, sir, before we sit down, I must demand your answer.”“Albert,” said the journalist, “these are questions which itis difficult to answer.”“I will facilitate it by repeating the question, ‘Will you, or willyou not, retract?’”“Morcerf, it is not enough to answer ‘yes’ or‘no’ to questions which concern the honor, the social interest, andthe life of such a man as Lieutenant-général the Count of Morcerf, peer ofFrance.”“What must then be done?”“What I have done, Albert. I reasoned thus—money, time, and fatigueare nothing compared with the reputation and interests of a whole family;probabilities will not suffice, only facts will justify a deadly combat with afriend. If I strike with the sword, or discharge the contents of a pistol atman with whom, for three years, I have been on terms of intimacy, I must, atleast, know why I do so; I must meet him with a heart at ease, and that quietconscience which a man needs when his own arm must save his life.”“Well,” said Morcerf, impatiently, “what does all thismean?”“It means that I have just returned from Yanina.”“From Yanina?”“Yes.”“Impossible!”“Here is my passport; examine the visa—Geneva, Milan, Venice,Trieste, Delvino, Yanina. Will you believe the government of a republic, akingdom, and an empire?” Albert cast his eyes on the passport, thenraised them in astonishment to Beauchamp.“You have been to Yanina?” said he.“Albert, had you been a stranger, a foreigner, a simple lord, like thatEnglishman who came to demand satisfaction three or four months since, and whomI killed to get rid of, I should not have taken this trouble; but I thoughtthis mark of consideration due to you. I took a week to go, another to return,four days of quarantine, and forty-eight hours to stay there; that makes threeweeks. I returned last night, and here I am.”“What circumlocution! How long you are before you tell me what I mostwish to know?”“Because, in truth, Albert——”“You hesitate?”“Yes,—I fear.”“You fear to acknowledge that your correspondent has deceived you? Oh, noself-love, Beauchamp. Acknowledge it, Beauchamp; your courage cannot bedoubted.”“Not so,” murmured the journalist; “on thecontrary——”Albert turned frightfully pale; he endeavored to speak, but the words died onhis lips.“My friend,” said Beauchamp, in the most affectionate tone,“I should gladly make an apology; but, alas!——”“But what?”“The paragraph was correct, my friend.”“What? That French officer——”“Yes.”“Fernand?”“Yes.”“The traitor who surrendered the castle of the man in whose service hewas——”“Pardon me, my friend, that man was your father!”Albert advanced furiously towards Beauchamp, but the latter restrained him moreby a mild look than by his extended hand.“My friend,” said he, “here is a proof of it.”Albert opened the paper, it was an attestation of four notable inhabitants ofYanina, proving that Colonel Fernand Mondego, in the service of Ali Tepelini,had surrendered the castle for two million crowns. The signatures wereperfectly legal. Albert tottered and fell overpowered in a chair. It could nolonger be doubted; the family name was fully given. After a moment’smournful silence, his heart overflowed, and he gave way to a flood of tears.Beauchamp, who had watched with sincere pity the young man’s paroxysm ofgrief, approached him.“Now, Albert,” said he, “you understand me—do you not?I wished to see all, and to judge of everything for myself, hoping theexplanation would be in your father’s favor, and that I might do himjustice. But, on the contrary, the particulars which are given prove thatFernand Mondego, raised by Ali Pasha to the rank of governor-general, is noother than Count Fernand of Morcerf; then, recollecting the honor you had doneme, in admitting me to your friendship, I hastened to you.”Albert, still extended on the chair, covered his face with both hands, as if toprevent the light from reaching him.“I hastened to you,” continued Beauchamp, “to tell you,Albert, that in this changing age, the faults of a father cannot revert uponhis children. Few have passed through this revolutionary period, in the midstof which we were born, without some stain of infamy or blood to soil theuniform of the soldier, or the gown of the magistrate. Now I have these proofs,Albert, and I am in your confidence, no human power can force me to a duelwhich your own conscience would reproach you with as criminal, but I come tooffer you what you can no longer demand of me. Do you wish these proofs, theseattestations, which I alone possess, to be destroyed? Do you wish thisfrightful secret to remain with us? Confided to me, it shall never escape mylips; say, Albert, my friend, do you wish it?”Albert threw himself on Beauchamp’s neck.“Ah, noble fellow!” cried he.“Take these,” said Beauchamp, presenting the papers to Albert.Albert seized them with a convulsive hand, tore them in pieces, and tremblinglest the least vestige should escape and one day appear to confront him, heapproached the wax-light, always kept burning for cigars, and burned everyfragment.“Dear, excellent friend,” murmured Albert, still burning thepapers.“Let all be forgotten as a sorrowful dream,” said Beauchamp;“let it vanish as the last sparks from the blackened paper, and disappearas the smoke from those silent ashes.”“Yes, yes,” said Albert, “and may there remain only theeternal friendship which I promised to my deliverer, which shall be transmittedto our children’s children, and shall always remind me that I owe my lifeand the honor of my name to you,—for had this been known, oh, Beauchamp,I should have destroyed myself; or,—no, my poor mother! I could not havekilled her by the same blow,—I should have fled from my country.”“Dear Albert,” said Beauchamp. But this sudden and factitious joysoon forsook the young man, and was succeeded by a still greater grief.“Well,” said Beauchamp, “what still oppresses you, myfriend?”“I am broken-hearted,” said Albert. “Listen, Beauchamp! Icannot thus, in a moment relinquish the respect, the confidence, and pride withwhich a father’s untarnished name inspires a son. Oh, Beauchamp,Beauchamp, how shall I now approach mine? Shall I draw back my forehead fromhis embrace, or withhold my hand from his? I am the most wretched of men. Ah,my mother, my poor mother!” said Albert, gazing through his tears at hismother’s portrait; “if you know this, how much must yousuffer!”“Come,” said Beauchamp, taking both his hands, “take courage,my friend.”“But how came that first note to be inserted in your journal? Someunknown enemy—an invisible foe—has done this.”“The more must you fortify yourself, Albert. Let no trace of emotion bevisible on your countenance, bear your grief as the cloud bears within it ruinand death—a fatal secret, known only when the storm bursts. Go, myfriend, reserve your strength for the moment when the crash shall come.”“You think, then, all is not over yet?” said Albert,horror-stricken.“I think nothing, my friend; but all things are possible. By theway——”“What?” said Albert, seeing that Beauchamp hesitated.“Are you going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?”“Why do you ask me now?”“Because the rupture or fulfilment of this engagement is connected withthe person of whom we were speaking.”“How?” said Albert, whose brow reddened; “you think M.Danglars——”“I ask you only how your engagement stands? Pray put no construction onmy words I do not mean they should convey, and give them no undueweight.”“No.” said Albert, “the engagement is broken off.”“Well,” said Beauchamp. Then, seeing the young man was about torelapse into melancholy, “Let us go out, Albert,” said he; “aride in the wood in the phaeton, or on horseback, will refresh you; we willthen return to breakfast, and you shall attend to your affairs, and I tomine.”“Willingly,” said Albert; “but let us walk. I think a littleexertion would do me good.”The two friends walked out on the fortress. When they arrived at the Madeleine:“Since we are out,” said Beauchamp, “let us call on M. deMonte Cristo; he is admirably adapted to revive one’s spirits, because henever interrogates, and in my opinion those who ask no questions are the bestcomforters.”“Gladly,” said Albert; “let us call—I love him.” Chapter 85. TheJourneyMonte Cristo uttered ajoyful exclamation on seeing the young men together. “Ah, ha!” saidhe, “I hope all is over, explained and settled.”“Yes,” said Beauchamp; “the absurd reports have died away,and should they be renewed, I would be the first to oppose them; so let usspeak no more of it.”“Albert will tell you,” replied the count “that I gave himthe same advice. Look,” added he. “I am finishing the mostexecrable morning’s work.”“What is it?” said Albert; “arranging your papers,apparently.”“My papers, thank God, no,—my papers are all in capital order,because I have none; but M. Cavalcanti’s.”“M. Cavalcanti’s?” asked Beauchamp.“Yes; do you not know that this is a young man whom the count isintroducing?” said Morcerf.“Let us not misunderstand each other,” replied Monte Cristo;“I introduce no one, and certainly not M. Cavalcanti.”“And who,” said Albert with a forced smile, “is to marryMademoiselle Danglars instead of me, which grieves me cruelly.”“What? Cavalcanti is going to marry Mademoiselle Danglars?” askedBeauchamp.“Certainly! do you come from the end of the world?” said MonteCristo; “you, a journalist, the husband of renown? It is the talk of allParis.”“And you, count, have made this match?” asked Beauchamp.“I? Silence, purveyor of gossip, do not spread that report. I make amatch? No, you do not know me; I have done all in my power to oppose it.”“Ah, I understand,” said Beauchamp, “on our friendAlbert’s account.”“On my account?” said the young man; “oh, no, indeed, thecount will do me the justice to assert that I have, on the contrary, alwaysentreated him to break off my engagement, and happily it is ended. The countpretends I have not him to thank;—so be it—I will erect an altarDeo ignoto.”“Listen,” said Monte Cristo; “I have had little to do withit, for I am at variance both with the father-in-law and the young man; thereis only Mademoiselle Eugénie, who appears but little charmed with the thoughtsof matrimony, and who, seeing how little I was disposed to persuade her torenounce her dear liberty, retains any affection for me.”“And do you say this wedding is at hand?”“Oh, yes, in spite of all I could say. I do not know the young man; he issaid to be of good family and rich, but I never trust to vague assertions. Ihave warned M. Danglars of it till I am tired, but he is fascinated with hisLuccanese. I have even informed him of a circumstance I consider very serious;the young man was either charmed by his nurse, stolen by gypsies, or lost byhis tutor, I scarcely know which. But I do know his father lost sight of himfor more than ten years; what he did during these ten years, God only knows.Well, all that was useless. They have commissioned me to write to the major todemand papers, and here they are. I send them, but like Pilate—washing myhands.”“And what does Mademoiselle d’Armilly say to you for robbing her ofher pupil?”“Oh, well, I don’t know; but I understand that she is going toItaly. Madame Danglars asked me for letters of recommendation for theimpresari; I gave her a few lines for the director of the Valle Theatre,who is under some obligation to me. But what is the matter, Albert? you lookdull; are you, after all, unconsciously in love with MademoiselleEugénie?”“I am not aware of it,” said Albert, smiling sorrowfully. Beauchampturned to look at some paintings.“But,” continued Monte Cristo, “you are not in your usualspirits?”“I have a dreadful headache,” said Albert.“Well, my dear viscount,” said Monte Cristo, “I have aninfallible remedy to propose to you.”“What is that?” asked the young man.“A change.”“Indeed?” said Albert.“Yes; and as I am just now excessively annoyed, I shall go from home.Shall we go together?”“You annoyed, count?” said Beauchamp; “and by what?”“Ah, you think very lightly of it; I should like to see you with a briefpreparing in your house.”“What brief?”“The one M. de Villefort is preparing against my amiableassassin—some brigand escaped from the gallows apparently.”“True,” said Beauchamp; “I saw it in the paper. Who is thisCaderousse?”“Some Provençal, it appears. M. de Villefort heard of him at Marseilles,and M. Danglars recollects having seen him. Consequently, the procureur is veryactive in the affair, and the prefect of police very much interested; and,thanks to that interest, for which I am very grateful, they send me all therobbers of Paris and the neighborhood, under pretence of their beingCaderousse’s murderers, so that in three months, if this continues, everyrobber and assassin in France will have the plan of my house at hisfingers’ ends. I am resolved to desert them and go to some remote cornerof the earth, and shall be happy if you will accompany me, viscount.”“Willingly.”“Then it is settled?”“Yes, but where?”“I have told you, where the air is pure, where every sound soothes, whereone is sure to be humbled, however proud may be his nature. I love thathumiliation, I, who am master of the universe, as was Augustus.”“But where are you really going?”“To sea, viscount; you know I am a sailor. I was rocked when an infant inthe arms of old Ocean, and on the bosom of the beautiful Amphitrite; I havesported with the green mantle of the one and the azure robe of the other; Ilove the sea as a mistress, and pine if I do not often see her.”“Let us go, count.”“To sea?”“Yes.”“You accept my proposal?”“I do.”“Well, viscount, there will be in my courtyard this evening a goodtravelling britzka, with four post-horses, in which one may rest as in a bed.M. Beauchamp, it holds four very well, will you accompany us?”“Thank you, I have just returned from sea.”“What? you have been to sea?”“Yes; I have just made a little excursion to the BorromeanIslands[18].”“What of that? come with us,” said Albert.“No, dear Morcerf; you know I only refuse when the thing is impossible.Besides, it is important,” added he in a low tone, “that I shouldremain in Paris just now to watch the paper.”“Ah, you are a good and an excellent friend,” said Albert;“yes, you are right; watch, watch, Beauchamp, and try to discover theenemy who made this disclosure.”Albert and Beauchamp parted, the last pressure of their hands expressing whattheir tongues could not before a stranger.“Beauchamp is a worthy fellow,” said Monte Cristo, when thejournalist was gone; “is he not, Albert?”“Yes, and a sincere friend; I love him devotedly. But now we arealone,—although it is immaterial to me,—where are we going?”“Into Normandy, if you like.”“Delightful; shall we be quite retired? have no society, noneighbors?”“Our companions will be riding-horses, dogs to hunt with, and afishing-boat.”“Exactly what I wish for; I will apprise my mother of my intention, andreturn to you.”“But shall you be allowed to go into Normandy?”“I may go where I please.”“Yes, I am aware you may go alone, since I once met you inItaly—but to accompany the mysterious Monte Cristo?”“You forget, count, that I have often told you of the deep interest mymother takes in you.”“‘Woman is fickle.’ said Francis I.; ‘woman is like awave of the sea,’ said Shakespeare; both the great king and the greatpoet ought to have known woman’s nature well.”“Woman’s, yes; my mother is not woman, but a woman.”“As I am only a humble foreigner, you must pardon me if I do notunderstand all the subtle refinements of your language.”“What I mean to say is, that my mother is not quick to give herconfidence, but when she does she never changes.”“Ah, yes, indeed,” said Monte Cristo with a sigh; “and do youthink she is in the least interested in me?”“I repeat it, you must really be a very strange and superior man, for mymother is so absorbed by the interest you have excited, that when I am with hershe speaks of no one else.”“And does she try to make you dislike me?”“On the contrary, she often says, ‘Morcerf, I believe the count hasa noble nature; try to gain his esteem.’”“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, sighing.“You see, then,” said Albert, “that instead of opposing, shewill encourage me.”“Adieu, then, until five o’clock; be punctual, and we shall arriveat twelve or one.”“At Tréport?”“Yes; or in the neighborhood.”“But can we travel forty-eight leagues in eight hours?”“Easily,” said Monte Cristo.“You are certainly a prodigy; you will soon not only surpass the railway,which would not be very difficult in France, but even the telegraph.”“But, viscount, since we cannot perform the journey in less than seven oreight hours, do not keep me waiting.”“Do not fear, I have little to prepare.”Monte Cristo smiled as he nodded to Albert, then remained a moment absorbed indeep meditation. But passing his hand across his forehead as if to dispel hisreverie, he rang the bell twice and Bertuccio entered.“Bertuccio,” said he, “I intend going this evening toNormandy, instead of tomorrow or the next day. You will have sufficient timebefore five o’clock; despatch a messenger to apprise the grooms at thefirst station. M. de Morcerf will accompany me.”Bertuccio obeyed and despatched a courier to Pontoise to say thetravelling-carriage would arrive at six o’clock. From Pontoise anotherexpress was sent to the next stage, and in six hours all the horses stationedon the road were ready.Before his departure, the count went to Haydée’s apartments, told her hisintention, and resigned everything to her care.Albert was punctual. The journey soon became interesting from its rapidity, ofwhich Morcerf had formed no previous idea.“Truly,” said Monte Cristo, “with your post-horses going atthe rate of two leagues an hour, and that absurd law that one traveller shallnot pass another without permission, so that an invalid or ill-temperedtraveller may detain those who are well and active, it is impossible to move; Iescape this annoyance by travelling with my own postilion and horses; do I not,Ali?”The count put his head out of the window and whistled, and the horses appearedto fly. The carriage rolled with a thundering noise over the pavement, andeveryone turned to notice the dazzling meteor. Ali, smiling, repeated thesound, grasped the reins with a firm hand, and spurred his horses, whosebeautiful manes floated in the breeze. This child of the desert was in hiselement, and with his black face and sparkling eyes appeared, in the cloud ofdust he raised, like the genius of the simoom and the god of the hurricane.“I never knew till now the delight of speed,” said Morcerf, and thelast cloud disappeared from his brow; “but where the devil do you getsuch horses? Are they made to order?”“Precisely,” said the count; “six years since I bought ahorse in Hungary remarkable for its swiftness. The thirty-two that we shall usetonight are its progeny; they are all entirely black, with the exception of astar upon the forehead.”“That is perfectly admirable; but what do you do, count, with all thesehorses?”“You see, I travel with them.”“But you are not always travelling.”“When I no longer require them, Bertuccio will sell them, and he expectsto realize thirty or forty thousand francs by the sale.”“But no monarch in Europe will be wealthy enough to purchase them.”“Then he will sell them to some Eastern vizier, who will empty hiscoffers to purchase them, and refill them by applying the bastinado to hissubjects.”“Count, may I suggest one idea to you?”“Certainly.”“It is that, next to you, Bertuccio must be the richest gentleman inEurope.”“You are mistaken, viscount; I believe he has not a franc in hispossession.”“Then he must be a wonder. My dear count, if you tell me many moremarvellous things, I warn you I shall not believe them.”“I countenance nothing that is marvellous, M. Albert. Tell me, why does asteward rob his master?”“Because, I suppose, it is his nature to do so, for the love ofrobbing.”“You are mistaken; it is because he has a wife and family, and ambitiousdesires for himself and them. Also because he is not sure of always retaininghis situation, and wishes to provide for the future. Now, M. Bertuccio is alonein the world; he uses my property without accounting for the use he makes ofit; he is sure never to leave my service.”“Why?”“Because I should never get a better.”“Probabilities are deceptive.”“But I deal in certainties; he is the best servant over whom one has thepower of life and death.”“Do you possess that right over Bertuccio?”“Yes.”There are words which close a conversation with an iron door; such was thecount’s “yes.”The whole journey was performed with equal rapidity; the thirty-two horses,dispersed over seven stages, brought them to their destination in eight hours.At midnight they arrived at the gate of a beautiful park. The porter was inattendance; he had been apprised by the groom of the last stage of thecount’s approach. At half past two in the morning Morcerf was conductedto his apartments, where a bath and supper were prepared. The servant who hadtravelled at the back of the carriage waited on him; Baptistin, who rode infront, attended the count.Albert bathed, took his supper, and went to bed. All night he was lulled by themelancholy noise of the surf. On rising, he went to his window, which opened ona terrace, having the sea in front, and at the back a pretty park bounded by asmall forest.In a creek lay a little sloop, with a narrow keel and high masts, bearing onits flag the Monte Cristo arms which were a mountain or, on a seaazure, with a cross gules in chief which might be an allusion tohis name that recalled Calvary, the mount rendered by our Lord’s passionmore precious than gold, and to the degrading cross which his blood hadrendered holy; or it might be some personal remembrance of suffering andregeneration buried in the night of this mysterious personage’s pastlife.Around the schooner lay a number of small fishing-boats belonging to thefishermen of the neighboring village, like humble subjects awaiting orders fromtheir queen. There, as in every spot where Monte Cristo stopped, if but for twodays, luxury abounded and life went on with the utmost ease.Albert found in his anteroom two guns, with all the accoutrements for hunting;a lofty room on the ground floor containing all the ingenious instruments theEnglish—eminent in piscatory pursuits, since they are patient andsluggish—have invented for fishing. The day passed in pursuing thoseexercises in which Monte Cristo excelled. They killed a dozen pheasants in thepark, as many trout in the stream, dined in a summer-house overlooking theocean, and took tea in the library.Towards the evening of the third day. Albert, completely exhausted with theexercise which invigorated Monte Cristo, was sleeping in an armchair near thewindow, while the count was designing with his architect the plan of aconservatory in his house, when the sound of a horse at full speed on the highroad made Albert look up. He was disagreeably surprised to see his own valet dechambre, whom he had not brought, that he might not inconvenience Monte Cristo.“Florentin here!” cried he, starting up; “is my motherill?” And he hastened to the door. Monte Cristo watched and saw himapproach the valet, who drew a small sealed parcel from his pocket, containinga newspaper and a letter.“From whom is this?” said he eagerly.“From M. Beauchamp,” replied Florentin.“Did he send you?”“Yes, sir; he sent for me to his house, gave me money for my journey,procured a horse, and made me promise not to stop till I had reached you, Ihave come in fifteen hours.”Albert opened the letter with fear, uttered a shriek on reading the first line,and seized the paper. His sight was dimmed, his legs sank under him, and hewould have fallen had not Florentin supported him.“Poor young man,” said Monte Cristo in a low voice; “it isthen true that the sin of the father shall fall on the children to the thirdand fourth generation.”Meanwhile Albert had revived, and, continuing to read, he threw back his head,saying:“Florentin, is your horse fit to return immediately?”“It is a poor, lame post-horse.”“In what state was the house when you left?”“All was quiet, but on returning from M. Beauchamp’s, I foundmadame in tears; she had sent for me to know when you would return. I told hermy orders from M. Beauchamp; she first extended her arms to prevent me, butafter a moment’s reflection, ‘Yes, go, Florentin,’ said she,‘and may he come quickly.’”“Yes, my mother,” said Albert, “I will return, and woe to theinfamous wretch! But first of all I must get there.”He went back to the room where he had left Monte Cristo. Five minutes hadsufficed to make a complete transformation in his appearance. His voice hadbecome rough and hoarse; his face was furrowed with wrinkles; his eyes burnedunder the blue-veined lids, and he tottered like a drunken man.“Count,” said he, “I thank you for your hospitality, which Iwould gladly have enjoyed longer; but I must return to Paris.”“What has happened?”“A great misfortune, more important to me than life. Don’t questionme, I beg of you, but lend me a horse.”“My stables are at your command, viscount; but you will kill yourself byriding on horseback. Take a post-chaise or a carriage.”“No, it would delay me, and I need the fatigue you warn me of; it will dome good.”Albert reeled as if he had been shot, and fell on a chair near the door. MonteCristo did not see this second manifestation of physical exhaustion; he was atthe window, calling:“Ali, a horse for M. de Morcerf—quick! he is in a hurry!”These words restored Albert; he darted from the room, followed by the count.“Thank you!” cried he, throwing himself on his horse.“Return as soon as you can, Florentin. Must I use any password to procurea horse?”“Only dismount; another will be immediately saddled.”Albert hesitated a moment. “You may think my departure strange andfoolish,” said the young man; “you do not know how a paragraph in anewspaper may exasperate one. Read that,” said he, “when I am gone,that you may not be witness of my anger.”While the count picked up the paper he put spurs to his horse, which leaped inastonishment at such an unusual stimulus, and shot away with the rapidity of anarrow. The count watched him with a feeling of compassion, and when he hadcompletely disappeared, read as follows:“The French officer in the service of Ali Pasha of Yanina alluded tothree weeks since in l’Impartial, who not only surrendered thecastle of Yanina, but sold his benefactor to the Turks, styled himself truly atthat time Fernand, as our esteemed contemporary states; but he has since addedto his Christian name a title of nobility and a family name. He now callshimself the Count of Morcerf, and ranks among the peers.”Thus the terrible secret, which Beauchamp had so generously destroyed, appearedagain like an armed phantom; and another paper, deriving its information fromsome malicious source, had published two days after Albert’s departurefor Normandy the few lines which had rendered the unfortunate young man almostcrazy. Chapter 86. The TrialAt eight o’clockin the morning Albert had arrived at Beauchamp’s door. The valet dechambre had received orders to usher him in at once. Beauchamp was in his bath.“Here I am,” Albert said.“Well, my poor friend,” replied Beauchamp, “I expectedyou.”“I need not say I think you are too faithful and too kind to have spokenof that painful circumstance. Your having sent for me is another proof of youraffection. So, without losing time, tell me, have you the slightest idea whencethis terrible blow proceeds?”“I think I have some clew.”“But first tell me all the particulars of this shameful plot.”Beauchamp proceeded to relate to the young man, who was overwhelmed with shameand grief, the following facts. Two days previously, the article had appearedin another paper besides  l’Impartial, and, what was more serious,one that was well known as a government paper. Beauchamp was breakfasting whenhe read the paragraph. He sent immediately for a cabriolet, and hastened to thepublisher’s office. Although professing diametrically opposite principlesfrom those of the editor of the other paper, Beauchamp—as it sometimes,we may say often, happens—was his intimate friend. The editor wasreading, with apparent delight, a leading article in the same paper onbeet-sugar, probably a composition of his own.“Ah, pardieu!” said Beauchamp, “with the paper in yourhand, my friend, I need not tell you the cause of my visit.”“Are you interested in the sugar question?” asked the editor of theministerial paper.“No,” replied Beauchamp, “I have not considered the question;a totally different subject interests me.”“What is it?”“The article relative to Morcerf.”“Indeed? Is it not a curious affair?”“So curious, that I think you are running a great risk of a prosecutionfor defamation of character.”“Not at all; we have received with the information all the requisiteproofs, and we are quite sure M. de Morcerf will not raise his voice againstus; besides, it is rendering a service to one’s country to denounce thesewretched criminals who are unworthy of the honor bestowed on them.”Beauchamp was thunderstruck.“Who, then, has so correctly informed you?” asked he; “for mypaper, which gave the first information on the subject, has been obliged tostop for want of proof; and yet we are more interested than you in exposing M.de Morcerf, as he is a peer of France, and we are of the opposition.”“Oh, that is very simple; we have not sought to scandalize. This news wasbrought to us. A man arrived yesterday from Yanina, bringing a formidable arrayof documents; and when we hesitated to publish the accusatory article, he toldus it should be inserted in some other paper.”Beauchamp understood that nothing remained but to submit, and left the officeto despatch a courier to Morcerf. But he had been unable to send to Albert thefollowing particulars, as the events had transpired after the messenger’sdeparture; namely, that the same day a great agitation was manifest in theHouse of Peers among the usually calm members of that dignified assembly.Everyone had arrived almost before the usual hour, and was conversing on themelancholy event which was to attract the attention of the public towards oneof their most illustrious colleagues. Some were perusing the article, othersmaking comments and recalling circumstances which substantiated the chargesstill more.The Count of Morcerf was no favorite with his colleagues. Like all upstarts, hehad had recourse to a great deal of haughtiness to maintain his position. Thetrue nobility laughed at him, the talented repelled him, and the honorableinstinctively despised him. He was, in fact, in the unhappy position of thevictim marked for sacrifice; the finger of God once pointed at him, everyonewas prepared to raise the hue and cry.The Count of Morcerf alone was ignorant of the news. He did not take in thepaper containing the defamatory article, and had passed the morning in writingletters and in trying a horse. He arrived at his usual hour, with a proud lookand insolent demeanor; he alighted, passed through the corridors, and enteredthe house without observing the hesitation of the door-keepers or the coolnessof his colleagues.Business had already been going on for half an hour when he entered. Everyoneheld the accusing paper, but, as usual, no one liked to take upon himself theresponsibility of the attack. At length an honorable peer, Morcerf’sacknowledged enemy, ascended the tribune with that solemnity which announcedthat the expected moment had arrived. There was an impressive silence; Morcerfalone knew not why such profound attention was given to an orator who was notalways listened to with so much complacency.The count did not notice the introduction, in which the speaker announced thathis communication would be of that vital importance that it demanded theundivided attention of the House; but at the mention of Yanina and ColonelFernand, he turned so frightfully pale that every member shuddered and fixedhis eyes upon him. Moral wounds have this peculiarity,—they may behidden, but they never close; always painful, always ready to bleed whentouched, they remain fresh and open in the heart.The article having been read during the painful hush that followed, a universalshudder pervaded the assembly, and immediately the closest attention was givento the orator as he resumed his remarks. He stated his scruples and thedifficulties of the case; it was the honor of M. de Morcerf, and that of thewhole House, he proposed to defend, by provoking a debate on personalquestions, which are always such painful themes of discussion. He concluded bycalling for an investigation, which might dispose of the calumnious reportbefore it had time to spread, and restore M. de Morcerf to the position he hadlong held in public opinion.Morcerf was so completely overwhelmed by this great and unexpected calamitythat he could scarcely stammer a few words as he looked around on the assembly.This timidity, which might proceed from the astonishment of innocence as wellas the shame of guilt, conciliated some in his favor; for men who are trulygenerous are always ready to compassionate when the misfortune of their enemysurpasses the limits of their hatred.The president put it to the vote, and it was decided that the investigationshould take place. The count was asked what time he required to prepare hisdefence. Morcerf’s courage had revived when he found himself alive afterthis horrible blow.“My lords,” answered he, “it is not by time I could repel theattack made on me by enemies unknown to me, and, doubtless, hidden inobscurity; it is immediately, and by a thunderbolt, that I must repel the flashof lightning which, for a moment, startled me. Oh, that I could, instead oftaking up this defence, shed my last drop of blood to prove to my noblecolleagues that I am their equal in worth.”These words made a favorable impression on behalf of the accused.“I demand, then, that the examination shall take place as soon aspossible, and I will furnish the house with all necessary information.”“What day do you fix?” asked the president.“Today I am at your service,” replied the count.The president rang the bell. “Does the House approve that the examinationshould take place today?”“Yes,” was the unanimous answer.A committee of twelve members was chosen to examine the proofs brought forwardby Morcerf. The investigation would begin at eight o’clock that eveningin the committee-room, and if postponement were necessary, the proceedingswould be resumed each evening at the same hour. Morcerf asked leave to retire;he had to collect the documents he had long been preparing against this storm,which his sagacity had foreseen.Beauchamp related to the young man all the facts we have just narrated; hisstory, however, had over ours all the advantage of the animation of livingthings over the coldness of dead things.Albert listened, trembling now with hope, then with anger, and then again withshame, for from Beauchamp’s confidence he knew his father was guilty, andhe asked himself how, since he was guilty, he could prove his innocence.Beauchamp hesitated to continue his narrative.“What next?” asked Albert.“What next? My friend, you impose a painful task on me. Must you knowall?”“Absolutely; and rather from your lips than another’s.”“Muster up all your courage, then, for never have you required itmore.”Albert passed his hand over his forehead, as if to try his strength, as a manwho is preparing to defend his life proves his shield and bends his sword. Hethought himself strong enough, for he mistook fever for energy. “Goon,” said he.“The evening arrived; all Paris was in expectation. Many said your fatherhad only to show himself to crush the charge against him; many others said hewould not appear; while some asserted that they had seen him start forBrussels; and others went to the police-office to inquire if he had taken out apassport. I used all my influence with one of the committee, a young peer of myacquaintance, to get admission to one of the galleries. He called for me atseven o’clock, and, before anyone had arrived, asked one of thedoor-keepers to place me in a box. I was concealed by a column, and mightwitness the whole of the terrible scene which was about to take place. At eighto’clock all were in their places, and M. de Morcerf entered at the laststroke. He held some papers in his hand; his countenance was calm, and his stepfirm, and he was dressed with great care in his military uniform, which wasbuttoned completely up to the chin. His presence produced a good effect. Thecommittee was made up of Liberals, several of whom came forward to shake handswith him.”Albert felt his heart bursting at these particulars, but gratitude mingled withhis sorrow: he would gladly have embraced those who had given his father thisproof of esteem at a moment when his honor was so powerfully attacked.“At this moment one of the door-keepers brought in a letter for thepresident. ‘You are at liberty to speak, M. de Morcerf,’ said thepresident, as he unsealed the letter; and the count began his defence, I assureyou, Albert, in a most eloquent and skilful manner. He produced documentsproving that the Vizier of Yanina had up to the last moment honored him withhis entire confidence, since he had interested him with a negotiation of lifeand death with the emperor. He produced the ring, his mark of authority, withwhich Ali Pasha generally sealed his letters, and which the latter had givenhim, that he might, on his return at any hour of the day or night, gain accessto the presence, even in the harem. Unfortunately, the negotiation failed, andwhen he returned to defend his benefactor, he was dead. ‘But,’ saidthe count, ‘so great was Ali Pasha’s confidence, that on hisdeath-bed he resigned his favorite mistress and her daughter to mycare.’”Albert started on hearing these words; the history of Haydée recurred to him,and he remembered what she had said of that message and the ring, and themanner in which she had been sold and made a slave.“And what effect did this discourse produce?” anxiously inquiredAlbert.“I acknowledge it affected me, and, indeed, all the committeealso,” said Beauchamp.“Meanwhile, the president carelessly opened the letter which had beenbrought to him; but the first lines aroused his attention; he read them againand again, and fixing his eyes on M. de Morcerf, ‘Count,’ said he,‘you have said that the Vizier of Yanina confided his wife and daughterto your care?’—‘Yes, sir,’ replied Morcerf; ‘butin that, like all the rest, misfortune pursued me. On my return, Vasiliki andher daughter Haydée had disappeared.’—‘Did you knowthem?’—‘My intimacy with the pasha and his unlimitedconfidence had gained me an introduction to them, and I had seen them abovetwenty times.’“‘Have you any idea what became of them?’—‘Yes,sir; I heard they had fallen victims to their sorrow, and, perhaps, to theirpoverty. I was not rich; my life was in constant danger; I could not seek them,to my great regret.’ The president frowned imperceptibly.‘Gentlemen,’ said he, ‘you have heard the Comte deMorcerf’s defence. Can you, sir, produce any witnesses to the truth ofwhat you have asserted?’—‘Alas, no, monsieur,’ repliedthe count; ‘all those who surrounded the vizier, or who knew me at hiscourt, are either dead or gone away, I know not where. I believe that I alone,of all my countrymen, survived that dreadful war. I have only the letters ofAli Tepelini, which I have placed before you; the ring, a token of hisgood-will, which is here; and, lastly, the most convincing proof I can offer,after an anonymous attack, and that is the absence of any witness against myveracity and the purity of my military life.’“A murmur of approbation ran through the assembly; and at this moment,Albert, had nothing more transpired, your father’s cause had been gained.It only remained to put it to the vote, when the president resumed:‘Gentlemen and you, monsieur,—you will not be displeased, Ipresume, to listen to one who calls himself a very important witness, and whohas just presented himself. He is, doubtless, come to prove the perfectinnocence of our colleague. Here is a letter I have just received on thesubject; shall it be read, or shall it be passed over? and shall we take nonotice of this incident?’ M. de Morcerf turned pale, and clenched hishands on the papers he held. The committee decided to hear the letter; thecount was thoughtful and silent. The president read:“‘Mr. President,—I can furnish the committee of inquiry intothe conduct of the Lieutenant-General the Count of Morcerf in Epirus and inMacedonia with important particulars.’“The president paused, and the count turned pale. The president looked athis auditors. ‘Proceed,’ was heard on all sides. The presidentresumed:“‘I was on the spot at the death of Ali Pasha. I was present duringhis last moments. I know what is become of Vasiliki and Haydée. I am at thecommand of the committee, and even claim the honor of being heard. I shall bein the lobby when this note is delivered to you.’“‘And who is this witness, or rather this enemy?’ asked thecount, in a tone in which there was a visible alteration. ‘We shall know,sir,’ replied the president. ‘Is the committee willing to hear thiswitness?’—‘Yes, yes,’ they all said at once. Thedoor-keeper was called. ‘Is there anyone in the lobby?’ said thepresident.“‘Yes, sir.’—‘Who is it?’—‘Awoman, accompanied by a servant.’ Everyone looked at his neighbor.‘Bring her in,’ said the president. Five minutes after thedoor-keeper again appeared; all eyes were fixed on the door, and I,” saidBeauchamp, “shared the general expectation and anxiety. Behind thedoor-keeper walked a woman enveloped in a large veil, which completelyconcealed her. It was evident, from her figure and the perfumes she had abouther, that she was young and fastidious in her tastes, but that was all. Thepresident requested her to throw aside her veil, and it was then seen that shewas dressed in the Grecian costume, and was remarkably beautiful.”“Ah,” said Albert, “it was she.”“Who?”“Haydée.”“Who told you that?”“Alas, I guess it. But go on, Beauchamp. You see I am calm and strong.And yet we must be drawing near the disclosure.”“M. de Morcerf,” continued Beauchamp, “looked at this womanwith surprise and terror. Her lips were about to pass his sentence of life ordeath. To the committee the adventure was so extraordinary and curious, thatthe interest they had felt for the count’s safety became now quite asecondary matter. The president himself advanced to place a seat for the younglady; but she declined availing herself of it. As for the count, he had fallenon his chair; it was evident that his legs refused to support him.“‘Madame,’ said the president, ‘you have engaged tofurnish the committee with some important particulars respecting the affair atYanina, and you have stated that you were an eyewitness of theevent.’—‘I was, indeed,’ said the stranger, with a toneof sweet melancholy, and with the sonorous voice peculiar to the East.“‘But allow me to say that you must have been very youngthen.’—‘I was four years old; but as those events deeplyconcerned me, not a single detail has escaped my memory.’—‘Inwhat manner could these events concern you? and who are you, that they shouldhave made so deep an impression on you?’—‘On them depended myfather’s life,’ replied she. ‘I am Haydée, the daughter ofAli Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and of Vasiliki, his beloved wife.’“The blush of mingled pride and modesty which suddenly suffused thecheeks of the young woman, the brilliancy of her eye, and her highly importantcommunication, produced an indescribable effect on the assembly. As for thecount, he could not have been more overwhelmed if a thunderbolt had fallen athis feet and opened an immense gulf before him.“‘Madame,’ replied the president, bowing with profoundrespect, ‘allow me to ask one question; it shall be the last: Can youprove the authenticity of what you have now stated?’“‘I can, sir,’ said Haydée, drawing from under her veil asatin satchel highly perfumed; ‘for here is the register of my birth,signed by my father and his principal officers, and that of my baptism, myfather having consented to my being brought up in my mother’sfaith,—this latter has been sealed by the grand primate of Macedonia andEpirus; and lastly (and perhaps the most important), the record of the sale ofmy person and that of my mother to the Armenian merchant El-Kobbir, by theFrench officer, who, in his infamous bargain with the Porte, had reserved ashis part of the booty the wife and daughter of his benefactor, whom he sold forthe sum of four hundred thousand francs.’ A greenish pallor spread overthe count’s cheeks, and his eyes became bloodshot at these terribleimputations, which were listened to by the assembly with ominous silence.“Haydée, still calm, but with a calmness more dreadful than the anger ofanother would have been, handed to the president the record of her sale,written in Arabic. It had been supposed some of the papers might be in theArabian, Romaic, or Turkish language, and the interpreter of the House was inattendance. One of the noble peers, who was familiar with the Arabic language,having studied it during the famous Egyptian campaign, followed with his eye asthe translator read aloud:“‘I, El-Kobbir, a slave-merchant, and purveyor of the harem of hishighness, acknowledge having received for transmission to the sublime emperor,from the French lord, the Count of Monte Cristo, an emerald valued at eighthundred thousand francs; as the ransom of a young Christian slave of elevenyears of age, named Haydée, the acknowledged daughter of the late lord AliTepelini, pasha of Yanina, and of Vasiliki, his favorite; she having been soldto me seven years previously, with her mother, who had died on arriving atConstantinople, by a French colonel in the service of the Vizier Ali Tepelini,named Fernand Mondego. The above-mentioned purchase was made on hishighness’s account, whose mandate I had, for the sum of four hundredthousand francs.“‘Given at Constantinople, by authority of his highness, in theyear 1247 of the Hegira.“‘Signed, El-Kobbir.’“‘That this record should have all due authority, it shall bear theimperial seal, which the vendor is bound to have affixed to it.’“Near the merchant’s signature there was, indeed, the seal of thesublime emperor. A dreadful silence followed the reading of this document; thecount could only stare, and his gaze, fixed as if unconsciously on Haydée,seemed one of fire and blood. ‘Madame,’ said the president,‘may reference be made to the Count of Monte Cristo, who is now, Ibelieve, in Paris?’“‘Sir,’ replied Haydée, ‘the Count of Monte Cristo, myfoster-father, has been in Normandy the last three days.’“‘Who, then, has counselled you to take this step, one for whichthe court is deeply indebted to you, and which is perfectly natural,considering your birth and your misfortunes?’—‘Sir,’replied Haydée, ‘I have been led to take this step from a feeling ofrespect and grief. Although a Christian, may God forgive me, I have alwayssought to revenge my illustrious father. Since I set my foot in France, andknew the traitor lived in Paris, I have watched carefully. I live retired inthe house of my noble protector, but I do it from choice. I love retirement andsilence, because I can live with my thoughts and recollections of past days.But the Count of Monte Cristo surrounds me with every paternal care, and I amignorant of nothing which passes in the world. I learn all in the silence of myapartments,—for instance, I see all the newspapers, every periodical, aswell as every new piece of music; and by thus watching the course of the lifeof others, I learned what had transpired this morning in the House of Peers,and what was to take place this evening; then I wrote.’“‘Then,’ remarked the president, ‘the Count of MonteCristo knows nothing of your present proceedings?’—‘He isquite unaware of them, and I have but one fear, which is that he shoulddisapprove of what I have done. But it is a glorious day for me,’continued the young girl, raising her ardent gaze to heaven, ‘that onwhich I find at last an opportunity of avenging my father!’“The count had not uttered one word the whole of this time. Hiscolleagues looked at him, and doubtless pitied his prospects, blighted underthe perfumed breath of a woman. His misery was depicted in sinister lines onhis countenance. ‘M. de Morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do yourecognize this lady as the daughter of Ali Tepelini, pasha ofYanina?’—‘No,’ said Morcerf, attempting to rise,‘it is a base plot, contrived by my enemies.’ Haydée, whose eyeshad been fixed on the door, as if expecting someone, turned hastily, and,seeing the count standing, shrieked, ‘You do not know me?’ saidshe. ‘Well, I fortunately recognize you! You are Fernand Mondego, theFrench officer who led the troops of my noble father! It is you who surrenderedthe castle of Yanina! It is you who, sent by him to Constantinople, to treatwith the emperor for the life or death of your benefactor, brought back a falsemandate granting full pardon! It is you who, with that mandate, obtained thepasha’s ring, which gave you authority over Selim, the fire-keeper! It isyou who stabbed Selim. It is you who sold us, my mother and me, to themerchant, El-Kobbir! Assassin, assassin, assassin, you have still on your browyour master’s blood! Look, gentlemen, all!’“These words had been pronounced with such enthusiasm and evident truth,that every eye was fixed on the count’s forehead, and he himself passedhis hand across it, as if he felt Ali’s blood still lingering there.‘You positively recognize M. de Morcerf as the officer, FernandMondego?’—‘Indeed I do!’ cried Haydée. ‘Oh, mymother, it was you who said, “You were free, you had a beloved father,you were destined to be almost a queen. Look well at that man; it is he whoraised your father’s head on the point of a spear; it is he who sold us;it is he who forsook us! Look well at his right hand, on which he has a largewound; if you forgot his features, you would know him by that hand, into whichfell, one by one, the gold pieces of the merchant El-Kobbir!” I know him!Ah, let him say now if he does not recognize me!’ Each word fell like adagger on Morcerf, and deprived him of a portion of his energy; as she utteredthe last, he hid his mutilated hand hastily in his bosom, and fell back on hisseat, overwhelmed by wretchedness and despair. This scene completely changedthe opinion of the assembly respecting the accused count.“‘Count of Morcerf,’ said the president, ‘do not allowyourself to be cast down; answer. The justice of the court is supreme andimpartial as that of God; it will not suffer you to be trampled on by yourenemies without giving you an opportunity of defending yourself. Shall furtherinquiries be made? Shall two members of the House be sent to Yanina?Speak!’ Morcerf did not reply. Then all the members looked at each otherwith terror. They knew the count’s energetic and violent temper; it mustbe, indeed, a dreadful blow which would deprive him of courage to defendhimself. They expected that his stupefied silence would be followed by a fieryoutburst. ‘Well,’ asked the president, ‘what is yourdecision?’“‘I have no reply to make,’ said the count in a low tone.“‘Has the daughter of Ali Tepelini spoken the truth?’ saidthe president. ‘Is she, then, the terrible witness to whose charge youdare not plead “Not guilty”? Have you really committed the crimesof which you are accused?’ The count looked around him with an expressionwhich might have softened tigers, but which could not disarm his judges. Thenhe raised his eyes towards the ceiling, but withdrew then, immediately, as ifhe feared the roof would open and reveal to his distressed view that secondtribunal called heaven, and that other judge named God. Then, with a hastymovement, he tore open his coat, which seemed to stifle him, and flew from theroom like a madman; his footstep was heard one moment in the corridor, then therattling of his carriage-wheels as he was driven rapidly away.‘Gentlemen,’ said the president, when silence was restored,‘is the Count of Morcerf convicted of felony, treason, and conductunbecoming a member of this House?’—‘Yes,’ replied allthe members of the committee of inquiry with a unanimous voice.“Haydée had remained until the close of the meeting. She heard thecount’s sentence pronounced without betraying an expression of joy orpity; then drawing her veil over her face she bowed majestically to thecouncillors, and left with that dignified step which Virgil attributes to hisgoddesses.” Chapter 87. TheChallengeThen,” continuedBeauchamp, “I took advantage of the silence and the darkness to leave thehouse without being seen. The usher who had introduced me was waiting for me atthe door, and he conducted me through the corridors to a private entranceopening into the Rue de Vaugirard. I left with mingled feelings of sorrow anddelight. Excuse me, Albert,—sorrow on your account, and delight with thatnoble girl, thus pursuing paternal vengeance. Yes, Albert, from whatever sourcethe blow may have proceeded—it may be from an enemy, but that enemy isonly the agent of Providence.”Albert held his head between his hands; he raised his face, red with shame andbathed in tears, and seizing Beauchamp’s arm:“My friend,” said he, “my life is ended. I cannot calmly saywith you, ‘Providence has struck the blow;’ but I must discover whopursues me with this hatred, and when I have found him I shall kill him, or hewill kill me. I rely on your friendship to assist me, Beauchamp, if contempthas not banished it from your heart.”“Contempt, my friend? How does this misfortune affect you? No, happilythat unjust prejudice is forgotten which made the son responsible for thefather’s actions. Review your life, Albert; although it is only justbeginning, did a lovely summer’s day ever dawn with greater purity thanhas marked the commencement of your career? No, Albert, take my advice. You areyoung and rich—leave Paris—all is soon forgotten in this greatBabylon of excitement and changing tastes. You will return after three or fouryears with a Russian princess for a bride, and no one will think more of whatoccurred yesterday than if it had happened sixteen years ago.”“Thank you, my dear Beauchamp, thank you for the excellent feeling whichprompts your advice; but it cannot be. I have told you my wish, or rather mydetermination. You understand that, interested as I am in this affair, I cannotsee it in the same light as you do. What appears to you to emanate from acelestial source, seems to me to proceed from one far less pure. Providenceappears to me to have no share in this affair; and happily so, for instead ofthe invisible, impalpable agent of celestial rewards and punishments, I shallfind one both palpable and visible, on whom I shall revenge myself, I assureyou, for all I have suffered during the last month. Now, I repeat, Beauchamp, Iwish to return to human and material existence, and if you are still the friendyou profess to be, help me to discover the hand that struck the blow.”“Be it so,” said Beauchamp; “if you must have me descend toearth, I submit; and if you will seek your enemy, I will assist you, and I willengage to find him, my honor being almost as deeply interested as yours.”“Well, then, you understand, Beauchamp, that we begin our searchimmediately. Each moment’s delay is an eternity for me. The calumniatoris not yet punished, and he may hope that he will not be; but, on my honor, ifhe thinks so, he deceives himself.”“Well, listen, Morcerf.”“Ah, Beauchamp, I see you know something already; you will restore me tolife.”“I do not say there is any truth in what I am going to tell you, but itis, at least, a ray of light in a dark night; by following it we may, perhaps,discover something more certain.”“Tell me; satisfy my impatience.”“Well, I will tell you what I did not like to mention on my return fromYanina.”“Say on.”“I went, of course, to the chief banker of the town to make inquiries. Atthe first word, before I had even mentioned your father’sname”—“‘Ah,’ said he. ‘I guess what brings you here.’“‘How, and why?’“‘Because a fortnight since I was questioned on the samesubject.’“‘By whom?’“‘By a banker of Paris, my correspondent.’“‘Whose name is——’“‘Danglars.’”“He!” cried Albert; “yes, it is indeed he who has so longpursued my father with jealous hatred. He, the man who would be popular, cannotforgive the Count of Morcerf for being created a peer; and this marriage brokenoff without a reason being assigned—yes, it is all from the samecause.”“Make inquiries, Albert, but do not be angry without reason; makeinquiries, and if it be true——”“Oh, yes, if it be true,” cried the young man, “he shall payme all I have suffered.”“Beware, Morcerf, he is already an old man.”“I will respect his age as he has respected the honor of my family; if myfather had offended him, why did he not attack him personally? Oh, no, he wasafraid to encounter him face to face.”“I do not condemn you, Albert; I only restrain you. Act prudently.”“Oh, do not fear; besides, you will accompany me. Beauchamp, solemntransactions should be sanctioned by a witness. Before this day closes, if M.Danglars is guilty, he shall cease to live, or I shall die. Pardieu,Beauchamp, mine shall be a splendid funeral!”“When such resolutions are made, Albert, they should be promptlyexecuted. Do you wish to go to M. Danglars? Let us go immediately.”They sent for a cabriolet. On entering the banker’s mansion, theyperceived the phaeton and servant of M. Andrea Cavalcanti.“Ah! parbleu! that’s good,” said Albert, with a gloomytone. “If M. Danglars will not fight with me, I will kill his son-in-law;Cavalcanti will certainly fight.”The servant announced the young man; but the banker, recollecting what hadtranspired the day before, did not wish him admitted. It was, however, toolate; Albert had followed the footman, and, hearing the order given, forced thedoor open, and followed by Beauchamp found himself in the banker’s study.“Sir,” cried the latter, “am I no longer at liberty toreceive whom I choose in my house? You appear to forget yourself sadly.”“No, sir,” said Albert, coldly; “there are circumstances inwhich one cannot, except through cowardice,—I offer you thatrefuge,—refuse to admit certain persons at least.”“What is your errand, then, with me, sir?”“I mean,” said Albert, drawing near, and without apparentlynoticing Cavalcanti, who stood with his back towards thefireplace—“I mean to propose a meeting in some retired corner whereno one will interrupt us for ten minutes; that will be sufficient—wheretwo men having met, one of them will remain on the ground.”Danglars turned pale; Cavalcanti moved a step forward, and Albert turnedtowards him.“And you, too,” said he, “come, if you like, monsieur; youhave a claim, being almost one of the family, and I will give as manyrendezvous of that kind as I can find persons willing to accept them.”Cavalcanti looked at Danglars with a stupefied air, and the latter, making aneffort, arose and stepped between the two young men. Albert’s attack onAndrea had placed him on a different footing, and he hoped this visit hadanother cause than that he had at first supposed.“Indeed, sir,” said he to Albert, “if you are come to quarrelwith this gentleman because I have preferred him to you, I shall resign thecase to the king’s attorney.”“You mistake, sir,” said Morcerf with a gloomy smile; “I amnot referring in the least to matrimony, and I only addressed myself to M.Cavalcanti because he appeared disposed to interfere between us. In one respectyou are right, for I am ready to quarrel with everyone today; but you have thefirst claim, M. Danglars.”“Sir,” replied Danglars, pale with anger and fear, “I warnyou, when I have the misfortune to meet with a mad dog, I kill it; and far fromthinking myself guilty of a crime, I believe I do society a kindness. Now, ifyou are mad and try to bite me, I will kill you without pity. Is it my faultthat your father has dishonored himself?”“Yes, miserable wretch!” cried Morcerf, “it is yourfault.”Danglars retreated a few steps. “My fault?” said he; “youmust be mad! What do I know of the Grecian affair? Have I travelled in thatcountry? Did I advise your father to sell the castle of Yanina—tobetray——”“Silence!” said Albert, with a thundering voice. “No; it isnot you who have directly made this exposure and brought this sorrow on us, butyou hypocritically provoked it.”“I?”“Yes; you! How came it known?”“I suppose you read it in the paper in the account from Yanina?”“Who wrote to Yanina?”“To Yanina?”“Yes. Who wrote for particulars concerning my father?”“I imagine anyone may write to Yanina.”“But one person only wrote!”“One only?”“Yes; and that was you!”“I, doubtless, wrote. It appears to me that when about to marry yourdaughter to a young man, it is right to make some inquiries respecting hisfamily; it is not only a right, but a duty.”“You wrote, sir, knowing what answer you would receive.”“I, indeed? I assure you,” cried Danglars, with a confidence andsecurity proceeding less from fear than from the interest he really felt forthe young man, “I solemnly declare to you, that I should never havethought of writing to Yanina, did I know anything of Ali Pasha’smisfortunes.”“Who, then, urged you to write? Tell me.”“Pardieu! it was the most simple thing in the world. I wasspeaking of your father’s past history. I said the origin of his fortuneremained obscure. The person to whom I addressed my scruples asked me whereyour father had acquired his property? I answered, ‘InGreece.’—‘Then,’ said he, ‘write toYanina.’”“And who thus advised you?”“No other than your friend, Monte Cristo.”“The Count of Monte Cristo told you to write to Yanina?”“Yes; and I wrote, and will show you my correspondence, if youlike.”Albert and Beauchamp looked at each other.“Sir,” said Beauchamp, who had not yet spoken, “you appear toaccuse the count, who is absent from Paris at this moment, and cannot justifyhimself.”“I accuse no one, sir,” said Danglars; “I relate, and I willrepeat before the count what I have said to you.”“Does the count know what answer you received?”“Yes; I showed it to him.”“Did he know my father’s Christian name was Fernand, and his familyname Mondego?”“Yes, I had told him that long since, and I did only what any other wouldhave done in my circumstances, and perhaps less. When, the day after thearrival of this answer, your father came by the advice of Monte Cristo to askmy daughter’s hand for you, I decidedly refused him, but without anyexplanation or exposure. In short, why should I have any more to do with theaffair? How did the honor or disgrace of M. de Morcerf affect me? It neitherincreased nor decreased my income.”Albert felt the blood mounting to his brow; there was no doubt upon thesubject. Danglars defended himself with the baseness, but at the same time withthe assurance, of a man who speaks the truth, at least in part, if notwholly—not for conscience’ sake, but through fear. Besides, whatwas Morcerf seeking? It was not whether Danglars or Monte Cristo was more orless guilty; it was a man who would answer for the offence, whether trifling orserious; it was a man who would fight, and it was evident Danglars would notfight.In addition to this, everything forgotten or unperceived before presenteditself now to his recollection. Monte Cristo knew everything, as he had boughtthe daughter of Ali Pasha; and, knowing everything, he had advised Danglars towrite to Yanina. The answer known, he had yielded to Albert’s wish to beintroduced to Haydée, and allowed the conversation to turn on the death of Ali,and had not opposed Haydée’s recital (but having, doubtless, warned theyoung girl, in the few Romaic words he spoke to her, not to implicateMorcerf’s father). Besides, had he not begged of Morcerf not to mentionhis father’s name before Haydée? Lastly, he had taken Albert to Normandywhen he knew the final blow was near. There could be no doubt that all had beencalculated and previously arranged; Monte Cristo then was in league with hisfather’s enemies. Albert took Beauchamp aside, and communicated theseideas to him.“You are right,” said the latter; “M. Danglars has only beena secondary agent in this sad affair, and it is of M. de Monte Cristo that youmust demand an explanation.”Albert turned.“Sir,” said he to Danglars, “understand that I do not take afinal leave of you; I must ascertain if your insinuations are just, and amgoing now to inquire of the Count of Monte Cristo.”He bowed to the banker, and went out with Beauchamp, without appearing tonotice Cavalcanti. Danglars accompanied him to the door, where he again assuredAlbert that no motive of personal hatred had influenced him against the Countof Morcerf. Chapter 88. The InsultAt the banker’sdoor Beauchamp stopped Morcerf.“Listen,” said he; “just now I told you it was of M. de MonteCristo you must demand an explanation.”“Yes; and we are going to his house.”“Reflect, Morcerf, one moment before you go.”“On what shall I reflect?”“On the importance of the step you are taking.”“Is it more serious than going to M. Danglars?”“Yes; M. Danglars is a money-lover, and those who love money, you know,think too much of what they risk to be easily induced to fight a duel. Theother is, on the contrary, to all appearance a true nobleman; but do you notfear to find him a bully?”“I only fear one thing; namely, to find a man who will not fight.”“Do not be alarmed,” said Beauchamp; “he will meet you. Myonly fear is that he will be too strong for you.”“My friend,” said Morcerf, with a sweet smile, “that is whatI wish. The happiest thing that could occur to me, would be to die in myfather’s stead; that would save us all.”“Your mother would die of grief.”“My poor mother!” said Albert, passing his hand across his eyes,“I know she would; but better so than die of shame.”“Are you quite decided, Albert?”“Yes; let us go.”“But do you think we shall find the count at home?”“He intended returning some hours after me, and doubtless he is now athome.”They ordered the driver to take them to No. 30 Champs-Élysées. Beauchamp wishedto go in alone, but Albert observed that as this was an unusual circumstance hemight be allowed to deviate from the usual etiquette of duels. The cause whichthe young man espoused was one so sacred that Beauchamp had only to comply withall his wishes; he yielded and contented himself with following Morcerf. Albertsprang from the porter’s lodge to the steps. He was received byBaptistin. The count had, indeed, just arrived, but he was in his bath, and hadforbidden that anyone should be admitted.“But after his bath?” asked Morcerf.“My master will go to dinner.”“And after dinner?”“He will sleep an hour.”“Then?”“He is going to the Opera.”“Are you sure of it?” asked Albert.“Quite, sir; my master has ordered his horses at eight o’clockprecisely.”“Very good,” replied Albert; “that is all I wished toknow.”Then, turning towards Beauchamp, “If you have anything to attend to,Beauchamp, do it directly; if you have any appointment for this evening, deferit till tomorrow. I depend on you to accompany me to the Opera; and if you can,bring Château-Renaud with you.”Beauchamp availed himself of Albert’s permission, and left him, promisingto call for him at a quarter before eight. On his return home, Albert expressedhis wish to Franz Debray, and Morrel, to see them at the Opera that evening.Then he went to see his mother, who since the events of the day before hadrefused to see anyone, and had kept her room. He found her in bed, overwhelmedwith grief at this public humiliation.The sight of Albert produced the effect which might naturally be expected onMercédès; she pressed her son’s hand and sobbed aloud, but her tearsrelieved her. Albert stood one moment speechless by the side of hismother’s bed. It was evident from his pale face and knit brows that hisresolution to revenge himself was growing weaker.“My dear mother,” said he, “do you know if M. de Morcerf hasany enemy?”Mercédès started; she noticed that the young man did not say “myfather.”“My son,” she said, “persons in the count’s situationhave many secret enemies. Those who are known are not the mostdangerous.”“I know it, and appeal to your penetration. You are of so superior amind, nothing escapes you.”“Why do you say so?”“Because, for instance, you noticed on the evening of the ball we gave,that M. de Monte Cristo would eat nothing in our house.”Mercédès raised herself on her feverish arm.“M. de Monte Cristo!” she exclaimed; “and how is he connectedwith the question you asked me?”“You know, mother, M. de Monte Cristo is almost an Oriental, and it iscustomary with the Orientals to secure full liberty for revenge by not eatingor drinking in the houses of their enemies.”“Do you say M. de Monte Cristo is our enemy?” replied Mercédès,becoming paler than the sheet which covered her. “Who told you so? Why,you are mad, Albert! M. de Monte Cristo has only shown us kindness. M. de MonteCristo saved your life; you yourself presented him to us. Oh, I entreat you, myson, if you had entertained such an idea, dispel it; and my counsel toyou—nay, my prayer—is to retain his friendship.”“Mother,” replied the young man, “you have special reasonsfor telling me to conciliate that man.”“I?” said Mercédès, blushing as rapidly as she had turned pale, andagain becoming paler than ever.“Yes, doubtless; and is it not that he may never do us any harm?”Mercédès shuddered, and, fixing on her son a scrutinizing gaze, “Youspeak strangely,” said she to Albert, “and you appear to have somesingular prejudices. What has the count done? Three days since you were withhim in Normandy; only three days since we looked on him as our bestfriend.”An ironical smile passed over Albert’s lips. Mercédès saw it and with thedouble instinct of woman and mother guessed all; but as she was prudent andstrong-minded she concealed both her sorrows and her fears. Albert was silent;an instant after, the countess resumed:“You came to inquire after my health; I will candidly acknowledge that Iam not well. You should install yourself here, and cheer my solitude. I do notwish to be left alone.”“Mother,” said the young man, “you know how gladly I wouldobey your wish, but an urgent and important affair obliges me to leave you forthe whole evening.”“Well,” replied Mercédès, sighing, “go, Albert; I will notmake you a slave to your filial piety.”Albert pretended he did not hear, bowed to his mother, and quitted her.Scarcely had he shut her door, when Mercédès called a confidential servant, andordered him to follow Albert wherever he should go that evening, and to comeand tell her immediately what he observed. Then she rang for her lady’smaid, and, weak as she was, she dressed, in order to be ready for whatevermight happen. The footman’s mission was an easy one. Albert went to hisroom, and dressed with unusual care. At ten minutes to eight Beauchamp arrived;he had seen Château-Renaud, who had promised to be in the orchestra before thecurtain was raised. Both got into Albert’s coupé; and, as theyoung man had no reason to conceal where he was going, he called aloud,“To the Opera.” In his impatience he arrived before the beginningof the performance.Château-Renaud was at his post; apprised by Beauchamp of the circumstances, herequired no explanation from Albert. The conduct of the son in seeking toavenge his father was so natural that Château-Renaud did not seek to dissuadehim, and was content with renewing his assurances of devotion. Debray was notyet come, but Albert knew that he seldom lost a scene at the Opera.Albert wandered about the theatre until the curtain was drawn up. He hoped tomeet with M. de Monte Cristo either in the lobby or on the stairs. The bellsummoned him to his seat, and he entered the orchestra with Château-Renaud andBeauchamp. But his eyes scarcely quitted the box between the columns, whichremained obstinately closed during the whole of the first act. At last, asAlbert was looking at his watch for about the hundredth time, at the beginningof the second act the door opened, and Monte Cristo entered, dressed in black,and, leaning over the front of the box, looked around the pit. Morrel followedhim, and looked also for his sister and brother in-law; he soon discovered themin another box, and kissed his hand to them.The count, in his survey of the pit, encountered a pale face and threateningeyes, which evidently sought to gain his attention. He recognized Albert, butthought it better not to notice him, as he looked so angry and discomposed.Without communicating his thoughts to his companion, he sat down, drew out hisopera-glass, and looked another way. Although apparently not noticing Albert,he did not, however, lose sight of him, and when the curtain fell at the end ofthe second act, he saw him leave the orchestra with his two friends. Then hishead was seen passing at the back of the boxes, and the count knew that theapproaching storm was intended to fall on him. He was at the moment conversingcheerfully with Morrel, but he was well prepared for what might happen.The door opened, and Monte Cristo, turning round, saw Albert, pale andtrembling, followed by Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.“Well,” cried he, with that benevolent politeness whichdistinguished his salutation from the common civilities of the world, “mycavalier has attained his object. Good-evening, M. de Morcerf.”The countenance of this man, who possessed such extraordinary control over hisfeelings, expressed the most perfect cordiality. Morrel only then recollectedthe letter he had received from the viscount, in which, without assigning anyreason, he begged him to go to the Opera, but he understood that somethingterrible was brooding.“We are not come here, sir, to exchange hypocritical expressions ofpoliteness, or false professions of friendship,” said Albert, “butto demand an explanation.”The young man’s trembling voice was scarcely audible.“An explanation at the Opera?” said the count, with that calm toneand penetrating eye which characterize the man who knows his cause is good.“Little acquainted as I am with the habits of Parisians, I should nothave thought this the place for such a demand.”“Still, if people will shut themselves up,” said Albert, “andcannot be seen because they are bathing, dining, or asleep, we must availourselves of the opportunity whenever they are to be seen.”“I am not difficult of access, sir; for yesterday, if my memory does notdeceive me, you were at my house.”“Yesterday I was at your house, sir,” said the young man;“because then I knew not who you were.”In pronouncing these words Albert had raised his voice so as to be heard bythose in the adjoining boxes and in the lobby. Thus the attention of many wasattracted by this altercation.“Where are you come from, sir? “ said Monte Cristo “You donot appear to be in the possession of your senses.”“Provided I understand your perfidy, sir, and succeed in making youunderstand that I will be revenged, I shall be reasonable enough,” saidAlbert furiously.“I do not understand you, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “and ifI did, your tone is too high. I am at home here, and I alone have a right toraise my voice above another’s. Leave the box, sir!”Monte Cristo pointed towards the door with the most commanding dignity.“Ah, I shall know how to make you leave your home!” replied Albert,clasping in his convulsed grasp the glove, which Monte Cristo did not losesight of.“Well, well,” said Monte Cristo quietly, “I see you wish toquarrel with me; but I would give you one piece of advice, which you will dowell to keep in mind. It is in poor taste to make a display of a challenge.Display is not becoming to everyone, M. de Morcerf.”At this name a murmur of astonishment passed around the group of spectators ofthis scene. They had talked of no one but Morcerf the whole day. Albertunderstood the allusion in a moment, and was about to throw his glove at thecount, when Morrel seized his hand, while Beauchamp and Château-Renaud, fearingthe scene would surpass the limits of a challenge, held him back. But MonteCristo, without rising, and leaning forward in his chair, merely stretched outhis arm and, taking the damp, crushed glove from the clenched hand of the youngman:“Sir,” said he in a solemn tone, “I consider your glovethrown, and will return it to you wrapped around a bullet. Now leave me or Iwill summon my servants to throw you out at the door.”Wild, almost unconscious, and with eyes inflamed, Albert stepped back, andMorrel closed the door. Monte Cristo took up his glass again as if nothing hadhappened; his face was like marble, and his heart was like bronze. Morrelwhispered, “What have you done to him?”“I? Nothing—at least personally,” said Monte Cristo.“But there must be some cause for this strange scene.”“The Count of Morcerf’s adventure exasperates the young man.”“Have you anything to do with it?”“It was through Haydée that the Chamber was informed of hisfather’s treason.”“Indeed?” said Morrel. “I had been told, but would not creditit, that the Grecian slave I have seen with you here in this very box was thedaughter of Ali Pasha.”“It is true, nevertheless.”“Then,” said Morrel, “I understand it all, and this scene waspremeditated.”“How so?”“Yes. Albert wrote to request me to come to the Opera, doubtless that Imight be a witness to the insult he meant to offer you.”“Probably,” said Monte Cristo with his imperturbable tranquillity.“But what shall you do with him?”“With whom?”“With Albert.”“What shall I do with Albert? As certainly, Maximilian, as I now pressyour hand, I shall kill him before ten o’clock tomorrow morning.”Morrel, in his turn, took Monte Cristo’s hand in both of his, and heshuddered to feel how cold and steady it was.“Ah, count,” said he, “his father loves him so much!”“Do not speak to me of that,” said Monte Cristo, with the firstmovement of anger he had betrayed; “I will make him suffer.”Morrel, amazed, let fall Monte Cristo’s hand. “Count, count!”said he.“Dear Maximilian,” interrupted the count, “listen howadorably Duprez is singing that line,—‘O Mathilde! idole de mon âme!’“I was the first to discover Duprez at Naples, and the first to applaudhim. Bravo, bravo!”Morrel saw it was useless to say more, and refrained. The curtain, which hadrisen at the close of the scene with Albert, again fell, and a rap was heard atthe door.“Come in,” said Monte Cristo with a voice that betrayed not theleast emotion; and immediately Beauchamp appeared. “Good-evening, M.Beauchamp,” said Monte Cristo, as if this was the first time he had seenthe journalist that evening; “be seated.”Beauchamp bowed, and, sitting down, “Sir,” said he, “I justnow accompanied M. de Morcerf, as you saw.”“And that means,” replied Monte Cristo, laughing, “that youhad, probably, just dined together. I am happy to see, M. Beauchamp, that youare more sober than he was.”“Sir,” said M. Beauchamp, “Albert was wrong, I acknowledge,to betray so much anger, and I come, on my own account, to apologize for him.And having done so, entirely on my own account, be it understood, I would addthat I believe you too gentlemanly to refuse giving him some explanationconcerning your connection with Yanina. Then I will add two words about theyoung Greek girl.”Monte Cristo motioned him to be silent. “Come,” said he, laughing,“there are all my hopes about to be destroyed.”“How so?” asked Beauchamp.“Doubtless you wish to make me appear a very eccentric character. I am,in your opinion, a Lara, a Manfred, a Lord Ruthven; then, just as I am arrivingat the climax, you defeat your own end, and seek to make an ordinary man of me.You bring me down to your own level, and demand explanations! Indeed, M.Beauchamp, it is quite laughable.”“Yet,” replied Beauchamp haughtily, “there are occasions whenprobity commands——”“M. Beauchamp,” interposed this strange man, “the Count ofMonte Cristo bows to none but the Count of Monte Cristo himself. Say no more, Ientreat you. I do what I please, M. Beauchamp, and it is always welldone.”“Sir,” replied the young man, “honest men are not to be paidwith such coin. I require honorable guaranties.”“I am, sir, a living guaranty,” replied Monte Cristo, motionless,but with a threatening look; “we have both blood in our veins which wewish to shed—that is our mutual guaranty. Tell the viscount so, and thattomorrow, before ten o’clock, I shall see what color his is.”“Then I have only to make arrangements for the duel,” saidBeauchamp.“It is quite immaterial to me,” said Monte Cristo, “and itwas very unnecessary to disturb me at the Opera for such a trifle. In Francepeople fight with the sword or pistol, in the colonies with the carbine, inArabia with the dagger. Tell your client that, although I am the insultedparty, in order to carry out my eccentricity, I leave him the choice of arms,and will accept without discussion, without dispute, anything, even combat bydrawing lots, which is always stupid, but with me different from other people,as I am sure to gain.”“Sure to gain!” repeated Beauchamp, looking with amazement at thecount.“Certainly,” said Monte Cristo, slightly shrugging his shoulders;“otherwise I would not fight with M. de Morcerf. I shall kill him—Icannot help it. Only by a single line this evening at my house let me know thearms and the hour; I do not like to be kept waiting.”“Pistols, then, at eight o’clock, in the Bois de Vincennes,”said Beauchamp, quite disconcerted, not knowing if he was dealing with anarrogant braggadocio or a supernatural being.“Very well, sir,” said Monte Cristo. “Now all that issettled, do let me see the performance, and tell your friend Albert not to comeany more this evening; he will hurt himself with all his ill-chosen barbarisms:let him go home and go to sleep.”Beauchamp left the box, perfectly amazed.“Now,” said Monte Cristo, turning towards Morrel, “I maydepend upon you, may I not?”“Certainly,” said Morrel, “I am at your service, count;still——”“What?”“It is desirable I should know the real cause.”“That is to say, you would rather not?”“No.”“The young man himself is acting blindfolded, and knows not the truecause, which is known only to God and to me; but I give you my word, Morrel,that God, who does know it, will be on our side.”“Enough,” said Morrel; “who is your second witness?”“I know no one in Paris, Morrel, on whom I could confer that honorbesides you and your brother Emmanuel. Do you think Emmanuel would obligeme?”“I will answer for him, count.”“Well? that is all I require. Tomorrow morning, at seven o’clock,you will be with me, will you not?”“We will.”“Hush, the curtain is rising. Listen! I never lose a note of this operaif I can avoid it; the music of William Tell is so sweet.” Chapter 89. The NightMonte Cristo waited,according to his usual custom, until Duprez had sung his famous“Suivez-moi!” then he rose and went out. Morrel took leaveof him at the door, renewing his promise to be with him the next morning atseven o’clock, and to bring Emmanuel. Then he stepped into hiscoupé, calm and smiling, and was at home in five minutes. No one whoknew the count could mistake his expression when, on entering, he said:“Ali, bring me my pistols with the ivory cross.”Ali brought the box to his master, who examined the weapons with a solicitudevery natural to a man who is about to intrust his life to a little powder andshot. These were pistols of an especial pattern, which Monte Cristo had hadmade for target practice in his own room. A cap was sufficient to drive out thebullet, and from the adjoining room no one would have suspected that the countwas, as sportsmen would say, keeping his hand in.He was just taking one up and looking for the point to aim at on a little ironplate which served him as a target, when his study door opened, and Baptistinentered. Before he had spoken a word, the count saw in the next room a veiledwoman, who had followed closely after Baptistin, and now, seeing the count witha pistol in his hand and swords on the table, rushed in. Baptistin looked athis master, who made a sign to him, and he went out, closing the door afterhim.“Who are you, madame?” said the count to the veiled woman.The stranger cast one look around her, to be certain that they were quitealone; then bending as if she would have knelt, and joining her hands, she saidwith an accent of despair:“Edmond, you will not kill my son!”The count retreated a step, uttered a slight exclamation, and let fall thepistol he held.“What name did you pronounce then, Madame de Morcerf?” said he.“Yours!” cried she, throwing back her veil,—“yours,which I alone, perhaps, have not forgotten. Edmond, it is not Madame de Morcerfwho is come to you, it is Mercédès.”“Mercédès is dead, madame,” said Monte Cristo; “I know no onenow of that name.”“Mercédès lives, sir, and she remembers, for she alone recognized youwhen she saw you, and even before she saw you, by your voice, Edmond,—bythe simple sound of your voice; and from that moment she has followed yoursteps, watched you, feared you, and she needs not to inquire what hand hasdealt the blow which now strikes M. de Morcerf.”“Fernand, do you mean?” replied Monte Cristo, with bitter irony;“since we are recalling names, let us remember them all.” MonteCristo had pronounced the name of Fernand with such an expression of hatredthat Mercédès felt a thrill of horror run through every vein.“You see, Edmond, I am not mistaken, and have cause to say, ‘Sparemy son!’”“And who told you, madame, that I have any hostile intentions againstyour son?”“No one, in truth; but a mother has twofold sight. I guessed all; Ifollowed him this evening to the Opera, and, concealed in a parquet box, haveseen all.”“If you have seen all, madame, you know that the son of Fernand haspublicly insulted me,” said Monte Cristo with awful calmness.“Oh, for pity’s sake!”“You have seen that he would have thrown his glove in my face if Morrel,one of my friends, had not stopped him.”“Listen to me, my son has also guessed who you are,—he attributeshis father’s misfortunes to you.”“Madame, you are mistaken, they are not misfortunes,—it is apunishment. It is not I who strike M. de Morcerf; it is Providence whichpunishes him.”“And why do you represent Providence?” cried Mercédès. “Whydo you remember when it forgets? What are Yanina and its vizier to you, Edmond?What injury has Fernand Mondego done you in betraying Ali Tepelini?”“Ah, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, “all this is an affairbetween the French captain and the daughter of Vasiliki. It does not concernme, you are right; and if I have sworn to revenge myself, it is not on theFrench captain, or the Count of Morcerf, but on the fisherman Fernand, thehusband of Mercédès the Catalane.”“Ah, sir!” cried the countess, “how terrible a vengeance fora fault which fatality made me commit!—for I am the only culprit, Edmond,and if you owe revenge to anyone, it is to me, who had not fortitude to bearyour absence and my solitude.”“But,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “why was I absent? And whywere you alone?”“Because you had been arrested, Edmond, and were a prisoner.”“And why was I arrested? Why was I a prisoner?”“I do not know,” said Mercédès.“You do not, madame; at least, I hope not. But I will tell you. I wasarrested and became a prisoner because, under the arbor of La Réserve, the daybefore I was to marry you, a man named Danglars wrote this letter, which thefisherman Fernand himself posted.”Monte Cristo went to a secretaire, opened a drawer by a spring, from which hetook a paper which had lost its original color, and the ink of which had becomeof a rusty hue—this he placed in the hands of Mercédès. It wasDanglars’ letter to the king’s attorney, which the Count of MonteCristo, disguised as a clerk from the house of Thomson & French, had takenfrom the file against Edmond Dantès, on the day he had paid the two hundredthousand francs to M. de Boville. Mercédès read with terror the followinglines:“The king’s attorney is informed by a friend to the throne andreligion that one Edmond Dantès, second in command on board the Pharaon,this day arrived from Smyrna, after having touched at Naples and Porto-Ferrajo,is the bearer of a letter from Murat to the usurper, and of another letter fromthe usurper to the Bonapartist club in Paris. Ample corroboration of thisstatement may be obtained by arresting the above-mentioned Edmond Dantès, whoeither carries the letter for Paris about with him, or has it at hisfather’s abode. Should it not be found in possession of either father orson, then it will assuredly be discovered in the cabin belonging to the saidDantès on board the Pharaon.”“How dreadful!” said Mercédès, passing her hand across her brow,moist with perspiration; “and that letter——”“I bought it for two hundred thousand francs, madame,” said MonteCristo; “but that is a trifle, since it enables me to justify myself toyou.”“And the result of that letter——”“You well know, madame, was my arrest; but you do not know how long thatarrest lasted. You do not know that I remained for fourteen years within aquarter of a league of you, in a dungeon in the Château d’If. You do notknow that every day of those fourteen years I renewed the vow of vengeancewhich I had made the first day; and yet I was not aware that you had marriedFernand, my calumniator, and that my father had died of hunger!”“Can it be?” cried Mercédès, shuddering.“That is what I heard on leaving my prison fourteen years after I hadentered it; and that is why, on account of the living Mercédès and my deceasedfather, I have sworn to revenge myself on Fernand, and—I have revengedmyself.”“And you are sure the unhappy Fernand did that?”“I am satisfied, madame, that he did what I have told you; besides, thatis not much more odious than that a Frenchman by adoption should pass over tothe English; that a Spaniard by birth should have fought against the Spaniards;that a stipendiary of Ali should have betrayed and murdered Ali. Compared withsuch things, what is the letter you have just read?—a lover’sdeception, which the woman who has married that man ought certainly to forgive;but not so the lover who was to have married her. Well, the French did notavenge themselves on the traitor, the Spaniards did not shoot the traitor, Aliin his tomb left the traitor unpunished; but I, betrayed, sacrificed, buried,have risen from my tomb, by the grace of God, to punish that man. He sends mefor that purpose, and here I am.”The poor woman’s head and arms fell; her legs bent under her, and shefell on her knees.“Forgive, Edmond, forgive for my sake, who love you still!”The dignity of the wife checked the fervor of the lover and the mother. Herforehead almost touched the carpet, when the count sprang forward and raisedher. Then seated on a chair, she looked at the manly countenance of MonteCristo, on which grief and hatred still impressed a threatening expression.“Not crush that accursed race?” murmured he; “abandon mypurpose at the moment of its accomplishment? Impossible, madame,impossible!”“Edmond,” said the poor mother, who tried every means, “whenI call you Edmond, why do you not call me Mercédès?”“Mercédès!” repeated Monte Cristo; “Mercédès! Well yes, youare right; that name has still its charms, and this is the first time for along period that I have pronounced it so distinctly. Oh, Mercédès, I haveuttered your name with the sigh of melancholy, with the groan of sorrow, withthe last effort of despair; I have uttered it when frozen with cold, crouchedon the straw in my dungeon; I have uttered it, consumed with heat, rolling onthe stone floor of my prison. Mercédès, I must revenge myself, for I sufferedfourteen years,—fourteen years I wept, I cursed; now I tell you,Mercédès, I must revenge myself.”The count, fearing to yield to the entreaties of her he had so ardently loved,called his sufferings to the assistance of his hatred.“Revenge yourself, then, Edmond,” cried the poor mother; “butlet your vengeance fall on the culprits,—on him, on me, but not on myson!”“It is written in the good book,” said Monte Cristo, “thatthe sins of the fathers shall fall upon their children to the third and fourthgeneration. Since God himself dictated those words to his prophet, why should Iseek to make myself better than God?”“Edmond,” continued Mercédès, with her arms extended towards thecount, “since I first knew you, I have adored your name, have respectedyour memory. Edmond, my friend, do not compel me to tarnish that noble and pureimage reflected incessantly on the mirror of my heart. Edmond, if you knew allthe prayers I have addressed to God for you while I thought you were living andsince I have thought you must be dead! Yes, dead, alas! I imagined your deadbody buried at the foot of some gloomy tower, or cast to the bottom of a pit byhateful jailers, and I wept! What could I do for you, Edmond, besides pray andweep? Listen; for ten years I dreamed each night the same dream. I had beentold that you had endeavored to escape; that you had taken the place of anotherprisoner; that you had slipped into the winding sheet of a dead body; that youhad been thrown alive from the top of the Château d’If, and that the cryyou uttered as you dashed upon the rocks first revealed to your jailers thatthey were your murderers. Well, Edmond, I swear to you, by the head of that sonfor whom I entreat your pity,—Edmond, for ten years I saw every nightevery detail of that frightful tragedy, and for ten years I heard every nightthe cry which awoke me, shuddering and cold. And I, too, Edmond—oh!believe me—guilty as I was—oh, yes, I, too, have sufferedmuch!”“Have you known what it is to have your father starve to death in yourabsence?” cried Monte Cristo, thrusting his hands into his hair;“have you seen the woman you loved giving her hand to your rival, whileyou were perishing at the bottom of a dungeon?”“No,” interrupted Mercédès, “but I have seen him whom I lovedon the point of murdering my son.”Mercédès uttered these words with such deep anguish, with an accent of suchintense despair, that Monte Cristo could not restrain a sob. The lion wasdaunted; the avenger was conquered.“What do you ask of me?” said he,—“your son’slife? Well, he shall live!”Mercédès uttered a cry which made the tears start from Monte Cristo’seyes; but these tears disappeared almost instantaneously, for, doubtless, Godhad sent some angel to collect them—far more precious were they in hiseyes than the richest pearls of Guzerat and Ophir.“Oh,” said she, seizing the count’s hand and raising it toher lips; “oh, thank you, thank you, Edmond! Now you are exactly what Idreamt you were,—the man I always loved. Oh, now I may say so!”“So much the better,” replied Monte Cristo; “as that poorEdmond will not have long to be loved by you. Death is about to return to thetomb, the phantom to retire in darkness.”“What do you say, Edmond?”“I say, since you command me, Mercédès, I must die.”“Die? and why so? Who talks of dying? Whence have you these ideas ofdeath?”“You do not suppose that, publicly outraged in the face of a wholetheatre, in the presence of your friends and those of your son—challengedby a boy who will glory in my forgiveness as if it were a victory—you donot suppose that I can for one moment wish to live. What I most loved afteryou, Mercédès, was myself, my dignity, and that strength which rendered mesuperior to other men; that strength was my life. With one word you havecrushed it, and I die.”“But the duel will not take place, Edmond, since you forgive?”“It will take place,” said Monte Cristo, in a most solemn tone;“but instead of your son’s blood to stain the ground, mine willflow.”Mercédès shrieked, and sprang towards Monte Cristo, but, suddenly stopping,“Edmond,” said she, “there is a God above us, since you liveand since I have seen you again; I trust to him from my heart. While waitinghis assistance I trust to your word; you have said that my son should live,have you not?”“Yes, madame, he shall live,” said Monte Cristo, surprised thatwithout more emotion Mercédès had accepted the heroic sacrifice he made forher. Mercédès extended her hand to the count.“Edmond,” said she, and her eyes were wet with tears while lookingat him to whom she spoke, “how noble it is of you, how great the actionyou have just performed, how sublime to have taken pity on a poor woman whoappealed to you with every chance against her, Alas, I am grown old with griefmore than with years, and cannot now remind my Edmond by a smile, or by a look,of that Mercédès whom he once spent so many hours in contemplating. Ah, believeme, Edmond, as I told you, I too have suffered much; I repeat, it is melancholyto pass one’s life without having one joy to recall, without preserving asingle hope; but that proves that all is not yet over. No, it is not finished;I feel it by what remains in my heart. Oh, I repeat it, Edmond; what you havejust done is beautiful—it is grand; it is sublime.”“Do you say so now, Mercédès?—then what would you say if you knewthe extent of the sacrifice I make to you? Suppose that the Supreme Being,after having created the world and fertilized chaos, had paused in the work tospare an angel the tears that might one day flow for mortal sins from herimmortal eyes; suppose that when everything was in readiness and the moment hadcome for God to look upon his work and see that it was good—suppose hehad snuffed out the sun and tossed the world back into eternalnight—then—even then, Mercédès, you could not imagine what I losein sacrificing my life at this moment.”Mercédès looked at the count in a way which expressed at the same time herastonishment, her admiration, and her gratitude. Monte Cristo pressed hisforehead on his burning hands, as if his brain could no longer bear alone theweight of its thoughts.“Edmond,” said Mercédès, “I have but one word more to say toyou.”The count smiled bitterly.“Edmond,” continued she, “you will see that if my face ispale, if my eyes are dull, if my beauty is gone; if Mercédès, in short, nolonger resembles her former self in her features, you will see that her heartis still the same. Adieu, then, Edmond; I have nothing more to ask ofheaven—I have seen you again, and have found you as noble and as great asformerly you were. Adieu, Edmond, adieu, and thank you.”But the count did not answer. Mercédès opened the door of the study and haddisappeared before he had recovered from the painful and profound reverie intowhich his thwarted vengeance had plunged him.The clock of the Invalides struck one when the carriage which conveyed Madamede Morcerf rolled away on the pavement of the Champs-Élysées, and made MonteCristo raise his head.“What a fool I was,” said he, “not to tear my heart out onthe day when I resolved to avenge myself!” Chapter 90. TheMeetingAfter Mercédès had leftMonte Cristo, he fell into profound gloom. Around him and within him the flightof thought seemed to have stopped; his energetic mind slumbered, as the bodydoes after extreme fatigue.“What?” said he to himself, while the lamp and the wax lights werenearly burnt out, and the servants were waiting impatiently in the anteroom;“what? this edifice which I have been so long preparing, which I havereared with so much care and toil, is to be crushed by a single touch, a word,a breath! Yes, this self, of whom I thought so much, of whom I was so proud,who had appeared so worthless in the dungeons of the Château d’If, andwhom I had succeeded in making so great, will be but a lump of clay tomorrow.Alas, it is not the death of the body I regret; for is not the destruction ofthe vital principle, the repose to which everything is tending, to which everyunhappy being aspires,—is not this the repose of matter after which I solong sighed, and which I was seeking to attain by the painful process ofstarvation when Faria appeared in my dungeon? What is death for me? One stepfarther into rest,—two, perhaps, into silence. No, it is not existence,then, that I regret, but the ruin of projects so slowly carried out, solaboriously framed. Providence is now opposed to them, when I most thought itwould be propitious. It is not God’s will that they should beaccomplished. This burden, almost as heavy as a world, which I had raised, andI had thought to bear to the end, was too great for my strength, and I wascompelled to lay it down in the middle of my career. Oh, shall I then, againbecome a fatalist, whom fourteen years of despair and ten of hope had rendereda believer in Providence?“And all this—all this, because my heart, which I thought dead, wasonly sleeping; because it has awakened and has begun to beat again, because Ihave yielded to the pain of the emotion excited in my breast by a woman’svoice.“Yet,” continued the count, becoming each moment more absorbed inthe anticipation of the dreadful sacrifice for the morrow, which Mercédès hadaccepted, “yet, it is impossible that so noble-minded a woman should thusthrough selfishness consent to my death when I am in the prime of life andstrength; it is impossible that she can carry to such a point maternal love, orrather delirium. There are virtues which become crimes by exaggeration. No, shemust have conceived some pathetic scene; she will come and throw herselfbetween us; and what would be sublime here will there appear ridiculous.”The blush of pride mounted to the count’s forehead as this thought passedthrough his mind.“Ridiculous?” repeated he; “and the ridicule will fall on me.I ridiculous? No, I would rather die.”By thus exaggerating to his own mind the anticipated ill-fortune of the nextday, to which he had condemned himself by promising Mercédès to spare her son,the count at last exclaimed:“Folly, folly, folly!—to carry generosity so far as to put myselfup as a mark for that young man to aim at. He will never believe that my deathwas suicide; and yet it is important for the honor of my memory,—and thissurely is not vanity, but a justifiable pride,—it is important the worldshould know that I have consented, by my free will, to stop my arm, alreadyraised to strike, and that with the arm which has been so powerful againstothers I have struck myself. It must be; it shall be.”Seizing a pen, he drew a paper from a secret drawer in his desk, and wrote atthe bottom of the document (which was no other than his will, made since hisarrival in Paris) a sort of codicil, clearly explaining the nature of hisdeath.“I do this, Oh, my God,” said he, with his eyes raised to heaven,“as much for thy honor as for mine. I have during ten years consideredmyself the agent of thy vengeance, and other wretches, like Morcerf, Danglars,Villefort, even Morcerf himself, must not imagine that chance has freed themfrom their enemy. Let them know, on the contrary, that their punishment, whichhad been decreed by Providence, is only delayed by my present determination,and although they escape it in this world, it awaits them in another, and thatthey are only exchanging time for eternity.”While he was thus agitated by gloomy uncertainties,—wretched wakingdreams of grief,—the first rays of morning pierced his windows, and shoneupon the pale blue paper on which he had just inscribed his justification ofProvidence.It was just five o’clock in the morning when a slight noise like astifled sigh reached his ear. He turned his head, looked around him, and saw noone; but the sound was repeated distinctly enough to convince him of itsreality.He arose, and quietly opening the door of the drawing-room, saw Haydée, who hadfallen on a chair, with her arms hanging down and her beautiful head thrownback. She had been standing at the door, to prevent his going out withoutseeing her, until sleep, which the young cannot resist, had overpowered herframe, wearied as she was with watching. The noise of the door did not awakenher, and Monte Cristo gazed at her with affectionate regret.“She remembered that she had a son,” said he; “and I forgot Ihad a daughter.” Then, shaking his head sorrowfully, “PoorHaydée,” said he; “she wished to see me, to speak to me; she hasfeared or guessed something. Oh, I cannot go without taking leave of her; Icannot die without confiding her to someone.”He quietly regained his seat, and wrote under the other lines:“I bequeath to Maximilian Morrel, captain of Spahis,—and son of myformer patron, Pierre Morrel, shipowner at Marseilles,—the sum of twentymillions, a part of which may be offered to his sister Julie and brother-in-lawEmmanuel, if he does not fear this increase of fortune may mar their happiness.These twenty millions are concealed in my grotto at Monte Cristo, of whichBertuccio knows the secret. If his heart is free, and he will marry Haydée, thedaughter of Ali Pasha of Yanina, whom I have brought up with the love of afather, and who has shown the love and tenderness of a daughter for me, he willthus accomplish my last wish. This will has already constituted Haydée heiressof the rest of my fortune, consisting of lands, funds in England, Austria, andHolland, furniture in my different palaces and houses, and which without thetwenty millions and the legacies to my servants, may still amount to sixtymillions.”He was finishing the last line when a cry behind him made him start, and thepen fell from his hand.“Haydée,” said he, “did you read it?”“Oh, my lord,” said she, “why are you writing thus at such anhour? Why are you bequeathing all your fortune to me? Are you going to leaveme?”“I am going on a journey, dear child,” said Monte Cristo, with anexpression of infinite tenderness and melancholy; “and if any misfortuneshould happen to me——”The count stopped.“Well?” asked the young girl, with an authoritative tone the counthad never observed before, and which startled him.“Well, if any misfortune happen to me,” replied Monte Cristo,“I wish my daughter to be happy.” Haydée smiled sorrowfully, andshook her head.“Do you think of dying, my lord?” said she.“The wise man, my child, has said, ‘It is good to think ofdeath.’”“Well, if you die,” said she, “bequeath your fortune toothers, for if you die I shall require nothing;” and, taking the paper,she tore it in four pieces, and threw it into the middle of the room. Then, theeffort having exhausted her strength, she fell, not asleep this time, butfainting on the floor.The count leaned over her and raised her in his arms; and seeing that sweetpale face, those lovely eyes closed, that beautiful form motionless and to allappearance lifeless, the idea occurred to him for the first time, that perhapsshe loved him otherwise than as a daughter loves a father.“Alas,” murmured he, with intense suffering, “I might, then,have been happy yet.”Then he carried Haydée to her room, resigned her to the care of her attendants,and returning to his study, which he shut quickly this time, he again copiedthe destroyed will. As he was finishing, the sound of a cabriolet entering theyard was heard. Monte Cristo approached the window, and saw Maximilian andEmmanuel alight. “Good,” said he; “it wastime,”—and he sealed his will with three seals.A moment afterwards he heard a noise in the drawing-room, and went to open thedoor himself. Morrel was there; he had come twenty minutes before the timeappointed.“I am perhaps come too soon, count,” said he, “but I franklyacknowledge that I have not closed my eyes all night, nor has anyone in myhouse. I need to see you strong in your courageous assurance, to recovermyself.”Monte Cristo could not resist this proof of affection; he not only extended hishand to the young man, but flew to him with open arms.“Morrel,” said he, “it is a happy day for me, to feel that Iam beloved by such a man as you. Good-morning, Emmanuel; you will come with methen, Maximilian?”“Did you doubt it?” said the young captain.“But if I were wrong——”“I watched you during the whole scene of that challenge yesterday; I havebeen thinking of your firmness all night, and I said to myself that justicemust be on your side, or man’s countenance is no longer to be reliedon.”“But, Morrel, Albert is your friend?”“Simply an acquaintance, sir.”“You met on the same day you first saw me?”“Yes, that is true; but I should not have recollected it if you had notreminded me.”“Thank you, Morrel.” Then ringing the bell once,“Look.” said he to Ali, who came immediately, “take that tomy solicitor. It is my will, Morrel. When I am dead, you will go and examineit.”“What?” said Morrel, “you dead?”“Yes; must I not be prepared for everything, dear friend? But what didyou do yesterday after you left me?”“I went to Tortoni’s, where, as I expected, I found Beauchamp andChâteau-Renaud. I own I was seeking them.”“Why, when all was arranged?”“Listen, count; the affair is serious and unavoidable.”“Did you doubt it!”“No; the offence was public, and everyone is already talking ofit.”“Well?”“Well, I hoped to get an exchange of arms,—to substitute the swordfor the pistol; the pistol is blind.”“Have you succeeded?” asked Monte Cristo quickly, with animperceptible gleam of hope.“No; for your skill with the sword is so well known.”“Ah?—who has betrayed me?”“The skilful swordsman whom you have conquered.”“And you failed?”“They positively refused.”“Morrel,” said the count, “have you ever seen me fire apistol?”“Never.”“Well, we have time; look.” Monte Cristo took the pistols he heldin his hand when Mercédès entered, and fixing an ace of clubs against the ironplate, with four shots he successively shot off the four sides of the club. Ateach shot Morrel turned pale. He examined the bullets with which Monte Cristoperformed this dexterous feat, and saw that they were no larger than buckshot.“It is astonishing,” said he. “Look, Emmanuel.” Thenturning towards Monte Cristo, “Count,” said he, “in the nameof all that is dear to you, I entreat you not to kill Albert!—the unhappyyouth has a mother.”“You are right,” said Monte Cristo; “and I have none.”These words were uttered in a tone which made Morrel shudder.“You are the offended party, count.”“Doubtless; what does that imply?”“That you will fire first.”“I fire first?”“Oh, I obtained, or rather claimed that; we had conceded enough for themto yield us that.”“And at what distance?”“Twenty paces.” A smile of terrible import passed over thecount’s lips.“Morrel,” said he, “do not forget what you have justseen.”“The only chance for Albert’s safety, then, will arise from youremotion.”“I suffer from emotion?” said Monte Cristo.“Or from your generosity, my friend; to so good a marksman as you are, Imay say what would appear absurd to another.”“What is that?”“Break his arm—wound him—but do not kill him.”“I will tell you, Morrel,” said the count, “that I do notneed entreating to spare the life of M. de Morcerf; he shall be so well spared,that he will return quietly with his two friends, while I——”“And you?”“That will be another thing; I shall be brought home.”“No, no,” cried Maximilian, quite unable to restrain his feelings.“As I told you, my dear Morrel, M. de Morcerf will kill me.”Morrel looked at him in utter amazement. “But what has happened, then,since last evening, count?”“The same thing that happened to Brutus the night before the battle ofPhilippi; I have seen a ghost.”“And that ghost——”“Told me, Morrel, that I had lived long enough.”Maximilian and Emmanuel looked at each other. Monte Cristo drew out his watch.“Let us go,” said he; “it is five minutes past seven, and theappointment was for eight o’clock.”A carriage was in readiness at the door. Monte Cristo stepped into it with histwo friends. He had stopped a moment in the passage to listen at a door, andMaximilian and Emmanuel, who had considerately passed forward a few steps,thought they heard him answer by a sigh to a sob from within. As the clockstruck eight they drove up to the place of meeting.“We are first,” said Morrel, looking out of the window.“Excuse me, sir,” said Baptistin, who had followed his master withindescribable terror, “but I think I see a carriage down there under thetrees.”Monte Cristo sprang lightly from the carriage, and offered his hand to assistEmmanuel and Maximilian. The latter retained the count’s hand betweenhis.“I like,” said he, “to feel a hand like this, when its ownerrelies on the goodness of his cause.”“It seems to me,” said Emmanuel, “that I see two young mendown there, who are evidently, waiting.”Monte Cristo drew Morrel a step or two behind his brother-in-law.“Maximilian,” said he, “are your affectionsdisengaged?” Morrel looked at Monte Cristo with astonishment. “I donot seek your confidence, my dear friend. I only ask you a simple question;answer it;—that is all I require.”“I love a young girl, count.”“Do you love her much?”“More than my life.”“Another hope defeated!” said the count. Then, with a sigh,“Poor Haydée!” murmured he.“To tell the truth, count, if I knew less of you, I should think that youwere less brave than you are.”“Because I sigh when thinking of someone I am leaving? Come, Morrel, itis not like a soldier to be so bad a judge of courage. Do I regret life? Whatis it to me, who have passed twenty years between life and death? Moreover, donot alarm yourself, Morrel; this weakness, if it is such, is betrayed to youalone. I know the world is a drawing-room, from which we must retire politelyand honestly; that is, with a bow, and our debts of honor paid.”“That is to the purpose. Have you brought your arms?”“I?—what for? I hope these gentlemen have theirs.”“I will inquire,” said Morrel.“Do; but make no treaty—you understand me?”“You need not fear.” Morrel advanced towards Beauchamp andChâteau-Renaud, who, seeing his intention, came to meet him. The three youngmen bowed to each other courteously, if not affably.“Excuse me, gentlemen,” said Morrel, “but I do not see M. deMorcerf.”“He sent us word this morning,” replied Château-Renaud, “thathe would meet us on the ground.”“Ah,” said Morrel. Beauchamp pulled out his watch.“It is only five minutes past eight,” said he to Morrel;“there is not much time lost yet.”“Oh, I made no allusion of that kind,” replied Morrel.“There is a carriage coming,” said Château-Renaud. It advancedrapidly along one of the avenues leading towards the open space where they wereassembled.“You are doubtless provided with pistols, gentlemen? M. de Monte Cristoyields his right of using his.”“We had anticipated this kindness on the part of the count,” saidBeauchamp, “and I have brought some weapons which I bought eight or tendays since, thinking to want them on a similar occasion. They are quite new,and have not yet been used. Will you examine them.”“Oh, M. Beauchamp, if you assure me that M. de Morcerf does not knowthese pistols, you may readily believe that your word will be quitesufficient.”“Gentlemen,” said Château-Renaud, “it is not Morcerf comingin that carriage;—faith, it is Franz and Debray!”The two young men he announced were indeed approaching. “What chancebrings you here, gentlemen?” said Château-Renaud, shaking hands with eachof them.“Because,” said Debray, “Albert sent this morning to requestus to come.” Beauchamp and Château-Renaud exchanged looks ofastonishment. “I think I understand his reason,” said Morrel.“What is it?”“Yesterday afternoon I received a letter from M. de Morcerf, begging meto attend the Opera.”“And I,” said Debray.“And I also,” said Franz.“And we, too,” added Beauchamp and Château-Renaud.“Having wished you all to witness the challenge, he now wishes you to bepresent at the combat.”“Exactly so,” said the young men; “you have probably guessedright.”“But, after all these arrangements, he does not come himself,” saidChâteau-Renaud. “Albert is ten minutes after time.”“There he comes,” said Beauchamp, “on horseback, at fullgallop, followed by a servant.”“How imprudent,” said Château-Renaud, “to come on horsebackto fight a duel with pistols, after all the instructions I had givenhim.”“And besides,” said Beauchamp, “with a collar above hiscravat, an open coat and white waistcoat! Why has he not painted a spot uponhis heart?—it would have been more simple.”Meanwhile Albert had arrived within ten paces of the group formed by the fiveyoung men. He jumped from his horse, threw the bridle on his servant’sarms, and joined them. He was pale, and his eyes were red and swollen; it wasevident that he had not slept. A shade of melancholy gravity overspread hiscountenance, which was not natural to him.“I thank you, gentlemen,” said he, “for having complied withmy request; I feel extremely grateful for this mark of friendship.”Morrel had stepped back as Morcerf approached, and remained at a shortdistance. “And to you also, M. Morrel, my thanks are due. Come, therecannot be too many.”“Sir,” said Maximilian, “you are not perhaps aware that I amM. de Monte Cristo’s friend?”“I was not sure, but I thought it might be so. So much the better; themore honorable men there are here the better I shall be satisfied.”“M. Morrel,” said Château-Renaud, “will you apprise the Countof Monte Cristo that M. de Morcerf is arrived, and we are at hisdisposal?”Morrel was preparing to fulfil his commission. Beauchamp had meanwhile drawnthe box of pistols from the carriage.“Stop, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I have two words to say tothe Count of Monte Cristo.”“In private?” asked Morrel.“No, sir; before all who are here.”Albert’s witnesses looked at each other. Franz and Debray exchanged somewords in a whisper, and Morrel, rejoiced at this unexpected incident, went tofetch the count, who was walking in a retired path with Emmanuel.“What does he want with me?” said Monte Cristo.“I do not know, but he wishes to speak to you.”“Ah?” said Monte Cristo, “I trust he is not going to tempt meby some fresh insult!”“I do not think that such is his intention,” said Morrel.The count advanced, accompanied by Maximilian and Emmanuel. His calm and serenelook formed a singular contrast to Albert’s grief-stricken face, whoapproached also, followed by the other four young men.When at three paces distant from each other, Albert and the count stopped.“Approach, gentlemen,” said Albert; “I wish you not to loseone word of what I am about to have the honor of saying to the Count of MonteCristo, for it must be repeated by you to all who will listen to it, strange asit may appear to you.”“Proceed, sir,” said the count.“Sir,” said Albert, at first with a tremulous voice, but whichgradually became firmer, “I reproached you with exposing the conduct ofM. de Morcerf in Epirus, for guilty as I knew he was, I thought you had noright to punish him; but I have since learned that you had that right. It isnot Fernand Mondego’s treachery towards Ali Pasha which induces me soreadily to excuse you, but the treachery of the fisherman Fernand towards you,and the almost unheard-of miseries which were its consequences; and I say, andproclaim it publicly, that you were justified in revenging yourself on myfather, and I, his son, thank you for not using greater severity.”Had a thunderbolt fallen in the midst of the spectators of this unexpectedscene, it would not have surprised them more than did Albert’sdeclaration. As for Monte Cristo, his eyes slowly rose towards heaven with anexpression of infinite gratitude. He could not understand how Albert’sfiery nature, of which he had seen so much among the Roman bandits, hadsuddenly stooped to this humiliation. He recognized the influence of Mercédès,and saw why her noble heart had not opposed the sacrifice she knew beforehandwould be useless.“Now, sir,” said Albert, “if you think my apology sufficient,pray give me your hand. Next to the merit of infallibility which you appear topossess, I rank that of candidly acknowledging a fault. But this confessionconcerns me only. I acted well as a man, but you have acted better than man. Anangel alone could have saved one of us from death—that angel came fromheaven, if not to make us friends (which, alas, fatality renders impossible),at least to make us esteem each other.”Monte Cristo, with moistened eye, heaving breast, and lips half open, extendedto Albert a hand which the latter pressed with a sentiment resemblingrespectful fear.“Gentlemen,” said he, “M. de Monte Cristo receives myapology. I had acted hastily towards him. Hasty actions are generally bad ones.Now my fault is repaired. I hope the world will not call me cowardly for actingas my conscience dictated. But if anyone should entertain a false opinion ofme,” added he, drawing himself up as if he would challenge both friendsand enemies, “I shall endeavor to correct his mistake.”“What happened during the night?” asked Beauchamp ofChâteau-Renaud; “we appear to make a very sorry figure here.”“In truth, what Albert has just done is either very despicable or verynoble,” replied the baron.“What can it mean?” said Debray to Franz.“The Count of Monte Cristo acts dishonorably to M. de Morcerf, and isjustified by his son! Had I ten Yaninas in my family, I should only considermyself the more bound to fight ten times.”As for Monte Cristo, his head was bent down, his arms were powerless. Bowingunder the weight of twenty-four years’ reminiscences, he thought not ofAlbert, of Beauchamp, of Château-Renaud, or of any of that group; but hethought of that courageous woman who had come to plead for her son’slife, to whom he had offered his, and who had now saved it by the revelation ofa dreadful family secret, capable of destroying forever in that youngman’s heart every feeling of filial piety.“Providence still,” murmured he; “now only am I fullyconvinced of being the emissary of God!” Chapter 91. Mother andSonThe Count of MonteCristo bowed to the five young men with a melancholy and dignified smile, andgot into his carriage with Maximilian and Emmanuel. Albert, Beauchamp, andChâteau-Renaud remained alone. Albert looked at his two friends, not timidly,but in a way that appeared to ask their opinion of what he had just done.“Indeed, my dear friend,” said Beauchamp first, who had either themost feeling or the least dissimulation, “allow me to congratulate you;this is a very unhoped-for conclusion of a very disagreeable affair.”Albert remained silent and wrapped in thought. Château-Renaud contented himselfwith tapping his boot with his flexible cane.“Are we not going?” said he, after this embarrassing silence.“When you please,” replied Beauchamp; “allow me only tocompliment M. de Morcerf, who has given proof today of rare chivalricgenerosity.”“Oh, yes,” said Château-Renaud.“It is magnificent,” continued Beauchamp, “to be able toexercise so much self-control!”“Assuredly; as for me, I should have been incapable of it,” saidChâteau-Renaud, with most significant coolness.“Gentlemen,” interrupted Albert, “I think you did notunderstand that something very serious had passed between M. de Monte Cristoand myself.”“Possibly, possibly,” said Beauchamp immediately; “but everysimpleton would not be able to understand your heroism, and sooner or later youwill find yourself compelled to explain it to them more energetically thanwould be convenient to your bodily health and the duration of your life. May Igive you a friendly counsel? Set out for Naples, the Hague, or St.Petersburg—calm countries, where the point of honor is better understoodthan among our hot-headed Parisians. Seek quietude and oblivion, so that youmay return peaceably to France after a few years. Am I not right, M. deChâteau-Renaud?”“That is quite my opinion,” said the gentleman; “nothinginduces serious duels so much as a duel forsworn.”“Thank you, gentlemen,” replied Albert, with a smile ofindifference; “I shall follow your advice—not because you give it,but because I had before intended to quit France. I thank you equally for theservice you have rendered me in being my seconds. It is deeply engraved on myheart, and, after what you have just said, I remember that only.”Château-Renaud and Beauchamp looked at each other; the impression was the sameon both of them, and the tone in which Morcerf had just expressed his thankswas so determined that the position would have become embarrassing for all ifthe conversation had continued.“Good-bye, Albert,” said Beauchamp suddenly, carelessly extendinghis hand to the young man. The latter did not appear to arouse from hislethargy; in fact, he did not notice the offered hand.“Good-bye,” said Château-Renaud in his turn, keeping his littlecane in his left hand, and saluting with his right.Albert’s lips scarcely whispered “Good-bye,” but his look wasmore explicit; it expressed a whole poem of restrained anger, proud disdain,and generous indignation. He preserved his melancholy and motionless positionfor some time after his two friends had regained their carriage; then suddenlyunfastening his horse from the little tree to which his servant had tied it, hemounted and galloped off in the direction of Paris.In a quarter of an hour he was entering the house in the Rue du Helder. As healighted, he thought he saw his father’s pale face behind the curtain ofthe count’s bedroom. Albert turned away his head with a sigh, and went tohis own apartments. He cast one lingering look on all the luxuries which hadrendered life so easy and so happy since his infancy; he looked at thepictures, whose faces seemed to smile, and the landscapes, which appearedpainted in brighter colors. Then he took away his mother’s portrait, withits oaken frame, leaving the gilt frame from which he took it black and empty.Then he arranged all his beautiful Turkish arms, his fine English guns, hisJapanese china, his cups mounted in silver, his artistic bronzes by Feuchèresor Barye; examined the cupboards, and placed the key in each; threw into adrawer of his secretaire, which he left open, all the pocket-money he had abouthim, and with it the thousand fancy jewels from his vases and his jewel-boxes;then he made an exact inventory of everything, and placed it in the mostconspicuous part of the table, after putting aside the books and papers whichhad collected there.At the beginning of this work, his servant, notwithstanding orders to thecontrary, came to his room.“What do you want?” asked he, with a more sorrowful than angrytone.“Pardon me, sir,” replied the valet; “you had forbidden me todisturb you, but the Count of Morcerf has called me.”“Well!” said Albert.“I did not like to go to him without first seeing you.”“Why?”“Because the count is doubtless aware that I accompanied you to themeeting this morning.”“It is probable,” said Albert.“And since he has sent for me, it is doubtless to question me on whathappened there. What must I answer?”“The truth.”“Then I shall say the duel did not take place?”“You will say I apologized to the Count of Monte Cristo. Go.”The valet bowed and retired, and Albert returned to his inventory. As he wasfinishing this work, the sound of horses prancing in the yard, and the wheelsof a carriage shaking his window, attracted his attention. He approached thewindow, and saw his father get into it, and drive away. The door was scarcelyclosed when Albert bent his steps to his mother’s room; and, no one beingthere to announce him, he advanced to her bedchamber, and distressed by what hesaw and guessed, stopped for one moment at the door.As if the same idea had animated these two beings, Mercédès was doing the samein her apartments that he had just done in his. Everything was inorder,—laces, dresses, jewels, linen, money, all were arranged in thedrawers, and the countess was carefully collecting the keys. Albert saw allthese preparations and understood them, and exclaiming, “Mymother!” he threw his arms around her neck.The artist who could have depicted the expression of these two countenanceswould certainly have made of them a beautiful picture. All these proofs of anenergetic resolution, which Albert did not fear on his own account, alarmed himfor his mother. “What are you doing?” asked he.“What were you doing?” replied she.“Oh, my mother!” exclaimed Albert, so overcome he could scarcelyspeak; “it is not the same with you and me—you cannot have made thesame resolution I have, for I have come to warn you that I bid adieu to yourhouse, and—and to you.”“I also,” replied Mercédès, “am going, and I acknowledge Ihad depended on your accompanying me; have I deceived myself?”“Mother,” said Albert with firmness. “I cannot make you sharethe fate I have planned for myself. I must live henceforth without rank andfortune, and to begin this hard apprenticeship I must borrow from a friend theloaf I shall eat until I have earned one. So, my dear mother, I am going atonce to ask Franz to lend me the small sum I shall require to supply my presentwants.”“You, my poor child, suffer poverty and hunger? Oh, do not say so; itwill break my resolutions.”“But not mine, mother,” replied Albert. “I am young andstrong; I believe I am courageous, and since yesterday I have learned the powerof will. Alas, my dear mother, some have suffered so much, and yet live, andhave raised a new fortune on the ruin of all the promises of happiness whichheaven had made them—on the fragments of all the hope which God had giventhem! I have seen that, mother; I know that from the gulf in which theirenemies have plunged them they have risen with so much vigor and glory that intheir turn they have ruled their former conquerors, and have punished them. No,mother; from this moment I have done with the past, and accept nothing fromit—not even a name, because you can understand that your son cannot bearthe name of a man who ought to blush for it before another.”“Albert, my child,” said Mercédès, “if I had a strongerheart, that is the counsel I would have given you; your conscience has spokenwhen my voice became too weak; listen to its dictates. You had friends, Albert;break off their acquaintance. But do not despair; you have life before you, mydear Albert, for you are yet scarcely twenty-two years old; and as a pure heartlike yours wants a spotless name, take my father’s—it was Herrera.I am sure, my dear Albert, whatever may be your career, you will soon renderthat name illustrious. Then, my son, return to the world still more brilliantbecause of your former sorrows; and if I am wrong, still let me cherish thesehopes, for I have no future to look forward to. For me the grave opens when Ipass the threshold of this house.”“I will fulfil all your wishes, my dear mother,” said the youngman. “Yes, I share your hopes; the anger of Heaven will not pursue us,since you are pure and I am innocent. But, since our resolution is formed, letus act promptly. M. de Morcerf went out about half an hour ago; the opportunityis favorable to avoid an explanation.”“I am ready, my son,” said Mercédès.Albert ran to fetch a carriage. He recollected that there was a small furnishedhouse to let in the Rue des Saints-Pères, where his mother would find a humblebut decent lodging, and thither he intended conducting the countess. As thecarriage stopped at the door, and Albert was alighting, a man approached andgave him a letter.Albert recognized the bearer. “From the count,” said Bertuccio.Albert took the letter, opened, and read it, then looked round for Bertuccio,but he was gone.He returned to Mercédès with tears in his eyes and heaving breast, and withoututtering a word he gave her the letter. Mercédès read:“Albert,—While showing you that I have discovered your plans, Ihope also to convince you of my delicacy. You are free, you leave thecount’s house, and you take your mother to your home; but reflect,Albert, you owe her more than your poor noble heart can pay her. Keep thestruggle for yourself, bear all the suffering, but spare her the trial ofpoverty which must accompany your first efforts; for she deserves not even theshadow of the misfortune which has this day fallen on her, and Providence isnot willing that the innocent should suffer for the guilty. I know you aregoing to leave the Rue du Helder without taking anything with you. Do not seekto know how I discovered it; I know it—that is sufficient.“Now, listen, Albert. Twenty-four years ago I returned, proud and joyful,to my country. I had a betrothed, Albert, a lovely girl whom I adored, and Iwas bringing to my betrothed a hundred and fifty louis, painfully amassed byceaseless toil. This money was for her; I destined it for her, and, knowing thetreachery of the sea I buried our treasure in the little garden of the house myfather lived in at Marseilles, on the Allées de Meilhan. Your mother, Albert,knows that poor house well. A short time since I passed through Marseilles, andwent to see the old place, which revived so many painful recollections; and inthe evening I took a spade and dug in the corner of the garden where I hadconcealed my treasure. The iron box was there—no one had touchedit—under a beautiful fig-tree my father had planted the day I was born,which overshadowed the spot. Well, Albert, this money, which was formerlydesigned to promote the comfort and tranquillity of the woman I adored, maynow, through strange and painful circumstances, be devoted to the same purpose.“Oh, feel for me, who could offer millions to that poor woman, but whoreturn her only the piece of black bread forgotten under my poor roof since theday I was torn from her I loved. You are a generous man, Albert, but perhapsyou may be blinded by pride or resentment; if you refuse me, if you ask anotherfor what I have a right to offer you, I will say it is ungenerous of you torefuse the life of your mother at the hands of a man whose father was allowedby your father to die in all the horrors of poverty and despair.”Albert stood pale and motionless to hear what his mother would decide after shehad finished reading this letter. Mercédès turned her eyes with an ineffablelook towards heaven.“I accept it,” said she; “he has a right to pay the dowry,which I shall take with me to some convent!”Putting the letter in her bosom, she took her son’s arm, and with afirmer step than she even herself expected she went downstairs. Chapter 92. TheSuicideMeanwhile Monte Cristohad also returned to town with Emmanuel and Maximilian. Their return wascheerful. Emmanuel did not conceal his joy at the peaceful termination of theaffair, and was loud in his expressions of delight. Morrel, in a corner of thecarriage, allowed his brother-in-law’s gayety to expend itself in words,while he felt equal inward joy, which, however, betrayed itself only in hiscountenance.At the Barrière du Trône they met Bertuccio, who was waiting there, motionlessas a sentinel at his post. Monte Cristo put his head out of the window,exchanged a few words with him in a low tone, and the steward disappeared.“Count,” said Emmanuel, when they were at the end of the PlaceRoyale, “put me down at my door, that my wife may not have a singlemoment of needless anxiety on my account or yours.”“If it were not ridiculous to make a display of our triumph, said Morrel,I would invite the count to our house; besides that, he doubtless has sometrembling heart to comfort. So we will take leave of our friend, and let himhasten home.”“Stop a moment,” said Monte Cristo; “do not let me lose bothmy companions. Return, Emmanuel, to your charming wife, and present my bestcompliments to her; and do you, Morrel, accompany me to theChamps-Élysées.”“Willingly,” said Maximilian; “particularly as I havebusiness in that quarter.”“Shall we wait breakfast for you?” asked Emmanuel.“No,” replied the young man. The door was closed, and the carriageproceeded. “See what good fortune I brought you!” said Morrel, whenhe was alone with the count. “Have you not thought so?”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “for that reason I wished to keepyou near me.”“It is miraculous!” continued Morrel, answering his own thoughts.“What?” said Monte Cristo.“What has just happened.”“Yes,” said the Count, “you are right—it ismiraculous.”“For Albert is brave,” resumed Morrel.“Very brave,” said Monte Cristo; “I have seen him sleep witha sword suspended over his head.”“And I know he has fought two duels,” said Morrel. “How canyou reconcile that with his conduct this morning?”“All owing to your influence,” replied Monte Cristo, smiling.“It is well for Albert he is not in the army,” said Morrel.“Why?”“An apology on the ground!” said the young captain, shaking hishead.“Come,” said the count mildly, “do not entertain theprejudices of ordinary men, Morrel! Acknowledge, that if Albert is brave, hecannot be a coward; he must then have had some reason for acting as he did thismorning, and confess that his conduct is more heroic than otherwise.”“Doubtless, doubtless,” said Morrel; “but I shall say, likethe Spaniard, ‘He has not been so brave today as he wasyesterday.’”“You will breakfast with me, will you not, Morrel?” said the count,to turn the conversation.“No; I must leave you at ten o’clock.”“Your engagement was for breakfast, then?” said the count.Morrel smiled, and shook his head.“Still you must breakfast somewhere.”“But if I am not hungry?” said the young man.“Oh,” said the count, “I only know two things which destroythe appetite,—grief—and as I am happy to see you very cheerful, itis not that—and love. Now after what you told me this morning of yourheart, I may believe——”“Well, count,” replied Morrel gayly, “I will not disputeit.”“But you will not make me your confidant, Maximilian?” said thecount, in a tone which showed how gladly he would have been admitted to thesecret.“I showed you this morning that I had a heart, did I not, count?”Monte Cristo only answered by extending his hand to the young man.“Well,” continued the latter, “since that heart is no longerwith you in the Bois de Vincennes, it is elsewhere, and I must go and findit.”“Go,” said the count deliberately; “go, dear friend, butpromise me if you meet with any obstacle to remember that I have some power inthis world, that I am happy to use that power in the behalf of those I love,and that I love you, Morrel.”“I will remember it,” said the young man, “as selfishchildren recollect their parents when they want their aid. When I need yourassistance, and the moment arrives, I will come to you, count.”“Well, I rely upon your promise. Good-bye, then.”“Good-bye, till we meet again.”They had arrived in the Champs-Élysées. Monte Cristo opened the carriage-door,Morrel sprang out on the pavement, Bertuccio was waiting on the steps. Morreldisappeared down the Avenue de Marigny, and Monte Cristo hastened to joinBertuccio.“Well?” asked he.“She is going to leave her house,” said the steward.“And her son?”“Florentin, his valet, thinks he is going to do the same.”“Come this way.” Monte Cristo took Bertuccio into his study, wrotethe letter we have seen, and gave it to the steward. “Go,” said hequickly. “But first, let Haydée be informed that I have returned.”“Here I am,” said the young girl, who at the sound of the carriagehad run downstairs and whose face was radiant with joy at seeing the countreturn safely. Bertuccio left. Every transport of a daughter finding a father,all the delight of a mistress seeing an adored lover, were felt by Haydéeduring the first moments of this meeting, which she had so eagerly expected.Doubtless, although less evident, Monte Cristo’s joy was not lessintense. Joy to hearts which have suffered long is like the dew on the groundafter a long drought; both the heart and the ground absorb that beneficentmoisture falling on them, and nothing is outwardly apparent.Monte Cristo was beginning to think, what he had not for a long time dared tobelieve, that there were two Mercédès in the world, and he might yet be happy.His eye, elate with happiness, was reading eagerly the tearful gaze of Haydée,when suddenly the door opened. The count knit his brow.“M. de Morcerf!” said Baptistin, as if that name sufficed for hisexcuse. In fact, the count’s face brightened.“Which,” asked he, “the viscount or the count?”“The count.”“Oh,” exclaimed Haydée, “is it not yet over?”“I know not if it is finished, my beloved child,” said MonteCristo, taking the young girl’s hands; “but I do know you havenothing more to fear.”“But it is the wretched——”“That man cannot injure me, Haydée,” said Monte Cristo; “itwas his son alone that there was cause to fear.”“And what I have suffered,” said the young girl, “you shallnever know, my lord.”Monte Cristo smiled. “By my father’s tomb,” said he,extending his hand over the head of the young girl, “I swear to you,Haydée, that if any misfortune happens, it will not be to me.”“I believe you, my lord, as implicitly as if God had spoken to me,”said the young girl, presenting her forehead to him. Monte Cristo pressed onthat pure beautiful forehead a kiss which made two hearts throb at once, theone violently, the other secretly.“Oh,” murmured the count, “shall I then be permitted to loveagain? Ask M. de Morcerf into the drawing-room,” said he to Baptistin,while he led the beautiful Greek girl to a private staircase.We must explain this visit, which although expected by Monte Cristo, isunexpected to our readers. While Mercédès, as we have said, was making asimilar inventory of her property to Albert’s, while she was arrangingher jewels, shutting her drawers, collecting her keys, to leave everything inperfect order, she did not perceive a pale and sinister face at a glass doorwhich threw light into the passage, from which everything could be both seenand heard. He who was thus looking, without being heard or seen, probably heardand saw all that passed in Madame de Morcerf’s apartments. From thatglass door the pale-faced man went to the count’s bedroom and raised witha constricted hand the curtain of a window overlooking the courtyard. Heremained there ten minutes, motionless and dumb, listening to the beating ofhis own heart. For him those ten minutes were very long. It was then Albert,returning from his meeting with the count, perceived his father watching forhis arrival behind a curtain, and turned aside. The count’s eye expanded;he knew Albert had insulted the count dreadfully, and that in every country inthe world such an insult would lead to a deadly duel. Albert returnedsafely—then the count was revenged.An indescribable ray of joy illumined that wretched countenance like the lastray of the sun before it disappears behind the clouds which bear the aspect,not of a downy couch, but of a tomb. But as we have said, he waited in vain forhis son to come to his apartment with the account of his triumph. He easilyunderstood why his son did not come to see him before he went to avenge hisfather’s honor; but when that was done, why did not his son come andthrow himself into his arms?It was then, when the count could not see Albert, that he sent for his servant,who he knew was authorized not to conceal anything from him. Ten minutesafterwards, General Morcerf was seen on the steps in a black coat with amilitary collar, black pantaloons, and black gloves. He had apparently givenprevious orders, for as he reached the bottom step his carriage came from thecoach-house ready for him. The valet threw into the carriage his militarycloak, in which two swords were wrapped, and, shutting the door, he took hisseat by the side of the coachman. The coachman stooped down for his orders.“To the Champs-Élysées,” said the general; “the Count ofMonte Cristo’s. Hurry!”The horses bounded beneath the whip; and in five minutes they stopped beforethe count’s door. M. de Morcerf opened the door himself, and as thecarriage rolled away he passed up the walk, rang, and entered the open doorwith his servant.A moment afterwards, Baptistin announced the Count of Morcerf to Monte Cristo,and the latter, leading Haydée aside, ordered that Morcerf be asked into thedrawing-room. The general was pacing the room the third time when, in turning,he perceived Monte Cristo at the door.“Ah, it is M. de Morcerf,” said Monte Cristo quietly; “Ithought I had not heard aright.”“Yes, it is I,” said the count, whom a frightful contraction of thelips prevented from articulating freely.“May I know the cause which procures me the pleasure of seeing M. deMorcerf so early?”“Had you not a meeting with my son this morning?” asked thegeneral.“I had,” replied the count.“And I know my son had good reasons to wish to fight with you, and toendeavor to kill you.”“Yes, sir, he had very good ones; but you see that in spite of them hehas not killed me, and did not even fight.”“Yet he considered you the cause of his father’s dishonor, thecause of the fearful ruin which has fallen on my house.”“It is true, sir,” said Monte Cristo with his dreadful calmness;“a secondary cause, but not the principal.”“Doubtless you made, then, some apology or explanation?”“I explained nothing, and it is he who apologized to me.”“But to what do you attribute this conduct?”“To the conviction, probably, that there was one more guilty thanI.”“And who was that?”“His father.”“That may be,” said the count, turning pale; “but you knowthe guilty do not like to find themselves convicted.”“I know it, and I expected this result.”“You expected my son would be a coward?” cried the count.“M. Albert de Morcerf is no coward!” said Monte Cristo.“A man who holds a sword in his hand, and sees a mortal enemy withinreach of that sword, and does not fight, is a coward! Why is he not here that Imay tell him so?”“Sir,” replied Monte Cristo coldly, “I did not expect thatyou had come here to relate to me your little family affairs. Go and tell M.Albert that, and he may know what to answer you.”“Oh, no, no,” said the general, smiling faintly, “I did notcome for that purpose; you are right. I came to tell you that I also look uponyou as my enemy. I came to tell you that I hate you instinctively; that itseems as if I had always known you, and always hated you; and, in short, sincethe young people of the present day will not fight, it remains for us to do so.Do you think so, sir?”“Certainly. And when I told you I had foreseen the result, it is thehonor of your visit I alluded to.”“So much the better. Are you prepared?”“Yes, sir.”“You know that we shall fight till one of us is dead,” said thegeneral, whose teeth were clenched with rage.“Until one of us dies,” repeated Monte Cristo, moving his headslightly up and down.“Let us start, then; we need no witnesses.”“Very true,” said Monte Cristo; “it is unnecessary, we knoweach other so well!”“On the contrary,” said the count, “we know so little of eachother.”“Indeed?” said Monte Cristo, with the same indomitable coolness;“let us see. Are you not the soldier Fernand who deserted on the eve ofthe battle of Waterloo? Are you not the Lieutenant Fernand who served as guideand spy to the French army in Spain? Are you not the Captain Fernand whobetrayed, sold, and murdered his benefactor, Ali? And have not all theseFernands, united, made Lieutenant-General, the Count of Morcerf, peer ofFrance?”“Oh,” cried the general, as if branded with a hot iron,“wretch,—to reproach me with my shame when about, perhaps, to killme! No, I did not say I was a stranger to you. I know well, demon, that youhave penetrated into the darkness of the past, and that you have read, by thelight of what torch I know not, every page of my life; but perhaps I may bemore honorable in my shame than you under your pompous coverings. No—no,I am aware you know me; but I know you only as an adventurer sewn up in goldand jewellery. You call yourself, in Paris, the Count of Monte Cristo; inItaly, Sinbad the Sailor; in Malta, I forget what. But it is your real name Iwant to know, in the midst of your hundred names, that I may pronounce it whenwe meet to fight, at the moment when I plunge my sword through yourheart.”The Count of Monte Cristo turned dreadfully pale; his eye seemed to burn with adevouring fire. He leaped towards a dressing-room near his bedroom, and in lessthan a moment, tearing off his cravat, his coat and waistcoat, he put on asailor’s jacket and hat, from beneath which rolled his long black hair.He returned thus, formidable and implacable, advancing with his arms crossed onhis breast, towards the general, who could not understand why he haddisappeared, but who on seeing him again, and feeling his teeth chatter and hislegs sink under him, drew back, and only stopped when he found a table tosupport his clenched hand.“Fernand,” cried he, “of my hundred names I need only tellyou one, to overwhelm you! But you guess it now, do you not?—or, rather,you remember it? For, notwithstanding all my sorrows and my tortures, I showyou today a face which the happiness of revenge makes young again—a faceyou must often have seen in your dreams since your marriage with Mercédès, mybetrothed!”The general, with his head thrown back, hands extended, gaze fixed, lookedsilently at this dreadful apparition; then seeking the wall to support him, heglided along close to it until he reached the door, through which he went outbackwards, uttering this single mournful, lamentable, distressing cry:“Edmond Dantès!”Then, with sighs which were unlike any human sound, he dragged himself to thedoor, reeled across the courtyard, and falling into the arms of his valet, hesaid in a voice scarcely intelligible,—“Home, home.”The fresh air and the shame he felt at having exposed himself before hisservants, partly recalled his senses, but the ride was short, and as he drewnear his house all his wretchedness revived. He stopped at a short distancefrom the house and alighted. The door was wide open, a hackney-coach wasstanding in the middle of the yard—a strange sight before so noble amansion; the count looked at it with terror, but without daring to inquire itsmeaning, he rushed towards his apartment.Two persons were coming down the stairs; he had only time to creep into analcove to avoid them. It was Mercédès leaning on her son’s arm andleaving the house. They passed close by the unhappy being, who, concealedbehind the damask curtain, almost felt Mercédès dress brush past him, and hisson’s warm breath, pronouncing these words:“Courage, mother! Come, this is no longer our home!”The words died away, the steps were lost in the distance. The general drewhimself up, clinging to the curtain; he uttered the most dreadful sob whichever escaped from the bosom of a father abandoned at the same time by his wifeand son. He soon heard the clatter of the iron step of the hackney-coach, thenthe coachman’s voice, and then the rolling of the heavy vehicle shook thewindows. He darted to his bedroom to see once more all he had loved in theworld; but the hackney-coach drove on and the head of neither Mercédès nor herson appeared at the window to take a last look at the house or the desertedfather and husband.And at the very moment when the wheels of that coach crossed the gateway areport was heard, and a thick smoke escaped through one of the panes of thewindow, which was broken by the explosion. Chapter 93. ValentineWe may easily conceivewhere Morrel’s appointment was. On leaving Monte Cristo he walked slowlytowards Villefort’s; we say slowly, for Morrel had more than half an hourto spare to go five hundred steps, but he had hastened to take leave of MonteCristo because he wished to be alone with his thoughts. He knew his timewell—the hour when Valentine was giving Noirtier his breakfast, and wassure not to be disturbed in the performance of this pious duty. Noirtier andValentine had given him leave to go twice a week, and he was now availinghimself of that permission.He arrived; Valentine was expecting him. Uneasy and almost crazed, she seizedhis hand and led him to her grandfather. This uneasiness, amounting almost tofrenzy, arose from the report Morcerf’s adventure had made in the world,for the affair at the Opera was generally known. No one at Villefort’sdoubted that a duel would ensue from it. Valentine, with her woman’sinstinct, guessed that Morrel would be Monte Cristo’s second, and fromthe young man’s well-known courage and his great affection for the count,she feared that he would not content himself with the passive part assigned tohim. We may easily understand how eagerly the particulars were asked for,given, and received; and Morrel could read an indescribable joy in the eyes ofhis beloved, when she knew that the termination of this affair was as happy asit was unexpected.“Now,” said Valentine, motioning to Morrel to sit down near hergrandfather, while she took her seat on his footstool,—“now let ustalk about our own affairs. You know, Maximilian, grandpapa once thought ofleaving this house, and taking an apartment away from M. deVillefort’s.”“Yes,” said Maximilian, “I recollect the project, of which Ihighly approved.”“Well,” said Valentine, “you may approve again, for grandpapais again thinking of it.”“Bravo,” said Maximilian.“And do you know,” said Valentine, “what reason grandpapagives for leaving this house.” Noirtier looked at Valentine to imposesilence, but she did not notice him; her looks, her eyes, her smile, were allfor Morrel.“Oh, whatever may be M. Noirtier’s reason,” answered Morrel,“I can readily believe it to be a good one.”“An excellent one,” said Valentine. “He pretends the air ofthe Faubourg Saint-Honoré is not good for me.”“Indeed?” said Morrel; “in that M. Noirtier may be right; youhave not seemed to be well for the last fortnight.”“Not very,” said Valentine. “And grandpapa has become myphysician, and I have the greatest confidence in him, because he knowseverything.”“Do you then really suffer?” asked Morrel quickly.“Oh, it must not be called suffering; I feel a general uneasiness, thatis all. I have lost my appetite, and my stomach feels as if it were strugglingto get accustomed to something.” Noirtier did not lose a word of whatValentine said.“And what treatment do you adopt for this singular complaint?”“A very simple one,” said Valentine. “I swallow every morninga spoonful of the mixture prepared for my grandfather. When I say one spoonful,I began by one—now I take four. Grandpapa says it is a panacea.”Valentine smiled, but it was evident that she suffered.Maximilian, in his devotedness, gazed silently at her. She was very beautiful,but her usual pallor had increased; her eyes were more brilliant than ever, andher hands, which were generally white like mother-of-pearl, now more resembledwax, to which time was adding a yellowish hue.From Valentine the young man looked towards Noirtier. The latter watched withstrange and deep interest the young girl, absorbed by her affection, and healso, like Morrel, followed those traces of inward suffering which was solittle perceptible to a common observer that they escaped the notice ofeveryone but the grandfather and the lover.“But,” said Morrel, “I thought this mixture, of which you nowtake four spoonfuls, was prepared for M. Noirtier?”“I know it is very bitter,” said Valentine; “so bitter, thatall I drink afterwards appears to have the same taste.” Noirtier lookedinquiringly at his granddaughter. “Yes, grandpapa,” said Valentine;“it is so. Just now, before I came down to you, I drank a glass ofsugared water; I left half, because it seemed so bitter.” Noirtier turnedpale, and made a sign that he wished to speak.Valentine rose to fetch the dictionary. Noirtier watched her with evidentanguish. In fact, the blood was rushing to the young girl’s head already,her cheeks were becoming red.“Oh,” cried she, without losing any of her cheerfulness,“this is singular! I can’t see! Did the sun shine in myeyes?” And she leaned against the window.“The sun is not shining,” said Morrel, more alarmed byNoirtier’s expression than by Valentine’s indisposition. He rantowards her. The young girl smiled.“Cheer up,” said she to Noirtier. “Do not be alarmed,Maximilian; it is nothing, and has already passed away. But listen! Do I nothear a carriage in the courtyard?” She opened Noirtier’s door, ranto a window in the passage, and returned hastily. “Yes,” said she,“it is Madame Danglars and her daughter, who have come to call on us.Good-bye;—I must run away, for they would send here for me, or, rather,farewell till I see you again. Stay with grandpapa, Maximilian; I promise younot to persuade them to stay.”Morrel watched her as she left the room; he heard her ascend the littlestaircase which led both to Madame de Villefort’s apartments and to hers.As soon as she was gone, Noirtier made a sign to Morrel to take the dictionary.Morrel obeyed; guided by Valentine, he had learned how to understand the oldman quickly. Accustomed, however, as he was to the work, he had to repeat mostof the letters of the alphabet and to find every word in the dictionary, sothat it was ten minutes before the thought of the old man was translated bythese words,“Fetch the glass of water and the decanter from Valentine’sroom.”Morrel rang immediately for the servant who had taken Barrois’ssituation, and in Noirtier’s name gave that order. The servant soonreturned. The decanter and the glass were completely empty. Noirtier made asign that he wished to speak.“Why are the glass and decanter empty?” asked he; “Valentinesaid she only drank half the glassful.”The translation of this new question occupied another five minutes.“I do not know,” said the servant, “but the housemaid is inMademoiselle Valentine’s room: perhaps she has emptied them.”“Ask her,” said Morrel, translating Noirtier’s thought thistime by his look. The servant went out, but returned almost immediately.“Mademoiselle Valentine passed through the room to go to Madame deVillefort’s,” said he; “and in passing, as she was thirsty,she drank what remained in the glass; as for the decanter, Master Edward hademptied that to make a pond for his ducks.”Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven, as a gambler does who stakes his all on onestroke. From that moment the old man’s eyes were fixed on the door, anddid not quit it.It was indeed Madame Danglars and her daughter whom Valentine had seen; theyhad been ushered into Madame de Villefort’s room, who had said she wouldreceive them there. That is why Valentine passed through her room, which was ona level with Valentine’s, and only separated from it by Edward’s.The two ladies entered the drawing-room with that sort of official stiffnesswhich preludes a formal communication. Among worldly people manner iscontagious. Madame de Villefort received them with equal solemnity. Valentineentered at this moment, and the formalities were resumed.“My dear friend,” said the baroness, while the two young peoplewere shaking hands, “I and Eugénie are come to be the first to announceto you the approaching marriage of my daughter with Prince Cavalcanti.”Danglars kept up the title of prince. The popular banker found that it answeredbetter than count.“Allow me to present you my sincere congratulations,” repliedMadame de Villefort. “Prince Cavalcanti appears to be a young man of rarequalities.”“Listen,” said the baroness, smiling; “speaking to you as afriend I can say that the prince does not yet appear all he will be. He hasabout him a little of that foreign manner by which French persons recognize, atfirst sight, the Italian or German nobleman. Besides, he gives evidence ofgreat kindness of disposition, much keenness of wit, and as to suitability, M.Danglars assures me that his fortune is majestic—that is his word.”“And then,” said Eugénie, while turning over the leaves of Madamede Villefort’s album, “add that you have taken a great fancy to theyoung man.”“And,” said Madame de Villefort, “I need not ask you if youshare that fancy.”“I?” replied Eugénie with her usual candor. “Oh, not theleast in the world, madame! My wish was not to confine myself to domesticcares, or the caprices of any man, but to be an artist, and consequently freein heart, in person, and in thought.”Eugénie pronounced these words with so firm a tone that the color mounted toValentine’s cheeks. The timid girl could not understand that vigorousnature which appeared to have none of the timidities of woman.“At any rate,” said she, “since I am to be married whether Iwill or not, I ought to be thankful to Providence for having released me frommy engagement with M. Albert de Morcerf, or I should this day have been thewife of a dishonored man.”“It is true,” said the baroness, with that strange simplicitysometimes met with among fashionable ladies, and of which plebeian intercoursecan never entirely deprive them,—“it is very true that had not theMorcerfs hesitated, my daughter would have married Monsieur Albert. The generaldepended much on it; he even came to force M. Danglars. We have had a narrowescape.”“But,” said Valentine, timidly, “does all the father’sshame revert upon the son? Monsieur Albert appears to me quite innocent of thetreason charged against the general.”“Excuse me,” said the implacable young girl, “Monsieur Albertclaims and well deserves his share. It appears that after having challenged M.de Monte Cristo at the Opera yesterday, he apologized on the groundtoday.”“Impossible,” said Madame de Villefort.“Ah, my dear friend,” said Madame Danglars, with the samesimplicity we before noticed, “it is a fact. I heard it from M. Debray,who was present at the explanation.”Valentine also knew the truth, but she did not answer. A single word hadreminded her that Morrel was expecting her in M. Noirtier’s room. Deeplyengaged with a sort of inward contemplation, Valentine had ceased for a momentto join in the conversation. She would, indeed, have found it impossible torepeat what had been said the last few minutes, when suddenly MadameDanglars’ hand, pressed on her arm, aroused her from her lethargy.“What is it?” said she, starting at Madame Danglars’ touch asshe would have done from an electric shock.“It is, my dear Valentine,” said the baroness, “that you are,doubtless, suffering.”“I?” said the young girl, passing her hand across her burningforehead.“Yes, look at yourself in that glass; you have turned pale and then redsuccessively, three or four times in one minute.”“Indeed,” cried Eugénie, “you are very pale!”“Oh, do not be alarmed; I have been so for many days.” Artless asshe was, the young girl knew that this was an opportunity to leave, andbesides, Madame de Villefort came to her assistance.“Retire, Valentine,” said she; “you are really suffering, andthese ladies will excuse you; drink a glass of pure water, it will restoreyou.”Valentine kissed Eugénie, bowed to Madame Danglars, who had already risen totake her leave, and went out.“That poor child,” said Madame de Villefort when Valentine wasgone, “she makes me very uneasy, and I should not be astonished if shehad some serious illness.”Meanwhile, Valentine, in a sort of excitement which she could not quiteunderstand, had crossed Edward’s room without noticing some trick of thechild, and through her own had reached the little staircase.She was within three steps of the bottom; she already heard Morrel’svoice, when suddenly a cloud passed over her eyes, her stiffened foot missedthe step, her hands had no power to hold the baluster, and falling against thewall she lost her balance wholly and toppled to the floor. Morrel bounded tothe door, opened it, and found Valentine stretched out at the bottom of thestairs. Quick as a flash, he raised her in his arms and placed her in a chair.Valentine opened her eyes.“Oh, what a clumsy thing I am,” said she with feverish volubility;“I don’t know my way. I forgot there were three more steps beforethe landing.”“You have hurt yourself, perhaps,” said Morrel. “What can Ido for you, Valentine?”Valentine looked around her; she saw the deepest terror depicted inNoirtier’s eyes.“Don’t worry, dear grandpapa,” said she, endeavoring tosmile; “it is nothing—it is nothing; I was giddy, that isall.”“Another attack of giddiness,” said Morrel, clasping his hands.“Oh, attend to it, Valentine, I entreat you.”“But no,” said Valentine,—“no, I tell you it is allpast, and it was nothing. Now, let me tell you some news; Eugénie is to bemarried in a week, and in three days there is to be a grand feast, a betrothalfestival. We are all invited, my father, Madame de Villefort, and I—atleast, I understood it so.”“When will it be our turn to think of these things? Oh, Valentine, youwho have so much influence over your grandpapa, try to make himanswer—Soon.”“And do you,” said Valentine, “depend on me to stimulate thetardiness and arouse the memory of grandpapa?”“Yes,” cried Morrel, “make haste. So long as you are notmine, Valentine, I shall always think I may lose you.”“Oh,” replied Valentine with a convulsive movement, “oh,indeed, Maximilian, you are too timid for an officer, for a soldier who, theysay, never knows fear. Ha, ha, ha!”She burst into a forced and melancholy laugh, her arms stiffened and twisted,her head fell back on her chair, and she remained motionless. The cry of terrorwhich was stopped on Noirtier’s lips, seemed to start from his eyes.Morrel understood it; he knew he must call assistance. The young man rang thebell violently; the housemaid who had been in Mademoiselle Valentine’sroom, and the servant who had replaced Barrois, ran in at the same moment.Valentine was so pale, so cold, so inanimate that without listening to what wassaid to them they were seized with the fear which pervaded that house, and theyflew into the passage crying for help. Madame Danglars and Eugénie were goingout at that moment; they heard the cause of the disturbance.“I told you so!” exclaimed Madame de Villefort. “Poorchild!” Chapter 94.Maximilian’s AvowalAt the same moment M. deVillefort’s voice was heard calling from his study, “What is thematter?”Morrel looked at Noirtier who had recovered his self-command, and with a glanceindicated the closet where once before under somewhat similar circumstances, hehad taken refuge. He had only time to get his hat and throw himself breathlessinto the closet when the procureur’s footstep was heard in the passage.Villefort sprang into the room, ran to Valentine, and took her in his arms.“A physician, a physician,—M. d’Avrigny!” criedVillefort; “or rather I will go for him myself.”He flew from the apartment, and Morrel at the same moment darted out at theother door. He had been struck to the heart by a frightfulrecollection—the conversation he had heard between the doctor andVillefort the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death, recurred to him;these symptoms, to a less alarming extent, were the same which had preceded thedeath of Barrois. At the same time Monte Cristo’s voice seemed to resoundin his ear with the words he had heard only two hours before, “Whateveryou want, Morrel, come to me; I have great power.”More rapidly than thought, he darted down the Rue Matignon, and thence to theAvenue des Champs-Élysées.Meanwhile M. de Villefort arrived in a hired cabriolet at M.d’Avrigny’s door. He rang so violently that the porter was alarmed.Villefort ran upstairs without saying a word. The porter knew him, and let himpass, only calling to him:“In his study, Monsieur Procureur—in his study!” Villefortpushed, or rather forced, the door open.“Ah,” said the doctor, “is it you?”“Yes,” said Villefort, closing the door after him, “it is I,who am come in my turn to ask you if we are quite alone. Doctor, my house isaccursed!”“What?” said the latter with apparent coolness, but with deepemotion, “have you another invalid?”“Yes, doctor,” cried Villefort, clutching his hair,“yes!”D’Avrigny’s look implied, “I told you it would be so.”Then he slowly uttered these words, “Who is now dying in your house? Whatnew victim is going to accuse you of weakness before God?”A mournful sob burst from Villefort’s heart; he approached the doctor,and seizing his arm,—“Valentine,” said he, “it isValentine’s turn!”“Your daughter!” cried d’Avrigny with grief and surprise.“You see you were deceived,” murmured the magistrate; “comeand see her, and on her bed of agony entreat her pardon for having suspectedher.”“Each time you have applied to me,” said the doctor, “it hasbeen too late; still I will go. But let us make haste, sir; with the enemiesyou have to do with there is no time to be lost.”“Oh, this time, doctor, you shall not have to reproach me with weakness.This time I will know the assassin, and will pursue him.”“Let us try first to save the victim before we think of revengingher,” said d’Avrigny. “Come.”The same cabriolet which had brought Villefort took them back at full speed,and at this moment Morrel rapped at Monte Cristo’s door.The count was in his study and was reading with an angry look something whichBertuccio had brought in haste. Hearing the name of Morrel, who had left himonly two hours before, the count raised his head, arose, and sprang to meethim.“What is the matter, Maximilian?” asked he; “you are pale,and the perspiration rolls from your forehead.” Morrel fell into a chair.“Yes,” said he, “I came quickly; I wanted to speak toyou.”“Are all your family well?” asked the count, with an affectionatebenevolence, whose sincerity no one could for a moment doubt.“Thank you, count—thank you,” said the young man, evidentlyembarrassed how to begin the conversation; “yes, everyone in my family iswell.”“So much the better; yet you have something to tell me?” repliedthe count with increased anxiety.“Yes,” said Morrel, “it is true; I have but now left a housewhere death has just entered, to run to you.”“Are you then come from M. de Morcerf’s?” asked Monte Cristo.“No,” said Morrel; “is someone dead in his house?”“The general has just blown his brains out,” replied Monte Cristowith great coolness.“Oh, what a dreadful event!” cried Maximilian.“Not for the countess, or for Albert,” said Monte Cristo; “adead father or husband is better than a dishonored one,—blood washes outshame.”“Poor countess,” said Maximilian, “I pity her very much; sheis so noble a woman!”“Pity Albert also, Maximilian; for believe me he is the worthy son of thecountess. But let us return to yourself. You have hastened to me—can Ihave the happiness of being useful to you?”“Yes, I need your help: that is I thought like a madman that you couldlend me your assistance in a case where God alone can succor me.”“Tell me what it is,” replied Monte Cristo.“Oh,” said Morrel, “I know not, indeed, if I may reveal thissecret to mortal ears, but fatality impels me, necessity constrains me,count——” Morrel hesitated.“Do you think I love you?” said Monte Cristo, taking the youngman’s hand affectionately in his.“Oh, you encourage me, and something tells me there,” placing hishand on his heart, “that I ought to have no secret from you.”“You are right, Morrel; God is speaking to your heart, and your heartspeaks to you. Tell me what it says.”“Count, will you allow me to send Baptistin to inquire after someone youknow?”“I am at your service, and still more my servants.”“Oh, I cannot live if she is not better.”“Shall I ring for Baptistin?”“No, I will go and speak to him myself.” Morrel went out, calledBaptistin, and whispered a few words to him. The valet ran directly.“Well, have you sent?” asked Monte Cristo, seeing Morrel return.“Yes, and now I shall be more calm.”“You know I am waiting,” said Monte Cristo, smiling.“Yes, and I will tell you. One evening I was in a garden; a clump oftrees concealed me; no one suspected I was there. Two persons passed nearme—allow me to conceal their names for the present; they were speaking inan undertone, and yet I was so interested in what they said that I did not losea single word.”“This is a gloomy introduction, if I may judge from your pallor andshuddering, Morrel.”“Oh, yes, very gloomy, my friend. Someone had just died in the house towhich that garden belonged. One of the persons whose conversation I overheardwas the master of the house; the other, the physician. The former was confidingto the latter his grief and fear, for it was the second time within a monththat death had suddenly and unexpectedly entered that house which wasapparently destined to destruction by some exterminating angel, as an object ofGod’s anger.”“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo, looking earnestly at the youngman, and by an imperceptible movement turning his chair, so that he remained inthe shade while the light fell full on Maximilian’s face.“Yes,” continued Morrel, “death had entered that house twicewithin one month.”“And what did the doctor answer?” asked Monte Cristo.“He replied—he replied, that the death was not a natural one, andmust be attributed”—“To what?”“To poison.”“Indeed!” said Monte Cristo with a slight cough which in moments ofextreme emotion helped him to disguise a blush, or his pallor, or the intenseinterest with which he listened; “indeed, Maximilian, did you hearthat?”“Yes, my dear count, I heard it; and the doctor added that if anotherdeath occurred in a similar way he must appeal to justice.”Monte Cristo listened, or appeared to do so, with the greatest calmness.“Well,” said Maximilian, “death came a third time, andneither the master of the house nor the doctor said a word. Death is now,perhaps, striking a fourth blow. Count, what am I bound to do, being inpossession of this secret?”“My dear friend,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to berelating an adventure which we all know by heart. I know the house where youheard it, or one very similar to it; a house with a garden, a master, aphysician, and where there have been three unexpected and sudden deaths. Well,I have not intercepted your confidence, and yet I know all that as well as you,and I have no conscientious scruples. No, it does not concern me. You say anexterminating angel appears to have devoted that house to God’sanger—well, who says your supposition is not reality? Do not noticethings which those whose interest it is to see them pass over. If it isGod’s justice, instead of his anger, which is walking through that house,Maximilian, turn away your face and let his justice accomplish itspurpose.”Morrel shuddered. There was something mournful, solemn, and terrible in thecount’s manner.“Besides,” continued he, in so changed a tone that no one wouldhave supposed it was the same person speaking—“besides, who saysthat it will begin again?”“It has returned, count,” exclaimed Morrel; “that is why Ihastened to you.”“Well, what do you wish me to do? Do you wish me, for instance, to giveinformation to the procureur?” Monte Cristo uttered the last words withso much meaning that Morrel, starting up, cried out:“You know of whom I speak, count, do you not?”“Perfectly well, my good friend; and I will prove it to you by puttingthe dots to the i, or rather by naming the persons. You were walking oneevening in M. de Villefort’s garden; from what you relate, I suppose itto have been the evening of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death. You heard M.de Villefort talking to M. d’Avrigny about the death of M. deSaint-Méran, and that no less surprising, of the countess. M. d’Avrignysaid he believed they both proceeded from poison; and you, honest man, haveever since been asking your heart and sounding your conscience to know if youought to expose or conceal this secret. We are no longer in the Middle Ages;there is no longer a Vehmgericht, or Free Tribunals; what do you want to askthese people? ‘Conscience, what hast thou to do with me?’ as Sternesaid. My dear fellow, let them sleep on, if they are asleep; let them grow palein their drowsiness, if they are disposed to do so, and pray do you remain inpeace, who have no remorse to disturb you.”Deep grief was depicted on Morrel’s features; he seized MonteCristo’s hand. “But it is beginning again, I say!”“Well,” said the Count, astonished at his perseverance, which hecould not understand, and looking still more earnestly at Maximilian,“let it begin again,—it is like the house of the Atreidae;[19]God has condemned them, and they must submit to their punishment. They will alldisappear, like the fabrics children build with cards, and which fall, one byone, under the breath of their builder, even if there are two hundred of them.Three months since it was M. de Saint-Méran; Madame de Saint-Méran two monthssince; the other day it was Barrois; today, the old Noirtier, or youngValentine.”“You knew it?” cried Morrel, in such a paroxysm of terror thatMonte Cristo started,—he whom the falling heavens would have foundunmoved; “you knew it, and said nothing?”“And what is it to me?” replied Monte Cristo, shrugging hisshoulders; “do I know those people? and must I lose the one to save theother? Faith, no, for between the culprit and the victim I have nochoice.”“But I,” cried Morrel, groaning with sorrow, “I loveher!”“You love?—whom?” cried Monte Cristo, starting to his feet,and seizing the two hands which Morrel was raising towards heaven.“I love most fondly—I love madly—I love as a man who wouldgive his life-blood to spare her a tear—I love Valentine de Villefort,who is being murdered at this moment! Do you understand me? I love her; and Iask God and you how I can save her?”Monte Cristo uttered a cry which those only can conceive who have heard theroar of a wounded lion. “Unhappy man,” cried he, wringing his handsin his turn; “you love Valentine,—that daughter of an accursedrace!”Never had Morrel witnessed such an expression—never had so terrible aneye flashed before his face—never had the genius of terror he had sooften seen, either on the battle-field or in the murderous nights of Algeria,shaken around him more dreadful fire. He drew back terrified.As for Monte Cristo, after this ebullition he closed his eyes as if dazzled byinternal light. In a moment he restrained himself so powerfully that thetempestuous heaving of his breast subsided, as turbulent and foaming wavesyield to the sun’s genial influence when the cloud has passed. Thissilence, self-control, and struggle lasted about twenty seconds, then the countraised his pallid face.“See,” said he, “my dear friend, how God punishes the mostthoughtless and unfeeling men for their indifference, by presenting dreadfulscenes to their view. I, who was looking on, an eager and curiousspectator,—I, who was watching the working of this mournfultragedy,—I, who like a wicked angel was laughing at the evil mencommitted protected by secrecy (a secret is easily kept by the rich andpowerful), I am in my turn bitten by the serpent whose tortuous course I waswatching, and bitten to the heart!”Morrel groaned.“Come, come,” continued the count, “complaints areunavailing, be a man, be strong, be full of hope, for I am here and will watchover you.”Morrel shook his head sorrowfully.“I tell you to hope. Do you understand me?” cried Monte Cristo.“Remember that I never uttered a falsehood and am never deceived. It istwelve o’clock, Maximilian; thank heaven that you came at noon ratherthan in the evening, or tomorrow morning. Listen, Morrel—it is noon; ifValentine is not now dead, she will not die.”“How so?” cried Morrel, “when I left her dying?”Monte Cristo pressed his hands to his forehead. What was passing in that brain,so loaded with dreadful secrets? What does the angel of light or the angel ofdarkness say to that mind, at once implacable and generous? God only knows.Monte Cristo raised his head once more, and this time he was calm as a childawaking from its sleep.“Maximilian,” said he, “return home. I command you not tostir—attempt nothing, not to let your countenance betray a thought, and Iwill send you tidings. Go.”“Oh, count, you overwhelm me with that coolness. Have you, then, poweragainst death? Are you superhuman? Are you an angel?” And the young man,who had never shrunk from danger, shrank before Monte Cristo with indescribableterror. But Monte Cristo looked at him with so melancholy and sweet a smile,that Maximilian felt the tears filling his eyes.“I can do much for you, my friend,” replied the count. “Go; Imust be alone.”Morrel, subdued by the extraordinary ascendancy Monte Cristo exercised overeverything around him, did not endeavor to resist it. He pressed thecount’s hand and left. He stopped one moment at the door for Baptistin,whom he saw in the Rue Matignon, and who was running.Meanwhile, Villefort and d’Avrigny had made all possible haste, Valentinehad not revived from her fainting fit on their arrival, and the doctor examinedthe invalid with all the care the circumstances demanded, and with an interestwhich the knowledge of the secret intensified twofold. Villefort, closelywatching his countenance and his lips, awaited the result of the examination.Noirtier, paler than even the young girl, more eager than Villefort for thedecision, was watching also intently and affectionately.At last d’Avrigny slowly uttered these words: “She is stillalive!”“Still?” cried Villefort; “oh, doctor, what a dreadful wordis that.”“Yes,” said the physician, “I repeat it; she is still alive,and I am astonished at it.”“But is she safe?” asked the father.“Yes, since she lives.”At that moment d’Avrigny’s glance met Noirtier’s eye. Itglistened with such extraordinary joy, so rich and full of thought, that thephysician was struck. He placed the young girl again on the chair,—herlips were scarcely discernible, they were so pale and white, as well as herwhole face,—and remained motionless, looking at Noirtier, who appeared toanticipate and commend all he did.“Sir,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “call MademoiselleValentine’s maid, if you please.”Villefort went himself to find her; and d’Avrigny approached Noirtier.“Have you something to tell me?” asked he. The old man winked hiseyes expressively, which we may remember was his only way of expressing hisapproval.“Privately?”“Yes.”“Well, I will remain with you.” At this moment Villefort returned,followed by the lady’s maid; and after her came Madame de Villefort.“What is the matter, then, with this dear child? she has just left me,and she complained of being indisposed, but I did not think seriously ofit.”The young woman with tears in her eyes and every mark of affection of a truemother, approached Valentine and took her hand. D’Avrigny continued tolook at Noirtier; he saw the eyes of the old man dilate and become round, hischeeks turn pale and tremble; the perspiration stood in drops upon hisforehead.“Ah,” said he, involuntarily following Noirtier’s eyes, whichwere fixed on Madame de Villefort, who repeated:“This poor child would be better in bed. Come, Fanny, we will put her tobed.”M. d’Avrigny, who saw that would be a means of his remaining alone withNoirtier, expressed his opinion that it was the best thing that could be done;but he forbade that anything should be given to her except what he ordered.They carried Valentine away; she had revived, but could scarcely move or speak,so shaken was her frame by the attack. She had, however, just power to give oneparting look to her grandfather, who in losing her seemed to be resigning hisvery soul. D’Avrigny followed the invalid, wrote a prescription, orderedVillefort to take a cabriolet, go in person to a chemist’s to get theprescribed medicine, bring it himself, and wait for him in his daughter’sroom. Then, having renewed his injunction not to give Valentine anything, hewent down again to Noirtier, shut the doors carefully, and after convincinghimself that no one was listening:“Do you,” said he, “know anything of this young lady’sillness?”“Yes,” said the old man.“We have no time to lose; I will question, and do you answer me.”Noirtier made a sign that he was ready to answer. “Did you anticipate theaccident which has happened to your granddaughter?”“Yes.” D’Avrigny reflected a moment; then approachingNoirtier:“Pardon what I am going to say,” added he, “but no indicationshould be neglected in this terrible situation. Did you see poor Barroisdie?” Noirtier raised his eyes to heaven.“Do you know of what he died!” asked d’Avrigny, placing hishand on Noirtier’s shoulder.“Yes,” replied the old man.“Do you think he died a natural death?” A sort of smile wasdiscernible on the motionless lips of Noirtier.“Then you have thought that Barrois was poisoned?”“Yes.”“Do you think the poison he fell a victim to was intended for him?”“No.”“Do you think the same hand which unintentionally struck Barrois has nowattacked Valentine?”“Yes.”“Then will she die too?” asked d’Avrigny, fixing hispenetrating gaze on Noirtier. He watched the effect of this question on the oldman.“No,” replied he with an air of triumph which would have puzzledthe most clever diviner.“Then you hope?” said d’Avrigny, with surprise.“Yes.”“What do you hope?” The old man made him understand with his eyesthat he could not answer.“Ah, yes, it is true,” murmured d’Avrigny. Then, turning toNoirtier,—“Do you hope the assassin will be tried?”“No.”“Then you hope the poison will take no effect on Valentine?”“Yes.”“It is no news to you,” added d’Avrigny, “to tell youthat an attempt has been made to poison her?” The old man made a signthat he entertained no doubt upon the subject. “Then how do you hopeValentine will escape?”Noirtier kept his eyes steadfastly fixed on the same spot. D’Avrignyfollowed the direction and saw that they were fixed on a bottle containing themixture which he took every morning. “Ah, indeed?” saidd’Avrigny, struck with a sudden thought, “has it occurred toyou”—Noirtier did not let him finish.“Yes,” said he.“To prepare her system to resist poison?”“Yes.”“By accustoming her by degrees——”“Yes, yes, yes,” said Noirtier, delighted to be understood.“Of course. I had told you that there was brucine in the mixture I giveyou.”“Yes.”“And by accustoming her to that poison, you have endeavored to neutralizethe effect of a similar poison?” Noirtier’s joy continued.“And you have succeeded,” exclaimed d’Avrigny. “Withoutthat precaution Valentine would have died before assistance could have beenprocured. The dose has been excessive, but she has only been shaken by it; andthis time, at any rate, Valentine will not die.”A superhuman joy expanded the old man’s eyes, which were raised towardsheaven with an expression of infinite gratitude. At this moment Villefortreturned.“Here, doctor,” said he, “is what you sent me for.”“Was this prepared in your presence?”“Yes,” replied the procureur.“Have you not let it go out of your hands?”“No.”D’Avrigny took the bottle, poured some drops of the mixture it containedin the hollow of his hand, and swallowed them.“Well,” said he, “let us go to Valentine; I will giveinstructions to everyone, and you, M. de Villefort, will yourself see that noone deviates from them.”At the moment when d’Avrigny was returning to Valentine’s room,accompanied by Villefort, an Italian priest, of serious demeanor and calm andfirm tone, hired for his use the house adjoining the hotel of M. de Villefort.No one knew how the three former tenants of that house left it. About two hoursafterwards its foundation was reported to be unsafe; but the report did notprevent the new occupant establishing himself there with his modest furniturethe same day at five o’clock. The lease was drawn up for three, six, ornine years by the new tenant, who, according to the rule of the proprietor,paid six months in advance.This new tenant, who, as we have said, was an Italian, was called Il SignorGiacomo Busoni. Workmen were immediately called in, and that same night thepassengers at the end of the faubourg saw with surprise that carpenters andmasons were occupied in repairing the lower part of the tottering house. Chapter 95. Father andDaughterWe saw in a precedingchapter how Madame Danglars went formally to announce to Madame de Villefortthe approaching marriage of Eugénie Danglars and M. Andrea Cavalcanti. Thisformal announcement, which implied or appeared to imply, the approval of allthe persons concerned in this momentous affair, had been preceded by a scene towhich our readers must be admitted. We beg them to take one step backward, andto transport themselves, the morning of that day of great catastrophes, intothe showy, gilded salon we have before shown them, and which was the pride ofits owner, Baron Danglars.In this room, at about ten o’clock in the morning, the banker himself hadbeen walking to and fro for some minutes thoughtfully and in evidentuneasiness, watching both doors, and listening to every sound. When hispatience was exhausted, he called his valet.“Étienne,” said he, “see why Mademoiselle Eugénie has askedme to meet her in the drawing-room, and why she makes me wait so long.”Having given this vent to his ill-humor, the baron became more calm;Mademoiselle Danglars had that morning requested an interview with her father,and had fixed on the gilded drawing-room as the spot. The singularity of thisstep, and above all its formality, had not a little surprised the banker, whohad immediately obeyed his daughter by repairing first to the drawing-room.Étienne soon returned from his errand.“Mademoiselle’s lady’s maid says, sir, that mademoiselle isfinishing her toilette, and will be here shortly.”Danglars nodded, to signify that he was satisfied. To the world and to hisservants Danglars assumed the character of the good-natured man and theindulgent father. This was one of his parts in the popular comedy he wasperforming,—a make-up he had adopted and which suited him about as wellas the masks worn on the classic stage by paternal actors, who seen from oneside, were the image of geniality, and from the other showed lips drawn down inchronic ill-temper. Let us hasten to say that in private the genial sidedescended to the level of the other, so that generally the indulgent mandisappeared to give place to the brutal husband and domineering father.“Why the devil does that foolish girl, who pretends to wish to speak tome, not come into my study? and why on earth does she want to speak to me atall?”He was turning this thought over in his brain for the twentieth time, when thedoor opened and Eugénie appeared, attired in a figured black satin dress, herhair dressed and gloves on, as if she were going to the Italian Opera.“Well, Eugénie, what is it you want with me? and why in this solemndrawing-room when the study is so comfortable?”“I quite understand why you ask, sir,” said Eugénie, making a signthat her father might be seated, “and in fact your two questions suggestfully the theme of our conversation. I will answer them both, and contrary tothe usual method, the last first, because it is the least difficult. I havechosen the drawing-room, sir, as our place of meeting, in order to avoid thedisagreeable impressions and influences of a banker’s study. Those gildedcashbooks, drawers locked like gates of fortresses, heaps of bank-bills, comefrom I know not where, and the quantities of letters from England, Holland,Spain, India, China, and Peru, have generally a strange influence on afather’s mind, and make him forget that there is in the world an interestgreater and more sacred than the good opinion of his correspondents. I have,therefore, chosen this drawing-room, where you see, smiling and happy in theirmagnificent frames, your portrait, mine, my mother’s, and all sorts ofrural landscapes and touching pastorals. I rely much on external impressions;perhaps, with regard to you, they are immaterial, but I should be no artist ifI had not some fancies.”“Very well,” replied M. Danglars, who had listened to all thispreamble with imperturbable coolness, but without understanding a word, sincelike every man burdened with thoughts of the past, he was occupied with seekingthe thread of his own ideas in those of the speaker.“There is, then, the second point cleared up, or nearly so,” saidEugénie, without the least confusion, and with that masculine pointedness whichdistinguished her gesture and her language; “and you appear satisfiedwith the explanation. Now, let us return to the first. You ask me why I haverequested this interview; I will tell you in two words, sir; I will not marrycount Andrea Cavalcanti.”Danglars leaped from his chair and raised his eyes and arms towards heaven.“Yes, indeed, sir,” continued Eugénie, still quite calm; “youare astonished, I see; for since this little affair began, I have notmanifested the slightest opposition, and yet I am always sure, when theopportunity arrives, to oppose a determined and absolute will to people whohave not consulted me, and things which displease me. However, this time, mytranquillity, or passiveness as philosophers say, proceeded from anothersource; it proceeded from a wish, like a submissive and devoted daughter”(a slight smile was observable on the purple lips of the young girl), “topractice obedience.”“Well?” asked Danglars.“Well, sir,” replied Eugénie, “I have tried to the very lastand now that the moment has come, I feel in spite of all my efforts that it isimpossible.”“But,” said Danglars, whose weak mind was at first quiteoverwhelmed with the weight of this pitiless logic, marking evidentpremeditation and force of will, “what is your reason for this refusal,Eugénie? what reason do you assign?”“My reason?” replied the young girl. “Well, it is not thatthe man is more ugly, more foolish, or more disagreeable than any other; no, M.Andrea Cavalcanti may appear to those who look at men’s faces and figuresas a very good specimen of his kind. It is not, either, that my heart is lesstouched by him than any other; that would be a schoolgirl’s reason, whichI consider quite beneath me. I actually love no one, sir; you know it, do younot? I do not then see why, without real necessity, I should encumber my lifewith a perpetual companion. Has not some sage said, ‘Nothing toomuch’? and another, ‘I carry all my effects with me’? I havebeen taught these two aphorisms in Latin and in Greek; one is, I believe, fromPhædrus, and the other from Bias. Well, my dear father, in the shipwreck oflife—for life is an eternal shipwreck of our hopes—I cast into thesea my useless encumbrance, that is all, and I remain with my own will,disposed to live perfectly alone, and consequently perfectly free.”“Unhappy girl, unhappy girl!” murmured Danglars, turning pale, forhe knew from long experience the solidity of the obstacle he had so suddenlyencountered.“Unhappy girl,” replied Eugénie, “unhappy girl, do you say,sir? No, indeed; the exclamation appears quite theatrical and affected. Happy,on the contrary, for what am I in want of? The world calls me beautiful. It issomething to be well received. I like a favorable reception; it expands thecountenance, and those around me do not then appear so ugly. I possess a shareof wit, and a certain relative sensibility, which enables me to draw from lifein general, for the support of mine, all I meet with that is good, like themonkey who cracks the nut to get at its contents. I am rich, for you have oneof the first fortunes in France. I am your only daughter, and you are not soexacting as the fathers of the Porte Saint-Martin and Gaîté, who disinherittheir daughters for not giving them grandchildren. Besides, the provident lawhas deprived you of the power to disinherit me, at least entirely, as it hasalso of the power to compel me to marry Monsieur This or Monsieur That. Andso—being, beautiful, witty, somewhat talented, as the comic operas say,and rich—and that is happiness, sir—why do you call meunhappy?”Danglars, seeing his daughter smiling, and proud even to insolence, could notentirely repress his brutal feelings, but they betrayed themselves only by anexclamation. Under the fixed and inquiring gaze levelled at him from underthose beautiful black eyebrows, he prudently turned away, and calmed himselfimmediately, daunted by the power of a resolute mind.“Truly, my daughter,” replied he with a smile, “you are allyou boast of being, excepting one thing; I will not too hastily tell you which,but would rather leave you to guess it.”Eugénie looked at Danglars, much surprised that one flower of her crown ofpride, with which she had so superbly decked herself, should be disputed.“My daughter,” continued the banker, “you have perfectlyexplained to me the sentiments which influence a girl like you, who isdetermined she will not marry; now it remains for me to tell you the motives ofa father like me, who has decided that his daughter shall marry.”Eugénie bowed, not as a submissive daughter, but as an adversary prepared for adiscussion.“My daughter,” continued Danglars, “when a father asks hisdaughter to choose a husband, he has always some reason for wishing her tomarry. Some are affected with the mania of which you spoke just now, that ofliving again in their grandchildren. This is not my weakness, I tell you atonce; family joys have no charm for me. I may acknowledge this to a daughterwhom I know to be philosophical enough to understand my indifference, and notto impute it to me as a crime.”“This is not to the purpose,” said Eugénie; “let us speakcandidly, sir; I admire candor.”“Oh,” said Danglars, “I can, when circumstances render itdesirable, adopt your system, although it may not be my general practice. Iwill therefore proceed. I have proposed to you to marry, not for your sake, forindeed I did not think of you in the least at the moment (you admire candor,and will now be satisfied, I hope); but because it suited me to marry you assoon as possible, on account of certain commercial speculations I am desirousof entering into.” Eugénie became uneasy.“It is just as I tell you, I assure you, and you must not be angry withme, for you have sought this disclosure. I do not willingly enter intoarithmetical explanations with an artist like you, who fears to enter my studylest she should imbibe disagreeable or anti-poetic impressions and sensations.But in that same banker’s study, where you very willingly presentedyourself yesterday to ask for the thousand francs I give you monthly forpocket-money, you must know, my dear young lady, that many things may belearned, useful even to a girl who will not marry. There one may learn, forinstance, what, out of regard to your nervous susceptibility, I will inform youof in the drawing-room, namely, that the credit of a banker is his physical andmoral life; that credit sustains him as breath animates the body; and M. deMonte Cristo once gave me a lecture on that subject, which I have neverforgotten. There we may learn that as credit sinks, the body becomes a corpse,and this is what must happen very soon to the banker who is proud to own sogood a logician as you for his daughter.”But Eugénie, instead of stooping, drew herself up under the blow.“Ruined?” said she.“Exactly, my daughter; that is precisely what I mean,” saidDanglars, almost digging his nails into his breast, while he preserved on hisharsh features the smile of the heartless though clever man;“ruined—yes, that is it.”“Ah!” said Eugénie.“Yes, ruined! Now it is revealed, this secret so full of horror, as thetragic poet says. Now, my daughter, learn from my lips how you may alleviatethis misfortune, so far as it will affect you.”“Oh,” cried Eugénie, “you are a bad physiognomist, if youimagine I deplore on my own account the catastrophe of which you warn me. Iruined? and what will that signify to me? Have I not my talent left? Can I not,like Pasta, Malibran, Grisi, acquire for myself what you would never have givenme, whatever might have been your fortune, a hundred or a hundred and fiftythousand livres per annum, for which I shall be indebted to no one but myself;and which, instead of being given as you gave me those poor twelve thousandfrancs, with sour looks and reproaches for my prodigality, will be accompaniedwith acclamations, with bravos, and with flowers? And if I do not possess thattalent, which your smiles prove to me you doubt, should I not still have thatardent love of independence, which will be a substitute for wealth, and whichin my mind supersedes even the instinct of self-preservation? No, I grieve noton my own account, I shall always find a resource; my books, my pencils, mypiano, all the things which cost but little, and which I shall be able toprocure, will remain my own.“Do you think that I sorrow for Madame Danglars? Undeceive yourselfagain; either I am greatly mistaken, or she has provided against thecatastrophe which threatens you, and, which will pass over without affectingher. She has taken care for herself,—at least I hope so,—for herattention has not been diverted from her projects by watching over me. She hasfostered my independence by professedly indulging my love for liberty. Oh, no,sir; from my childhood I have seen too much, and understood too much, of whathas passed around me, for misfortune to have an undue power over me. From myearliest recollections, I have been beloved by no one—so much the worse;that has naturally led me to love no one—so much the better—now youhave my profession of faith.”“Then,” said Danglars, pale with anger, which was not at all due tooffended paternal love,—“then, mademoiselle, you persist in yourdetermination to accelerate my ruin?”“Your ruin? I accelerate your ruin? What do you mean? I do not understandyou.”“So much the better, I have a ray of hope left; listen.”“I am all attention,” said Eugénie, looking so earnestly at herfather that it was an effort for the latter to endure her unrelenting gaze.“M. Cavalcanti,” continued Danglars, “is about to marry you,and will place in my hands his fortune, amounting to three millionlivres.”“That is admirable!” said Eugénie with sovereign contempt,smoothing her gloves out one upon the other.“You think I shall deprive you of those three millions,” saidDanglars; “but do not fear it. They are destined to produce at least ten.I and a brother banker have obtained a grant of a railway, the only industrialenterprise which in these days promises to make good the fabulous prospectsthat Law once held out to the eternally deluded Parisians, in the fantasticMississippi scheme. As I look at it, a millionth part of a railway is worthfully as much as an acre of waste land on the banks of the Ohio. We make in ourcase a deposit, on a mortgage, which is an advance, as you see, since we gainat least ten, fifteen, twenty, or a hundred livres’ worth of iron inexchange for our money. Well, within a week I am to deposit four millions formy share; the four millions, I promise you, will produce ten or twelve.”“But during my visit to you the day before yesterday, sir, which youappear to recollect so well,” replied Eugénie, “I saw you arranginga deposit—is not that the term?—of five millions and a half; youeven pointed it out to me in two drafts on the treasury, and you wereastonished that so valuable a paper did not dazzle my eyes likelightning.”“Yes, but those five millions and a half are not mine, and are only aproof of the great confidence placed in me; my title of popular banker hasgained me the confidence of charitable institutions, and the five millions anda half belong to them; at any other time I should not have hesitated to makeuse of them, but the great losses I have recently sustained are well known,and, as I told you, my credit is rather shaken. That deposit may be at anymoment withdrawn, and if I had employed it for another purpose, I should bringon me a disgraceful bankruptcy. I do not despise bankruptcies, believe me, butthey must be those which enrich, not those which ruin. Now, if you marry M.Cavalcanti, and I get the three millions, or even if it is thought I am goingto get them, my credit will be restored, and my fortune, which for the lastmonth or two has been swallowed up in gulfs which have been opened in my pathby an inconceivable fatality, will revive. Do you understand me?”“Perfectly; you pledge me for three millions, do you not?”“The greater the amount, the more flattering it is to you; it gives youan idea of your value.”“Thank you. One word more, sir; do you promise me to make what use youcan of the report of the fortune M. Cavalcanti will bring without touching themoney? This is no act of selfishness, but of delicacy. I am willing to helprebuild your fortune, but I will not be an accomplice in the ruin ofothers.”“But since I tell you,” cried Danglars, “that with thesethree million——”“Do you expect to recover your position, sir, without touching thosethree million?”“I hope so, if the marriage should take place and confirm mycredit.”“Shall you be able to pay M. Cavalcanti the five hundred thousand francsyou promise for my dowry?”“He shall receive them on returning from themayor’s[20].”“Very well!”“What next? what more do you want?”“I wish to know if, in demanding my signature, you leave me entirely freein my person?”“Absolutely.”“Then, as I said before, sir,—very well; I am ready to marry M.Cavalcanti.”“But what are you up to?”“Ah, that is my affair. What advantage should I have over you, if knowingyour secret I were to tell you mine?”Danglars bit his lips. “Then,” said he, “you are ready to paythe official visits, which are absolutely indispensable?”“Yes,” replied Eugénie.“And to sign the contract in three days?”“Yes.”“Then, in my turn, I also say, very well!”Danglars pressed his daughter’s hand in his. But, extraordinary torelate, the father did not say, “Thank you, my child,” nor did thedaughter smile at her father.“Is the conference ended?” asked Eugénie, rising.Danglars motioned that he had nothing more to say. Five minutes afterwards thepiano resounded to the touch of Mademoiselle d’Armilly’s fingers,and Mademoiselle Danglars was singing Brabantio’s malediction onDesdemona. At the end of the piece Étienne entered, and announced to Eugéniethat the horses were to the carriage, and that the baroness was waiting for herto pay her visits. We have seen them at Villefort’s; they proceeded thenon their course.VOLUME FIVE Chapter 96. TheContractThree days after thescene we have just described, namely towards five o’clock in theafternoon of the day fixed for the signature of the contract betweenMademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Andrea Cavalcanti, whom the banker persistedin calling prince, a fresh breeze was stirring the leaves in the little gardenin front of the Count of Monte Cristo’s house, and the count waspreparing to go out. While his horses were impatiently pawing the ground, heldin by the coachman, who had been seated a quarter of an hour on his box, theelegant phaeton with which we are familiar rapidly turned the angle of theentrance-gate, and cast out on the doorsteps M. Andrea Cavalcanti, as decked upand gay as if he were going to marry a princess.He inquired after the count with his usual familiarity, and ascending lightlyto the first story met him at the top of the stairs.The count stopped on seeing the young man. As for Andrea, he was launched, andwhen he was once launched nothing stopped him.“Ah, good morning, my dear count,” said he.“Ah, M. Andrea,” said the latter, with his half-jesting tone;“how do you do?”“Charmingly, as you see. I am come to talk to you about a thousandthings; but, first tell me, were you going out or just returned?”“I was going out, sir.”“Then, in order not to hinder you, I will get up with you if you pleasein your carriage, and Tom shall follow with my phaeton in tow.”“No,” said the count, with an imperceptible smile of contempt, forhe had no wish to be seen in the young man’s society,—“no; Iprefer listening to you here, my dear M. Andrea; we can chat better in-doors,and there is no coachman to overhear our conversation.”The count returned to a small drawing-room on the first floor, sat down, andcrossing his legs motioned to the young man to take a seat also. Andrea assumedhis gayest manner.“You know, my dear count,” said he, “the ceremony is to takeplace this evening. At nine o’clock the contract is to be signed at myfather-in-law’s.”“Ah, indeed?” said Monte Cristo.“What; is it news to you? Has not M. Danglars informed you of theceremony?”“Oh, yes,” said the count; “I received a letter from himyesterday, but I do not think the hour was mentioned.”“Possibly my father-in-law trusted to its general notoriety.”“Well,” said Monte Cristo, “you are fortunate, M. Cavalcanti;it is a most suitable alliance you are contracting, and Mademoiselle Danglarsis a handsome girl.”“Yes, indeed she is,” replied Cavalcanti, in a very modest tone.“Above all, she is very rich,—at least, I believe so,” saidMonte Cristo.“Very rich, do you think?” replied the young man.“Doubtless; it is said M. Danglars conceals at least half of hisfortune.”“And he acknowledges fifteen or twenty millions,” said Andrea witha look sparkling with joy.“Without reckoning,” added Monte Cristo, “that he is on theeve of entering into a sort of speculation already in vogue in the UnitedStates and in England, but quite novel in France.”“Yes, yes, I know what you mean,—the railway, of which he hasobtained the grant, is it not?”“Precisely; it is generally believed he will gain ten millions by thataffair.”“Ten millions! Do you think so? It is magnificent!” saidCavalcanti, who was quite confounded at the metallic sound of these goldenwords.“Without reckoning,” replied Monte Cristo, “that all hisfortune will come to you, and justly too, since Mademoiselle Danglars is anonly daughter. Besides, your own fortune, as your father assured me, is almostequal to that of your betrothed. But enough of money matters. Do you know, M.Andrea, I think you have managed this affair rather skilfully?”“Not badly, by any means,” said the young man; “I was bornfor a diplomatist.”“Well, you must become a diplomatist; diplomacy, you know, is somethingthat is not to be acquired; it is instinctive. Have you lost your heart?”“Indeed, I fear it,” replied Andrea, in the tone in which he hadheard Dorante or Valère reply toAlceste[21]at the Théâtre Français.“Is your love returned?”“I suppose so,” said Andrea with a triumphant smile, “since Iam accepted. But I must not forget one grand point.”“Which?”“That I have been singularly assisted.”“Nonsense.”“I have, indeed.”“By circumstances?”“No; by you.”“By me? Not at all, prince,” said Monte Cristo laying a markedstress on the title, “what have I done for you? Are not your name, yoursocial position, and your merit sufficient?”“No,” said Andrea,—“no; it is useless for you to sayso, count. I maintain that the position of a man like you has done more than myname, my social position, and my merit.”“You are completely mistaken, sir,” said Monte Cristo coldly, whofelt the perfidious manœuvre of the young man, and understood the bearing ofhis words; “you only acquired my protection after the influence andfortune of your father had been ascertained; for, after all, who procured forme, who had never seen either you or your illustrious father, the pleasure ofyour acquaintance?—two of my good friends, Lord Wilmore and the AbbéBusoni. What encouraged me not to become your surety, but to patronizeyou?—your father’s name, so well known in Italy and so highlyhonored. Personally, I do not know you.”This calm tone and perfect ease made Andrea feel that he was, for the moment,restrained by a more muscular hand than his own, and that the restraint couldnot be easily broken through.“Oh, then my father has really a very large fortune, count?”“It appears so, sir,” replied Monte Cristo.“Do you know if the marriage settlement he promised me has come?”“I have been advised of it.”“But the three millions?”“The three millions are probably on the road.”“Then I shall really have them?”“Oh, well,” said the count, “I do not think you have yetknown the want of money.”Andrea was so surprised that he pondered the matter for a moment. Then,arousing from his reverie:“Now, sir, I have one request to make to you, which you will understand,even if it should be disagreeable to you.”“Proceed,” said Monte Cristo.“I have formed an acquaintance, thanks to my good fortune, with manynoted persons, and have, at least for the moment, a crowd of friends. Butmarrying, as I am about to do, before all Paris, I ought to be supported by anillustrious name, and in the absence of the paternal hand some powerful oneought to lead me to the altar; now, my father is not coming to Paris, ishe?”“He is old, covered with wounds, and suffers dreadfully, he says, intravelling.”“I understand; well, I am come to ask a favor of you.”“Of me?”“Yes, of you.”“And pray what may it be?”“Well, to take his part.”“Ah, my dear sir! What?—after the varied relations I have had thehappiness to sustain towards you, can it be that you know me so little as toask such a thing? Ask me to lend you half a million and, although such a loanis somewhat rare, on my honor, you would annoy me less! Know, then, what Ithought I had already told you, that in participation in this world’saffairs, more especially in their moral aspects, the Count of Monte Cristo hasnever ceased to entertain the scruples and even the superstitions of the East.I, who have a seraglio at Cairo, one at Smyrna, and one at Constantinople,preside at a wedding?—never!”“Then you refuse me?”“Decidedly; and were you my son or my brother I would refuse you in thesame way.”“But what must be done?” said Andrea, disappointed.“You said just now that you had a hundred friends.”“Very true, but you introduced me at M. Danglars’.”“Not at all! Let us recall the exact facts. You met him at a dinner partyat my house, and you introduced yourself at his house; that is a totallydifferent affair.”“Yes, but, by my marriage, you have forwarded that.”“I?—not in the least, I beg you to believe. Recollect what I toldyou when you asked me to propose you. ‘Oh, I never make matches, my dearprince, it is my settled principle.’” Andrea bit his lips.“But, at least, you will be there?”“Will all Paris be there?”“Oh, certainly.”“Well, like all Paris, I shall be there too,” said the count.“And will you sign the contract?”“I see no objection to that; my scruples do not go thus far.”“Well, since you will grant me no more, I must be content with what yougive me. But one word more, count.”“What is it?”“Advice.”“Be careful; advice is worse than a service.”“Oh, you can give me this without compromising yourself.”“Tell me what it is.”“Is my wife’s fortune five hundred thousand livres?”“That is the sum M. Danglars himself announced.”“Must I receive it, or leave it in the hands of the notary?”“This is the way such affairs are generally arranged when it is wished todo them stylishly: Your two solicitors appoint a meeting, when the contract issigned, for the next or the following day; then they exchange the two portions,for which they each give a receipt; then, when the marriage is celebrated, theyplace the amount at your disposal as the chief member of the alliance.”“Because,” said Andrea, with a certain ill-concealed uneasiness,“I thought I heard my father-in-law say that he intended embarking ourproperty in that famous railway affair of which you spoke just now.”“Well,” replied Monte Cristo, “it will be the way, everybodysays, of trebling your fortune in twelve months. Baron Danglars is a goodfather, and knows how to calculate.”“In that case,” said Andrea, “everything is all right,excepting your refusal, which quite grieves me.”“You must attribute it only to natural scruples under similarcircumstances.”“Well,” said Andrea, “let it be as you wish. This evening,then, at nine o’clock.”“Adieu till then.”Notwithstanding a slight resistance on the part of Monte Cristo, whose lipsturned pale, but who preserved his ceremonious smile, Andrea seized thecount’s hand, pressed it, jumped into his phaeton, and disappeared.The four or five remaining hours before nine o’clock arrived, Andreaemployed in riding, paying visits,—designed to induce those of whom hehad spoken to appear at the banker’s in their gayestequipages,—dazzling them by promises of shares in schemes which havesince turned every brain, and in which Danglars was just taking the initiative.In fact, at half-past eight in the evening the grand salon, the galleryadjoining, and the three other drawing-rooms on the same floor, were filledwith a perfumed crowd, who sympathized but little in the event, but who allparticipated in that love of being present wherever there is anything fresh tobe seen. An Academician would say that the entertainments of the fashionableworld are collections of flowers which attract inconstant butterflies, famishedbees, and buzzing drones.No one could deny that the rooms were splendidly illuminated; the lightstreamed forth on the gilt mouldings and the silk hangings; and all the badtaste of decorations, which had only their richness to boast of, shone in itssplendor. Mademoiselle Eugénie was dressed with elegant simplicity in a figuredwhite silk dress, and a white rose half concealed in her jet black hair was heronly ornament, unaccompanied by a single jewel. Her eyes, however, betrayedthat perfect confidence which contradicted the girlish simplicity of thismodest attire.Madame Danglars was chatting at a short distance with Debray, Beauchamp, andChâteau-Renaud. Debray was admitted to the house for this grand ceremony, buton the same plane with everyone else, and without any particular privilege. M.Danglars, surrounded by deputies and men connected with the revenue, wasexplaining a new theory of taxation which he intended to adopt when the courseof events had compelled the government to call him into the ministry. Andrea,on whose arm hung one of the most consummate dandies of the Opera, wasexplaining to him rather cleverly, since he was obliged to be bold to appear atease, his future projects, and the new luxuries he meant to introduce toParisian fashions with his hundred and seventy-five thousand livres per annum.The crowd moved to and fro in the rooms like an ebb and flow of turquoises,rubies, emeralds, opals, and diamonds. As usual, the oldest women were the mostdecorated, and the ugliest the most conspicuous. If there was a beautiful lily,or a sweet rose, you had to search for it, concealed in some corner behind amother with a turban, or an aunt with a bird-of-paradise.At each moment, in the midst of the crowd, the buzzing, and the laughter, thedoor-keeper’s voice was heard announcing some name well known in thefinancial department, respected in the army, or illustrious in the literaryworld, and which was acknowledged by a slight movement in the different groups.But for one whose privilege it was to agitate that ocean of human waves, howmany were received with a look of indifference or a sneer of disdain!At the moment when the hand of the massive time-piece, representing Endymionasleep, pointed to nine on its golden face, and the hammer, the faithful typeof mechanical thought, struck nine times, the name of the Count of Monte Cristoresounded in its turn, and as if by an electric shock all the assembly turnedtowards the door. The count was dressed in black and with his habitualsimplicity; his white waistcoat displayed his expansive noble chest and hisblack stock was singularly noticeable because of its contrast with the deadlypaleness of his face. His only jewellery was a chain, so fine that the slendergold thread was scarcely perceptible on his white waistcoat.A circle was immediately formed around the door. The count perceived at oneglance Madame Danglars at one end of the drawing-room, M. Danglars at theother, and Eugénie in front of him. He first advanced towards the baroness, whowas chatting with Madame de Villefort, who had come alone, Valentine beingstill an invalid; and without turning aside, so clear was the road left forhim, he passed from the baroness to Eugénie, whom he complimented in such rapidand measured terms, that the proud artist was quite struck. Near her wasMademoiselle Louise d’Armilly, who thanked the count for the letters ofintroduction he had so kindly given her for Italy, which she intendedimmediately to make use of. On leaving these ladies he found himself withDanglars, who had advanced to meet him.Having accomplished these three social duties, Monte Cristo stopped, lookingaround him with that expression peculiar to a certain class, which seems tosay, “I have done my duty, now let others do theirs.”Andrea, who was in an adjoining room, had shared in the sensation caused by thearrival of Monte Cristo, and now came forward to pay his respects to the count.He found him completely surrounded; all were eager to speak to him, as isalways the case with those whose words are few and weighty. The solicitorsarrived at this moment and arranged their scrawled papers on the velvet clothembroidered with gold which covered the table prepared for the signature; itwas a gilt table supported on lions’ claws. One of the notaries sat down,the other remained standing. They were about to proceed to the reading of thecontract, which half Paris assembled was to sign. All took their places, orrather the ladies formed a circle, while the gentlemen (more indifferent to therestraints of what Boileau calls the style énergique) commented on thefeverish agitation of Andrea, on M. Danglars’ riveted attention,Eugénie’s composure, and the light and sprightly manner in which thebaroness treated this important affair.The contract was read during a profound silence. But as soon as it wasfinished, the buzz was redoubled through all the drawing-rooms; the brilliantsums, the rolling millions which were to be at the command of the two youngpeople, and which crowned the display of the wedding presents and the younglady’s diamonds, which had been made in a room entirely appropriated forthat purpose, had exercised to the full their delusions over the enviousassembly.Mademoiselle Danglars’ charms were heightened in the opinion of the youngmen, and for the moment seemed to outvie the sun in splendor. As for theladies, it is needless to say that while they coveted the millions, theythought they did not need them for themselves, as they were beautiful enoughwithout them. Andrea, surrounded by his friends, complimented, flattered,beginning to believe in the reality of his dream, was almost bewildered. Thenotary solemnly took the pen, flourished it above his head, and said:“Gentlemen, we are about to sign the contract.”The baron was to sign first, then the representative of M. Cavalcanti, senior,then the baroness, afterwards the “future couple,” as they arestyled in the abominable phraseology of legal documents.The baron took the pen and signed, then the representative. The baronessapproached, leaning on Madame de Villefort’s arm.“My dear,” said she, as she took the pen, “is it notvexatious? An unexpected incident, in the affair of murder and theft at theCount of Monte Cristo’s, in which he nearly fell a victim, deprives us ofthe pleasure of seeing M. de Villefort.”“Indeed?” said M. Danglars, in the same tone in which he would havesaid, “Oh, well, what do I care?”“As a matter of fact,” said Monte Cristo, approaching, “I ammuch afraid that I am the involuntary cause of his absence.”“What, you, count?” said Madame Danglars, signing; “if youare, take care, for I shall never forgive you.”Andrea pricked up his ears.“But it is not my fault, as I shall endeavor to prove.”Everyone listened eagerly; Monte Cristo who so rarely opened his lips, wasabout to speak.“You remember,” said the count, during the most profound silence,“that the unhappy wretch who came to rob me died at my house; thesupposition is that he was stabbed by his accomplice, on attempting to leaveit.”“Yes,” said Danglars.“In order that his wounds might be examined he was undressed, and hisclothes were thrown into a corner, where the police picked them up, with theexception of the waistcoat, which they overlooked.”Andrea turned pale, and drew towards the door; he saw a cloud rising in thehorizon, which appeared to forebode a coming storm.“Well, this waistcoat was discovered today, covered with blood, and witha hole over the heart.” The ladies screamed, and two or three prepared tofaint. “It was brought to me. No one could guess what the dirty rag couldbe; I alone suspected that it was the waistcoat of the murdered man. My valet,in examining this mournful relic, felt a paper in the pocket and drew it out;it was a letter addressed to you, baron.”“To me?” cried Danglars.“Yes, indeed, to you; I succeeded in deciphering your name under theblood with which the letter was stained,” replied Monte Cristo, amid thegeneral outburst of amazement.“But,” asked Madame Danglars, looking at her husband withuneasiness, “how could that prevent M. de Villefort——”“In this simple way, madame,” replied Monte Cristo; “thewaistcoat and the letter were both what is termed circumstantial evidence; Itherefore sent them to the king’s attorney. You understand, my dearbaron, that legal methods are the safest in criminal cases; it was, perhaps,some plot against you.” Andrea looked steadily at Monte Cristo anddisappeared in the second drawing-room.“Possibly,” said Danglars; “was not this murdered man an oldgalley-slave?”“Yes,” replied the count; “a felon named Caderousse.”Danglars turned slightly pale; Andrea reached the anteroom beyond the littledrawing-room.“But go on signing,” said Monte Cristo; “I perceive that mystory has caused a general emotion, and I beg to apologize to you, baroness,and to Mademoiselle Danglars.”The baroness, who had signed, returned the pen to the notary.“Prince Cavalcanti,” said the latter; “Prince Cavalcanti,where are you?”“Andrea, Andrea,” repeated several young people, who were alreadyon sufficiently intimate terms with him to call him by his Christian name.“Call the prince; inform him that it is his turn to sign,” criedDanglars to one of the floorkeepers.But at the same instant the crowd of guests rushed in alarm into the principalsalon as if some frightful monster had entered the apartments, quærens quemdevoret. There was, indeed, reason to retreat, to be alarmed, and toscream. An officer was placing two soldiers at the door of each drawing-room,and was advancing towards Danglars, preceded by a commissary of police, girdedwith his scarf. Madame Danglars uttered a scream and fainted. Danglars, whothought himself threatened (certain consciences are never calm),—Danglarseven before his guests showed a countenance of abject terror.“What is the matter, sir?” asked Monte Cristo, advancing to meetthe commissioner.“Which of you gentlemen,” asked the magistrate, without replying tothe count, “answers to the name of Andrea Cavalcanti?”A cry of astonishment was heard from all parts of the room. They searched; theyquestioned.“But who then is Andrea Cavalcanti?” asked Danglars in amazement.“A galley-slave, escaped from confinement at Toulon.”“And what crime has he committed?”“He is accused,” said the commissary with his inflexible voice,“of having assassinated the man named Caderousse, his former companion inprison, at the moment he was making his escape from the house of the Count ofMonte Cristo.”Monte Cristo cast a rapid glance around him. Andrea was gone. Chapter 97. The Departurefor BelgiumA few minutes after thescene of confusion produced in the salons of M. Danglars by the unexpectedappearance of the brigade of soldiers, and by the disclosure which hadfollowed, the mansion was deserted with as much rapidity as if a case of plagueor of cholera morbus had broken out among the guests.In a few minutes, through all the doors, down all the staircases, by everyexit, everyone hastened to retire, or rather to fly; for it was a situationwhere the ordinary condolences,—which even the best friends are so eagerto offer in great catastrophes,—were seen to be utterly futile. Thereremained in the banker’s house only Danglars, closeted in his study, andmaking his statement to the officer of gendarmes; Madame Danglars, terrified,in the boudoir with which we are acquainted; and Eugénie, who with haughty airand disdainful lip had retired to her room with her inseparable companion,Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.As for the numerous servants (more numerous that evening than usual, for theirnumber was augmented by cooks and butlers from the Café de Paris), venting ontheir employers their anger at what they termed the insult to which they hadbeen subjected, they collected in groups in the hall, in the kitchens, or intheir rooms, thinking very little of their duty, which was thus naturallyinterrupted. Of all this household, only two persons deserve our notice; theseare Mademoiselle Eugénie Danglars and Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.The betrothed had retired, as we said, with haughty air, disdainful lip, andthe demeanor of an outraged queen, followed by her companion, who was paler andmore disturbed than herself. On reaching her room Eugénie locked her door,while Louise fell on a chair.“Ah, what a dreadful thing,” said the young musician; “whowould have suspected it? M. Andrea Cavalcanti a murderer—a galley-slaveescaped—a convict!”An ironical smile curled the lip of Eugénie. “In truth, I wasfated,” said she. “I escaped the Morcerf only to fall into theCavalcanti.”“Oh, do not confound the two, Eugénie.”“Hold your tongue! The men are all infamous, and I am happy to be ablenow to do more than detest them—I despise them.”“What shall we do?” asked Louise.“What shall we do?”“Yes.”“Why, the same we had intended doing three days since—setoff.”“What?—although you are not now going to be married, you intendstill——”“Listen, Louise. I hate this life of the fashionable world, alwaysordered, measured, ruled, like our music-paper. What I have always wished for,desired, and coveted, is the life of an artist, free and independent, relyingonly on my own resources, and accountable only to myself. Remain here? Whatfor?—that they may try, a month hence, to marry me again; and towhom?—M. Debray, perhaps, as it was once proposed. No, Louise, no! Thisevening’s adventure will serve for my excuse. I did not seek one, I didnot ask for one. God sends me this, and I hail it joyfully!”“How strong and courageous you are!” said the fair, frail girl toher brunette companion.“Did you not yet know me? Come, Louise, let us talk of our affairs. Thepost-chaise——”“Was happily bought three days since.”“Have you had it sent where we are to go for it?”“Yes.”“Our passport?”“Here it is.”And Eugénie, with her usual precision, opened a printed paper, and read:“M. Léon d’Armilly, twenty years of age; profession, artist; hairblack, eyes black; travelling with his sister.”“Capital! How did you get this passport?”“When I went to ask M. de Monte Cristo for letters to the directors ofthe theatres at Rome and Naples, I expressed my fears of travelling as a woman;he perfectly understood them, and undertook to procure for me a man’spassport, and two days after I received this, to which I have added with my ownhand, ‘travelling with his sister.’”“Well,” said Eugénie cheerfully, “we have then only to packup our trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the contract,instead of the evening of the wedding—that is all.”“But consider the matter seriously, Eugénie!”“Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing only of marketreports, of the end of the month, of the rise and fall of Spanish funds, ofHaitian bonds. Instead of that, Louise—do you understand?—air,liberty, melody of birds, plains of Lombardy, Venetian canals, Roman palaces,the Bay of Naples. How much have we, Louise?”The young girl to whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaidsecretaire a small portfolio with a lock, in which she counted twenty-threebank-notes.“Twenty-three thousand francs,” said she.“And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels,” saidEugénie. “We are rich. With forty-five thousand francs we can live likeprincesses for two years, and comfortably for four; but before sixmonths—you with your music, and I with my voice—we shall double ourcapital. Come, you shall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box; so thatif one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other would stillhave hers left. Now, the portmanteau—let us make haste—theportmanteau!”“Stop!” said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars’door.“What do you fear?”“That we may be discovered.”“The door is locked.”“They may tell us to open it.”“They may if they like, but we will not.”“You are a perfect Amazon, Eugénie!” And the two young girls beganto heap into a trunk all the things they thought they should require.“There now,” said Eugénie, “while I change my costume do youlock the portmanteau.” Louise pressed with all the strength of her littlehands on the top of the portmanteau.“But I cannot,” said she; “I am not strong enough; do youshut it.”“Ah, you do well to ask,” said Eugénie, laughing; “I forgotthat I was Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!”And the young girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts of theportmanteau together, and Mademoiselle d’Armilly passed the bolt of thepadlock through. When this was done, Eugénie opened a drawer, of which she keptthe key, and took from it a wadded violet silk travelling cloak.“Here,” said she, “you see I have thought of everything; withthis cloak you will not be cold.”“But you?”“Oh, I am never cold, you know! Besides, with these men’sclothes——”“Will you dress here?”“Certainly.”“Shall you have time?”“Do not be uneasy, you little coward! All our servants are busy,discussing the grand affair. Besides, what is there astonishing, when you thinkof the grief I ought to be in, that I shut myself up?—tell me!”“No, truly—you comfort me.”“Come and help me.”From the same drawer she took a man’s complete costume, from the boots tothe coat, and a provision of linen, where there was nothing superfluous, butevery requisite. Then, with a promptitude which indicated that this was not thefirst time she had amused herself by adopting the garb of the opposite sex,Eugénie drew on the boots and pantaloons, tied her cravat, buttoned herwaistcoat up to the throat, and put on a coat which admirably fitted herbeautiful figure.“Oh, that is very good—indeed, it is very good!” said Louise,looking at her with admiration; “but that beautiful black hair, thosemagnificent braids, which made all the ladies sigh with envy,—will theygo under a man’s hat like the one I see down there?”“You shall see,” said Eugénie. And with her left hand seizing thethick mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp, she took in her righthand a pair of long scissors, and soon the steel met through the rich andsplendid hair, which fell in a cluster at her feet as she leaned back to keepit from her coat. Then she grasped the front hair, which she also cut off,without expressing the least regret; on the contrary, her eyes sparkled withgreater pleasure than usual under her ebony eyebrows.“Oh, the magnificent hair!” said Louise, with regret.“And am I not a hundred times better thus?” cried Eugénie,smoothing the scattered curls of her hair, which had now quite a masculineappearance; “and do you not think me handsomer so?”“Oh, you are beautiful—always beautiful!” cried Louise.“Now, where are you going?”“To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. We can go toBrussels, Liège, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up the Rhine to Strasbourg. We willcross Switzerland, and go down into Italy by the Saint-Gothard. Will thatdo?”“Yes.”“What are you looking at?”“I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! One would sayyou were carrying me off.”“And they would be right, pardieu!”“Oh, I think you swore, Eugénie.”And the two young girls, whom everyone might have thought plunged in grief, theone on her own account, the other from interest in her friend, burst outlaughing, as they cleared away every visible trace of the disorder which hadnaturally accompanied the preparations for their escape. Then, having blown outthe lights, the two fugitives, looking and listening eagerly, with outstretchednecks, opened the door of a dressing-room which led by a side staircase down tothe yard,—Eugénie going first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau,which by the opposite handle Mademoiselle d’Armilly scarcely raised withboth hands. The yard was empty; the clock was striking twelve. The porter wasnot yet gone to bed. Eugénie approached softly, and saw the old man sleepingsoundly in an armchair in his lodge. She returned to Louise, took up theportmanteau, which she had placed for a moment on the ground, and they reachedthe archway under the shadow of the wall.Eugénie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so that if the porterchanced to awake he might see but one person. Then placing herself in the fulllight of the lamp which lit the yard:“Gate!” cried she, with her finest contralto voice, and rapping atthe window.The porter got up as Eugénie expected, and even advanced some steps torecognize the person who was going out, but seeing a young man striking hisboot impatiently with his riding-whip, he opened it immediately. Louise slidthrough the half-open gate like a snake, and bounded lightly forward. Eugénie,apparently calm, although in all probability her heart beat somewhat fasterthan usual, went out in her turn.A porter was passing and they gave him the portmanteau; then the two younggirls, having told him to take it to No. 36, Rue de la Victoire, walked behindthis man, whose presence comforted Louise. As for Eugénie, she was as strong asa Judith or a Delilah. They arrived at the appointed spot. Eugénie ordered theporter to put down the portmanteau, gave him some pieces of money, and havingrapped at the shutter sent him away. The shutter where Eugénie had rapped wasthat of a little laundress, who had been previously warned, and was not yetgone to bed. She opened the door.“Mademoiselle,” said Eugénie, “let the porter get thepost-chaise from the coach-house, and fetch some post-horses from the hotel.Here are five francs for his trouble.”“Indeed,” said Louise, “I admire you, and I could almost sayrespect you.” The laundress looked on in astonishment, but as she hadbeen promised twenty louis, she made no remark.In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boy and horses, whichwere harnessed, and put in the post-chaise in a minute, while the porterfastened the portmanteau on with the assistance of a cord and strap.“Here is the passport,” said the postilion, “which way are wegoing, young gentleman?”“To Fontainebleau,” replied Eugénie with an almost masculine voice.“What do you say?” said Louise.“I am giving them the slip,” said Eugénie; “this woman towhom we have given twenty louis may betray us for forty; we will soon alter ourdirection.”And the young girl jumped into the britzka, which was admirably arranged forsleeping in, without scarcely touching the step.“You are always right,” said the music teacher, seating herself bythe side of her friend.A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the rightroad, passed with a crack of his whip through the gateway of the BarrièreSaint-Martin.“Ah,” said Louise, breathing freely, “here we are out ofParis.”“Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,” repliedEugénie.“Yes, and without violence,” said Louise.“I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,”replied Eugénie.These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling over thepavement of La Villette. M. Danglars no longer had a daughter. Chapter 98. The Bell andBottle TavernAnd now let us leaveMademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing their way to Brussels, and returnto poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so inopportunely interrupted in his rise to fortune.Notwithstanding his youth, Master Andrea was a very skilful and intelligentboy. We have seen that on the first rumor which reached the salon he hadgradually approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at lastdisappeared. But we have forgotten to mention one circumstance, whichnevertheless ought not to be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed, thetrousseau of the bride-elect was on exhibition. There were caskets ofdiamonds, cashmere shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veils, and in fact allthe tempting things, the bare mention of which makes the hearts of young girlsbound with joy, and which is called thecorbeille.[22]Now, in passing through this room, Andrea proved himself not only to be cleverand intelligent, but also provident, for he helped himself to the most valuableof the ornaments before him.Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter heart from thewindow, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes. Tall and wellproportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a Spartan, he walked fora quarter of an hour without knowing where to direct his steps, actuated by thesole idea of getting away from the spot where if he lingered he knew that hewould surely be taken. Having passed through the Rue du Mont-Blanc, guided bythe instinct which leads thieves always to take the safest path, he foundhimself at the end of the Rue La Fayette. There he stopped, breathless andpanting. He was quite alone; on one side was the vast wilderness of theSaint-Lazare, on the other, Paris enshrouded in darkness.“Am I to be captured?” he cried; “no, not if I can use moreactivity than my enemies. My safety is now a mere question of speed.”At this moment he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg Poissonnière. The dulldriver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward the limits of the FaubourgSaint-Denis, where no doubt he ordinarily had his station.“Ho, friend!” said Benedetto.“What do you want, sir?” asked the driver.“Is your horse tired?”“Tired? oh, yes, tired enough—he has done nothing the whole of thisblessed day! Four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all sevenfrancs, are all that I have earned, and I ought to take ten to theowner.”“Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?”“With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. Tell me what Iam to do for this.”“A very easy thing, if your horse isn’t tired.”“I tell you he’ll go like the wind,—only tell me which way todrive.”“Towards the Louvres.”“Ah, I know the way—you get good sweetened rum over there.”“Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends, with whom I amgoing to hunt tomorrow at Chapelle-en-Serval. He should have waited for me herewith a cabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and, tired of waiting, hemust have gone on.”“It is likely.”“Well, will you try and overtake him?”“Nothing I should like better.”“If you do not overtake him before we reach Bourget you shall have twentyfrancs; if not before Louvres, thirty.”“And if we do overtake him?”“Forty,” said Andrea, after a moment’s hesitation, at the endof which he remembered that he might safely promise.“That’s all right,” said the man; “hop in, andwe’re off! Who-o-o-pla!”Andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through the Faubourg Saint-Denis,along the Faubourg Saint-Martin, crossed the barrier, and threaded its waythrough the interminable Villette. They never overtook the chimerical friend,yet Andrea frequently inquired of people on foot whom he passed and at the innswhich were not yet closed, for a green cabriolet and bay horse; and as thereare a great many cabriolets to be seen on the road to the Low Countries, and asnine-tenths of them are green, the inquiries increased at every step. Everyonehad just seen it pass; it was only five hundred, two hundred, one hundred stepsin advance; at length they reached it, but it was not the friend. Once the cabwas also passed by a calash rapidly whirled along by two post-horses.“Ah,” said Cavalcanti to himself, “if I only had thatbritzka, those two good post-horses, and above all the passport that carriesthem on!” And he sighed deeply.The calash contained Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly.“Hurry, hurry!” said Andrea, “we must overtake himsoon.”And the poor horse resumed the desperate gallop it had kept up since leavingthe barrier, and arrived steaming at Louvres.“Certainly,” said Andrea, “I shall not overtake my friend,but I shall kill your horse, therefore I had better stop. Here are thirtyfrancs; I will sleep at the Cheval Rouge, and will secure a place in thefirst coach. Good-night, friend.”And Andrea, after placing six pieces of five francs each in the man’shand, leaped lightly on to the pathway. The cabman joyfully pocketed the sum,and turned back on his road to Paris. Andrea pretended to go towards the hotelof the Cheval Rouge, but after leaning an instant against the door, andhearing the last sound of the cab, which was disappearing from view, he went onhis road, and with a lusty stride soon traversed the space of two leagues. Thenhe rested; he must be near Chapelle-en-Serval, where he pretended to be going.It was not fatigue that stayed Andrea here; it was that he might form someresolution, adopt some plan. It would be impossible to make use of a diligence,equally so to engage post-horses; to travel either way a passport wasnecessary. It was still more impossible to remain in the department of theOise, one of the most open and strictly guarded in France; this was quite outof the question, especially to a man like Andrea, perfectly conversant withcriminal matters.He sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in his hands andreflected. Ten minutes after he raised his head; his resolution was made. Hethrew some dust over the topcoat, which he had found time to unhook from theantechamber and button over his ball costume, and going to Chapelle-en-Servalhe knocked loudly at the door of the only inn in the place.The host opened.“My friend,” said Andrea, “I was coming from Mortefontaine toSenlis, when my horse, which is a troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me.I must reach Compiègne tonight, or I shall cause deep anxiety to my family.Could you let me hire a horse of you?”An innkeeper has always a horse to let, whether it be good or bad. The hostcalled the stable-boy, and ordered him to saddle Le Blanc then he awokehis son, a child of seven years, whom he ordered to ride before the gentlemanand bring back the horse. Andrea gave the innkeeper twenty francs, and intaking them from his pocket dropped a visiting card. This belonged to one ofhis friends at the Café de Paris, so that the innkeeper, picking it up afterAndrea had left, was convinced that he had let his horse to the Count ofMauléon, 25 Rue Saint-Dominique, that being the name and address on the card.Le Blanc was not a fast animal, but he kept up an easy, steady pace; inthree hours and a half Andrea had traversed the nine leagues which separatedhim from Compiègne, and four o’clock struck as he reached the place wherethe coaches stop. There is an excellent tavern at Compiègne, well remembered bythose who have ever been there. Andrea, who had often stayed there in his ridesabout Paris, recollected the Bell and Bottle inn; he turned around, saw thesign by the light of a reflected lamp, and having dismissed the child, givinghim all the small coin he had about him, he began knocking at the door, veryreasonably concluding that having now three or four hours before him he hadbest fortify himself against the fatigues of the morrow by a sound sleep and agood supper. A waiter opened the door.“My friend,” said Andrea, “I have been dining atSaint-Jean-aux-Bois, and expected to catch the coach which passes by atmidnight, but like a fool I have lost my way, and have been walking for thelast four hours in the forest. Show me into one of those pretty little roomswhich overlook the court, and bring me a cold fowl and a bottle ofBordeaux.”The waiter had no suspicions; Andrea spoke with perfect composure, he had acigar in his mouth, and his hands in the pocket of his top coat; his clotheswere fashionably made, his chin smooth, his boots irreproachable; he lookedmerely as if he had stayed out very late, that was all. While the waiter waspreparing his room, the hostess arose; Andrea assumed his most charming smile,and asked if he could have No. 3, which he had occupied on his last stay atCompiègne. Unfortunately, No. 3 was engaged by a young man who was travellingwith his sister. Andrea appeared in despair, but consoled himself when thehostess assured him that No. 7, prepared for him, was situated precisely thesame as No. 3, and while warming his feet and chatting about the last races atChantilly, he waited until they announced his room to be ready.Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms looking out upon thecourt of the Bell Hotel, which with its triple galleries like those of atheatre, with the jessamine and clematis twining round the light columns, formsone of the prettiest entrances to an inn that you can imagine. The fowl wastender, the wine old, the fire clear and sparkling, and Andrea was surprised tofind himself eating with as good an appetite as though nothing had happened.Then he went to bed and almost immediately fell into that deep sleep which issure to visit men of twenty years of age, even when they are torn with remorse.Now, here we are obliged to own that Andrea ought to have felt remorse, butthat he did not.This was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best chance of hissecurity. Before daybreak he would awake, leave the inn after rigorously payinghis bill, and reaching the forest, he would, under pretence of making studiesin painting, test the hospitality of some peasants, procure himself the dressof a woodcutter and a hatchet, casting off the lion’s skin to assume thatof the woodman; then, with his hands covered with dirt, his hair darkened bymeans of a leaden comb, his complexion embrowned with a preparation for whichone of his old comrades had given him the recipe, he intended, by following thewooded districts, to reach the nearest frontier, walking by night and sleepingin the day in the forests and quarries, and only entering inhabited regions tobuy a loaf from time to time.Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of his diamonds; and byuniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes he always carried about with him in caseof accident, he would then find himself possessor of about 50,000 livres, whichhe philosophically considered as no very deplorable condition after all.Moreover, he reckoned much on the interest of the Danglars to hush up the rumorof their own misadventures. These were the reasons which, added to the fatigue,caused Andrea to sleep so soundly. In order that he might wake early he did notclose the shutters, but contented himself with bolting the door and placing onthe table an unclasped and long-pointed knife, whose temper he well knew, andwhich was never absent from him.About seven in the morning Andrea was awakened by a ray of sunlight, whichplayed, warm and brilliant, upon his face. In all well-organized brains, thepredominating idea—and there always is one—is sure to be the lastthought before sleeping, and the first upon waking in the morning. Andrea hadscarcely opened his eyes when his predominating idea presented itself, andwhispered in his ear that he had slept too long. He jumped out of bed and ranto the window. A gendarme was crossing the court. A gendarme is one of the moststriking objects in the world, even to a man void of uneasiness; but for onewho has a timid conscience, and with good cause too, the yellow, blue, andwhite uniform is really very alarming.“Why is that gendarme there?” asked Andrea of himself.Then, all at once, he replied, with that logic which the reader has, doubtless,remarked in him, “There is nothing astonishing in seeing a gendarme at aninn; instead of being astonished, let me dress myself.” And the youthdressed himself with a facility his valet de chambre had failed to rob him ofduring the two months of fashionable life he had led in Paris.“Now then,” said Andrea, while dressing himself, “I’llwait till he leaves, and then I’ll slip away.”And, saying this, Andrea, who had now put on his boots and cravat, stole gentlyto the window, and a second time lifted up the muslin curtain. Not only was thefirst gendarme still there, but the young man now perceived a second yellow,blue, and white uniform at the foot of the staircase, the only one by which hecould descend, while a third, on horseback, holding a musket in his fist, wasposted as a sentinel at the great street-door which alone afforded the means ofegress. The appearance of the third gendarme settled the matter, for a crowd ofcurious loungers was extended before him, effectually blocking the entrance tothe hotel.“They’re after me!” was Andrea’s first thought.“Diable!”A pallor overspread the young man’s forehead, and he looked around himwith anxiety. His room, like all those on the same floor, had but one outlet tothe gallery in the sight of everybody. “I am lost!” was his secondthought; and, indeed, for a man in Andrea’s situation, an arrest meantthe assizes, trial, and death,—death without mercy or delay.For a moment he convulsively pressed his head within his hands, and during thatbrief period he became nearly mad with terror; but soon a ray of hope glimmeredin the multitude of thoughts which bewildered his mind, and a faint smileplayed upon his white lips and pallid cheeks. He looked around and saw theobjects of his search upon the chimney-piece; they were a pen, ink, and paper.With forced composure he dipped the pen in the ink, and wrote the followinglines upon a sheet of paper:“I have no money to pay my bill, but I am not a dishonest man; I leavebehind me as a pledge this pin, worth ten times the amount. I shall be excusedfor leaving at daybreak, for I was ashamed.”He then drew the pin from his cravat and placed it on the paper. This done,instead of leaving the door fastened, he drew back the bolts and even placedthe door ajar, as though he had left the room, forgetting to close it, andslipping into the chimney like a man accustomed to that kind of gymnasticexercise, after replacing the chimney-board, which represented Achilles withDeidamia, and effacing the very marks of his feet upon the ashes, he commencedclimbing the hollow tunnel, which afforded him the only means of escape left.At this precise time, the first gendarme Andrea had noticed walked upstairs,preceded by the commissary of police, and supported by the second gendarme whoguarded the staircase and was himself reinforced by the one stationed at thedoor.Andrea was indebted for this visit to the following circumstances. At daybreak,the telegraphs were set at work in all directions, and almost immediately theauthorities in every district had exerted their utmost endeavors to arrest themurderer of Caderousse. Compiègne, that royal residence and fortified town, iswell furnished with authorities, gendarmes, and commissaries of police; theytherefore began operations as soon as the telegraphic despatch arrived, and theBell and Bottle being the best-known hotel in the town, they had naturallydirected their first inquiries there.Now, besides the reports of the sentinels guarding the Hôtel de Ville, which isnext door to the Bell and Bottle, it had been stated by others that a number oftravellers had arrived during the night. The sentinel who was relieved at sixo’clock in the morning, remembered perfectly that, just as he was takinghis post a few minutes past four, a young man arrived on horseback, with alittle boy before him. The young man, having dismissed the boy and horse,knocked at the door of the hotel, which was opened, and again closed after hisentrance. This late arrival had attracted much suspicion, and the young manbeing no other than Andrea, the commissary and gendarme, who was a brigadier,directed their steps towards his room. They found the door ajar.“Oh, oh,” said the brigadier, who thoroughly understood the trick;“a bad sign to find the door open! I would rather find it triplybolted.”And, indeed, the little note and pin upon the table confirmed, or rathercorroborated, the sad truth. Andrea had fled. We say corroborated, because thebrigadier was too experienced to be convinced by a single proof. He glancedaround, looked in the bed, shook the curtains, opened the closets, and finallystopped at the chimney. Andrea had taken the precaution to leave no traces ofhis feet in the ashes, but still it was an outlet, and in this light was not tobe passed over without serious investigation.The brigadier sent for some sticks and straw, and having filled the chimneywith them, set a light to it. The fire crackled, and the smoke ascended likethe dull vapor from a volcano; but still no prisoner fell down, as theyexpected. The fact was, that Andrea, at war with society ever since his youth,was quite as deep as a gendarme, even though he were advanced to the rank ofbrigadier, and quite prepared for the fire, he had climbed out on the roof andwas crouching down against the chimney-pots.At one time he thought he was saved, for he heard the brigadier exclaim in aloud voice, to the two gendarmes, “He is not here!” But venturingto peep, he perceived that the latter, instead of retiring, as might have beenreasonably expected upon this announcement, were watching with increasedattention.It was now his turn to look about him; the Hôtel de Ville, a massive sixteenthcentury building, was on his right; anyone could descend from the openings inthe tower, and examine every corner of the roof below, and Andrea expectedmomentarily to see the head of a gendarme appear at one of these openings. Ifonce discovered, he knew he would be lost, for the roof afforded no chance ofescape; he therefore resolved to descend, not through the same chimney by whichhe had come up, but by a similar one conducting to another room.He looked around for a chimney from which no smoke issued, and having reachedit, he disappeared through the orifice without being seen by anyone. At thesame minute, one of the little windows of the Hôtel de Ville was thrown open,and the head of a gendarme appeared. For an instant it remained motionless asone of the stone decorations of the building, then after a long sigh ofdisappointment the head disappeared. The brigadier, calm and dignified as thelaw he represented, passed through the crowd, without answering the thousandquestions addressed to him, and re-entered the hotel.“Well?” asked the two gendarmes.“Well, my boys,” said the brigadier, “the brigand must reallyhave escaped early this morning; but we will send to the Villers-Coterets andNoyon roads, and search the forest, when we shall catch him, no doubt.”The honorable functionary had scarcely expressed himself thus, in thatintonation which is peculiar to brigadiers of the gendarmerie, when a loudscream, accompanied by the violent ringing of a bell, resounded through thecourt of the hotel.“Ah, what is that?” cried the brigadier.“Some traveller seems impatient,” said the host. “What numberwas it that rang?”“Number 3.”“Run, waiter!”At this moment the screams and ringing were redoubled.“Aha!” said the brigadier, stopping the servant, “the personwho is ringing appears to want something more than a waiter; we will attendupon him with a gendarme. Who occupies Number 3?”“The little fellow who arrived last night in a post-chaise with hissister, and who asked for an apartment with two beds.”The bell here rang for the third time, with another shriek of anguish.“Follow me, Mr. Commissary!” said the brigadier; “tread in mysteps.”“Wait an instant,” said the host; “Number 3 has twostaircases,—inside and outside.”“Good,” said the brigadier. “I will take charge of the insideone. Are the carbines loaded?”“Yes, brigadier.”“Well, you guard the exterior, and if he attempts to fly, fire upon him;he must be a great criminal, from what the telegraph says.”The brigadier, followed by the commissary, disappeared by the inside staircase,accompanied by the noise which his assertions respecting Andrea had excited inthe crowd.This is what had happened: Andrea had very cleverly managed to descendtwo-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and notwithstanding hisendeavors, he came into the room with more speed and noise than he intended. Itwould have signified little had the room been empty, but unfortunately it wasoccupied. Two ladies, sleeping in one bed, were awakened by the noise, andfixing their eyes upon the spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. Oneof these ladies, the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resoundedthrough the house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all herstrength. Andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.“For pity’s sake,” he cried, pale and bewildered, withoutseeing whom he was addressing,—“for pity’s sake do not callassistance! Save me!—I will not harm you.”“Andrea, the murderer!” cried one of the ladies.“Eugénie! Mademoiselle Danglars!” exclaimed Andrea, stupefied.“Help, help!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, taking the bellfrom her companion’s hand, and ringing it yet more violently.“Save me, I am pursued!” said Andrea, clasping his hands.“For pity, for mercy’s sake do not deliver me up!”“It is too late, they are coming,” said Eugénie.“Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlessly alarmed; youcan turn their suspicions and save my life!”The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the bedclothestightly around them, remained silent to this supplicating voice, repugnance andfear taking possession of their minds.“Well, be it so,” at length said Eugénie; “return by the sameroad you came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy wretch.”“Here he is, here he is!” cried a voice from the landing;“here he is! I see him!”The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole, and had discovered Andrea in aposture of entreaty. A violent blow from the butt end of the musket burst openthe lock, two more forced out the bolts, and the broken door fell in. Andrearan to the other door, leading to the gallery, ready to rush out; but he wasstopped short, and he stood with his body a little thrown back, pale, and withthe useless knife in his clenched hand.“Fly, then!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, whose pityreturned as her fears diminished; “fly!”“Or kill yourself!” said Eugénie (in a tone which a Vestal in theamphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious gladiator to finishhis vanquished adversary). Andrea shuddered, and looked on the young girl withan expression which proved how little he understood such ferocious honor.“Kill myself?” he cried, throwing down his knife; “why shouldI do so?”“Why, you said,” answered Mademoiselle Danglars, “that youwould be condemned to die like the worst criminals.”“Bah,” said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, “one hasfriends.”The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand.“Come, come,” said Andrea, “sheathe your sword, my finefellow; there is no occasion to make such a fuss, since I give myselfup;” and he held out his hands to be manacled.The two girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the man ofthe world shaking off his covering and appearing as a galley-slave. Andreaturned towards them, and with an impertinent smile asked, “Have you anymessage for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars, for in all probability I shallreturn to Paris?”Eugénie covered her face with her hands.“Oh, oh!” said Andrea, “you need not be ashamed, even thoughyou did post after me. Was I not nearly your husband?”And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls a prey to theirown feelings of shame, and to the comments of the crowd. An hour after theystepped into their calash, both dressed in feminine attire. The gate of thehotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but they were forced, when thedoor was open, to pass through a throng of curious glances and whisperingvoices.Eugénie closed her eyes; but though she could not see, she could hear, and thesneers of the crowd reached her in the carriage.“Oh, why is not the world a wilderness?” she exclaimed, throwingherself into the arms of Mademoiselle d’Armilly, her eyes sparkling withthe same kind of rage which made Nero wish that the Roman world had but oneneck, that he might sever it at a single blow.The next day they stopped at the Hôtel de Flandre, at Brussels. The sameevening Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie. Chapter 99. The LawWe have seen how quietlyMademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly accomplished theirtransformation and flight; the fact being that everyone was too much occupiedin his or her own affairs to think of theirs.We will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude of his debtbefore the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness, who after beingmomentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which had struck her, had goneto seek her usual adviser, Lucien Debray. The baroness had looked forward tothis marriage as a means of ridding her of a guardianship which, over a girl ofEugénie’s character, could not fail to be rather a troublesomeundertaking; for in the tacit relations which maintain the bond of familyunion, the mother, to maintain her ascendancy over her daughter, must neverfail to be a model of wisdom and a type of perfection.Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugénie’s sagacity and the influence ofMademoiselle d’Armilly; she had frequently observed the contemptuousexpression with which her daughter looked upon Debray,—an expressionwhich seemed to imply that she understood all her mother’s amorous andpecuniary relationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she saw thatEugénie detested Debray, not only because he was a source of dissension andscandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at once classed him inthat catalogue of bipeds whom Plato endeavors to withdraw from the appellationof men, and whom Diogenes designated as animals upon two legs without feathers.Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through acertain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as others,and Madame Danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the marriage ofEugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was good, and likely toinsure the happiness of her child, but because it would also set her atliberty. She ran therefore to Debray, who, after having, like the rest ofParis, witnessed the contract scene and the scandal attending it, had retiredin haste to his club, where he was chatting with some friends upon the eventswhich served as a subject of conversation for three-fourths of that city knownas the capital of the world.At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in black and concealed in along veil, was ascending the stairs leading to Debray’s apartments,notwithstanding the assurances of the concierge that the young man was not athome, Debray was occupied in repelling the insinuations of a friend, who triedto persuade him that after the terrible scene which had just taken place heought, as a friend of the family, to marry Mademoiselle Danglars and her twomillions. Debray did not defend himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimescrossed his mind; still, when he recollected the independent, proud spirit ofEugénie, he positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the samethought again continually recurred and found a resting-place in his heart. Tea,play, and the conversation, which had become interesting during the discussionof such serious affairs, lasted till one o’clock in the morning.Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of Debray inthe little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers, which she hadthat morning sent, and which, it must be confessed, Debray had himself arrangedand watered with so much care that his absence was half excused in the eyes ofthe poor woman.At twenty minutes to twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of waiting, returned home.Women of a certain grade are like prosperous grisettes in one respect, theyseldom return home after twelve o’clock. The baroness returned to thehotel with as much caution as Eugénie used in leaving it; she ran lightlyupstairs, and with an aching heart entered her apartment, contiguous, as weknow, to that of Eugénie. She was fearful of exciting any remark, and believedfirmly in her daughter’s innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof. Shelistened at Eugénie’s door, and hearing no sound tried to enter, but thebolts were in place. Madame Danglars then concluded that the young girl hadbeen overcome with the terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bedand to sleep. She called the maid and questioned her.“Mademoiselle Eugénie,” said the maid, “retired to herapartment with Mademoiselle d’Armilly; they then took tea together, afterwhich they desired me to leave, saying that they needed me no longer.”Since then the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought theyoung ladies were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore, went to bedwithout a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the recent events. Inproportion as her memory became clearer, the occurrences of the evening wererevealed in their true light; what she had taken for confusion was a tumult;what she had regarded as something distressing, was in reality a disgrace. Andthen the baroness remembered that she had felt no pity for poor Mercédès, whohad been afflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.“Eugénie,” she said to herself, “is lost, and so are we. Theaffair, as it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in a society suchas ours satire inflicts a painful and incurable wound. How fortunate thatEugénie is possessed of that strange character which has so often made metremble!”And her glance was turned towards heaven, where a mysterious Providencedisposes all things, and out of a fault, nay, even a vice, sometimes produces ablessing. And then her thoughts, cleaving through space like a bird in the air,rested on Cavalcanti. This Andrea was a wretch, a robber, an assassin, and yethis manners showed the effects of a sort of education, if not a complete one;he had been presented to the world with the appearance of an immense fortune,supported by an honorable name. How could she extricate herself from thislabyrinth? To whom would she apply to help her out of this painful situation?Debray, to whom she had run, with the first instinct of a woman towards the manshe loves, and who yet betrays her,—Debray could but give her advice, shemust apply to someone more powerful than he.The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de Villefort who hadremorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though they had beenstrangers. But, no; on reflection, the procureur was not a merciless man; andit was not the magistrate, slave to his duties, but the friend, the loyalfriend, who roughly but firmly cut into the very core of the corruption; it wasnot the executioner, but the surgeon, who wished to withdraw the honor ofDanglars from ignominious association with the disgraced young man they hadpresented to the world as their son-in-law. And since Villefort, the friend ofDanglars, had acted in this way, no one could suppose that he had beenpreviously acquainted with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea’sintrigues. Villefort’s conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared tothe baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage. But the inflexibility ofthe procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and if shecould not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she would, at least,obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would invoke the past, recall oldrecollections; she would supplicate him by the remembrance of guilty, yet happydays. M. de Villefort would stifle the affair; he had only to turn his eyes onone side, and allow Andrea to fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow ofguilt called contempt of court. And after this reasoning she slept easily.At nine o’clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her maidor giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in the samesimple style as on the previous night; then running downstairs, she left thehotel, walked to the Rue de Provence, called a cab, and drove to M. deVillefort’s house.For the last month this wretched house had presented the gloomy appearance of alazaretto infected with the plague. Some of the apartments were closed withinand without; the shutters were only opened to admit a minute’s air,showing the scared face of a footman, and immediately afterwards the windowwould be closed, like a gravestone falling on a sepulchre, and the neighborswould say to each other in a low voice, “Will there be another funeraltoday at the procureur’s house?”Madame Danglars involuntarily shuddered at the desolate aspect of the mansion;descending from the cab, she approached the door with trembling knees, and rangthe bell. Three times did the bell ring with a dull, heavy sound, seeming toparticipate, in the general sadness, before the concierge appeared and peepedthrough the door, which he opened just wide enough to allow his words to beheard. He saw a lady, a fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the doorremained almost closed.“Do you intend opening the door?” said the baroness.“First, madame, who are you?”“Who am I? You know me well enough.”“We no longer know anyone, madame.”“You must be mad, my friend,” said the baroness.“Where do you come from?”“Oh, this is too much!”“Madame, these are my orders; excuse me. Your name?”“The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times.”“Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?”“Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort of theimpertinence of his servants.”“Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters here withoutan order from M. d’Avrigny, or without speaking to the procureur.”“Well, I have business with the procureur.”“Is it pressing business?”“You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my carriage out yet.But enough of this—here is my card, take it to your master.”“Madame will await my return?”“Yes; go.”The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the street. She hadnot long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide enough to admither, and when she had passed through, it was again shut. Without losing sightof her for an instant, the concierge took a whistle from his pocket as soon asthey entered the court, and blew it. The valet de chambre appeared on thedoor-steps.“You will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” he said, as he precededthe baroness, “but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged meto tell you that he could not act otherwise.”In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who had been admittedwith the same precautions. The baroness ascended the steps; she felt herselfstrongly infected with the sadness which seemed to magnify her own, and stillguided by the valet de chambre, who never lost sight of her for an instant, shewas introduced to the magistrate’s study.Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit, thetreatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so insulting,that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising his head, boweddown by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile that her complaints diedupon her lips.“Forgive my servants,” he said, “for a terror I cannot blamethem for; from being suspected they have become suspicious.”Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate alluded,but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never have believed thatthe sentiment had been carried so far.“You too, then, are unhappy?” she said.“Yes, madame,” replied the magistrate.“Then you pity me!”“Sincerely, madame.”“And you understand what brings me here?”“You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which has justhappened?”“Yes, sir,—a fearful misfortune.”“You mean a mischance.”“A mischance?” repeated the baroness.“Alas, madame,” said the procureur with his imperturbable calmnessof manner, “I consider those alone misfortunes which areirreparable.”“And do you suppose this will be forgotten?”“Everything will be forgotten, madame,” said Villefort. “Yourdaughter will be married tomorrow, if not today—in a week, if nottomorrow; and I do not think you can regret the intended husband of yourdaughter.”Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost insultinglycalm. “Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of mournfuldignity.“You know that you are, madame,” said Villefort, whose pale cheeksbecame slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly this assurancecarried him back to different events from those now occupying the baroness andhim.“Well, then, be more affectionate, my dear Villefort,” said thebaroness. “Speak to me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when Iam in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay.”Villefort bowed.“When I hear misfortunes named, madame,” he said, “I havewithin the last few months contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, andthen I cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind. That is thereason that by the side of my misfortunes yours appear to me mere mischances;that is why my dreadful position makes yours appear enviable. But this annoysyou; let us change the subject. You were saying, madame——”“I came to ask you, my friend,” said the baroness, “what willbe done with this impostor?”“Impostor,” repeated Villefort; “certainly, madame, youappear to extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others. Impostor,indeed!—M. Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather M. Benedetto, is nothing more norless than an assassin!”“Sir, I do not deny the justice of your correction, but the more severelyyou arm yourself against that unfortunate man, the more deeply will you strikeour family. Come, forget him for a moment, and instead of pursuing him, let himgo.”“You are too late, madame; the orders are issued.”“Well, should he be arrested—do they think they will arresthim?”“I hope so.”“If they should arrest him (I know that sometimes prisons afford means ofescape), will you leave him in prison?”The procureur shook his head.“At least keep him there till my daughter be married.”“Impossible, madame; justice has its formalities.”“What, even for me?” said the baroness, half jesting, half inearnest.“For all, even for myself among the rest,” replied Villefort.“Ah!” exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas whichthe exclamation betrayed. Villefort looked at her with that piercing glancewhich reads the secrets of the heart.“Yes, I know what you mean,” he said; “you refer to theterrible rumors spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which have kept mein mourning for the last three months, and from which Valentine has onlyescaped by a miracle, have not happened by natural means.”“I was not thinking of that,” replied Madame Danglars quickly.“Yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice. You could not helpthinking of it, and saying to yourself, ‘you, who pursue crime sovindictively, answer now, why are there unpunished crimes in yourdwelling?’” The baroness became pale. “You were saying this,were you not?”“Well, I own it.”“I will answer you.”Villefort drew his armchair nearer to Madame Danglars; then resting both handsupon his desk he said in a voice more hollow than usual:“There are crimes which remain unpunished because the criminals areunknown, and we might strike the innocent instead of the guilty; but when theculprits are discovered” (Villefort here extended his hand toward a largecrucifix placed opposite to his desk)—“when they are discovered, Iswear to you, by all I hold most sacred, that whoever they may be they shalldie. Now, after the oath I have just taken, and which I will keep, madame, dareyou ask for mercy for that wretch!”“But, sir, are you sure he is as guilty as they say?”“Listen; this is his description: ‘Benedetto, condemned, at the ageof sixteen, for five years to the galleys for forgery.’ He promised well,as you see—first a runaway, then an assassin.”“And who is this wretch?”“Who can tell?—a vagabond, a Corsican.”“Has no one owned him?”“No one; his parents are unknown.”“But who was the man who brought him from Lucca?”“Another rascal like himself, perhaps his accomplice.” The baronessclasped her hands.“Villefort,” she exclaimed in her softest and most captivatingmanner.“For Heaven’s sake, madame,” said Villefort, with a firmnessof expression not altogether free from harshness—“forHeaven’s sake, do not ask pardon of me for a guilty wretch! What amI?—the law. Has the law any eyes to witness your grief? Has the law earsto be melted by your sweet voice? Has the law a memory for all those softrecollections you endeavor to recall? No, madame; the law has commanded, andwhen it commands it strikes. You will tell me that I am a living being, and nota code—a man, and not a volume. Look at me, madame—look around me.Has mankind treated me as a brother? Have men loved me? Have they spared me?Has anyone shown the mercy towards me that you now ask at my hands? No, madame,they struck me, always struck me!“Woman, siren that you are, do you persist in fixing on me thatfascinating eye, which reminds me that I ought to blush? Well, be it so; let meblush for the faults you know, and perhaps—perhaps for even more thanthose! But having sinned myself,—it may be more deeply thanothers,—I never rest till I have torn the disguises from myfellow-creatures, and found out their weaknesses. I have always found them; andmore,—I repeat it with joy, with triumph,—I have always found someproof of human perversity or error. Every criminal I condemn seems to me livingevidence that I am not a hideous exception to the rest. Alas, alas, alas; allthe world is wicked; let us therefore strike at wickedness!”Villefort pronounced these last words with a feverish rage, which gave aferocious eloquence to his words.“But”’ said Madame Danglars, resolving to make a last effort,“this young man, though a murderer, is an orphan, abandoned byeverybody.”“So much the worse, or rather, so much the better; it has been soordained that he may have none to weep his fate.”“But this is trampling on the weak, sir.”“The weakness of a murderer!”“His dishonor reflects upon us.”“Is not death in my house?”“Oh, sir,” exclaimed the baroness, “you are without pity forothers, well, then, I tell you they will have no mercy on you!”“Be it so!” said Villefort, raising his arms to heaven with athreatening gesture.“At least, delay the trial till the next assizes; we shall then have sixmonths before us.”“No, madame,” said Villefort; “instructions have been given.There are yet five days left; five days are more than I require. Do you notthink that I also long for forgetfulness? While working night and day, Isometimes lose all recollection of the past, and then I experience the samesort of happiness I can imagine the dead feel; still, it is better thansuffering.”“But, sir, he has fled; let him escape—inaction is a pardonableoffence.”“I tell you it is too late; early this morning the telegraph wasemployed, and at this very minute——”“Sir,” said the valet de chambre, entering the room, “adragoon has brought this despatch from the Minister of the Interior.”Villefort seized the letter, and hastily broke the seal. Madame Danglarstrembled with fear; Villefort started with joy.“Arrested!” he exclaimed; “he was taken at Compiègne, and allis over.”Madame Danglars rose from her seat, pale and cold.“Adieu, sir,” she said.“Adieu, madame,” replied the king’s attorney, as in an almostjoyful manner he conducted her to the door. Then, turning to his desk, he said,striking the letter with the back of his right hand:“Come, I had a forgery, three robberies, and two cases of arson, I onlywanted a murder, and here it is. It will be a splendid session!” Chapter 100. TheApparitionAs the procureur hadtold Madame Danglars, Valentine was not yet recovered. Bowed down with fatigue,she was indeed confined to her bed; and it was in her own room, and from thelips of Madame de Villefort, that she heard all the strange events we haverelated; we mean the flight of Eugénie and the arrest of Andrea Cavalcanti, orrather Benedetto, together with the accusation of murder pronounced againsthim. But Valentine was so weak that this recital scarcely produced the sameeffect it would have done had she been in her usual state of health. Indeed,her brain was only the seat of vague ideas, and confused forms, mingled withstrange fancies, alone presented themselves before her eyes.During the daytime Valentine’s perceptions remained tolerably clear,owing to the constant presence of M. Noirtier, who caused himself to be carriedto his granddaughter’s room, and watched her with his paternaltenderness; Villefort also, on his return from the law courts, frequentlypassed an hour or two with his father and child.At six o’clock Villefort retired to his study, at eight M.d’Avrigny himself arrived, bringing the night draught prepared for theyoung girl, and then M. Noirtier was carried away. A nurse of thedoctor’s choice succeeded them, and never left till about ten or eleveno’clock, when Valentine was asleep. As she went downstairs she gave thekeys of Valentine’s room to M. de Villefort, so that no one could reachthe sick-room excepting through that of Madame de Villefort and little Edward.Every morning Morrel called on Noirtier to receive news of Valentine, and,extraordinary as it seemed, each day found him less uneasy. Certainly, thoughValentine still labored under dreadful nervous excitement, she was better; andmoreover, Monte Cristo had told him when, half distracted, he had rushed to thecount’s house, that if she were not dead in two hours she would be saved.Now four days had elapsed, and Valentine still lived.The nervous excitement of which we speak pursued Valentine even in her sleep,or rather in that state of somnolence which succeeded her waking hours; it wasthen, in the silence of night, in the dim light shed from the alabaster lamp onthe chimney-piece, that she saw the shadows pass and repass which hover overthe bed of sickness, and fan the fever with their trembling wings. First shefancied she saw her stepmother threatening her, then Morrel stretched his armstowards her; sometimes mere strangers, like the Count of Monte Cristo came tovisit her; even the very furniture, in these moments of delirium, seemed tomove, and this state lasted till about three o’clock in the morning, whena deep, heavy slumber overcame the young girl, from which she did not awaketill daylight.On the evening of the day on which Valentine had learned of the flight ofEugénie and the arrest of Benedetto,—Villefort having retired as well asNoirtier and d’Avrigny,—her thoughts wandered in a confused maze,alternately reviewing her own situation and the events she had just heard.Eleven o’clock had struck. The nurse, having placed the beverage preparedby the doctor within reach of the patient, and locked the door, was listeningwith terror to the comments of the servants in the kitchen, and storing hermemory with all the horrible stories which had for some months past amused theoccupants of the antechambers in the house of the king’s attorney.Meanwhile an unexpected scene was passing in the room which had been socarefully locked.Ten minutes had elapsed since the nurse had left; Valentine, who for the lasthour had been suffering from the fever which returned nightly, incapable ofcontrolling her ideas, was forced to yield to the excitement which exhausteditself in producing and reproducing a succession and recurrence of the samefancies and images. The night-lamp threw out countless rays, each resolvingitself into some strange form to her disordered imagination, when suddenly byits flickering light Valentine thought she saw the door of her library, whichwas in the recess by the chimney-piece, open slowly, though she in vainlistened for the sound of the hinges on which it turned.At any other time Valentine would have seized the silken bell-pull and summonedassistance, but nothing astonished her in her present situation. Her reasontold her that all the visions she beheld were but the children of herimagination, and the conviction was strengthened by the fact that in themorning no traces remained of the nocturnal phantoms, who disappeared with thecoming of daylight.From behind the door a human figure appeared, but the girl was too familiarwith such apparitions to be alarmed, and therefore only stared, hoping torecognize Morrel. The figure advanced towards the bed and appeared to listenwith profound attention. At this moment a ray of light glanced across the faceof the midnight visitor.“It is not he,” she murmured, and waited, in the assurance thatthis was but a dream, for the man to disappear or assume some other form.Still, she felt her pulse, and finding it throb violently she remembered thatthe best method of dispelling such illusions was to drink, for a draught of thebeverage prepared by the doctor to allay her fever seemed to cause a reactionof the brain, and for a short time she suffered less. Valentine thereforereached her hand towards the glass, but as soon as her trembling arm left thebed the apparition advanced more quickly towards her, and approached the younggirl so closely that she fancied she heard his breath, and felt the pressure ofhis hand.This time the illusion, or rather the reality, surpassed anything Valentine hadbefore experienced; she began to believe herself really alive and awake, andthe belief that her reason was this time not deceived made her shudder. Thepressure she felt was evidently intended to arrest her arm, and she slowlywithdrew it. Then the figure, from whom she could not detach her eyes, and whoappeared more protecting than menacing, took the glass, and walking towards thenight-light held it up, as if to test its transparency. This did not seemsufficient; the man, or rather the ghost—for he trod so softly that nosound was heard—then poured out about a spoonful into the glass, anddrank it.Valentine witnessed this scene with a sentiment of stupefaction. Every minuteshe had expected that it would vanish and give place to another vision; but theman, instead of dissolving like a shadow, again approached her, and said in anagitated voice, “Now you may drink.”Valentine shuddered. It was the first time one of these visions had everaddressed her in a living voice, and she was about to utter an exclamation. Theman placed his finger on her lips.“The Count of Monte Cristo!” she murmured.It was easy to see that no doubt now remained in the young girl’s mind asto the reality of the scene; her eyes started with terror, her hands trembled,and she rapidly drew the bedclothes closer to her. Still, the presence of MonteCristo at such an hour, his mysterious, fanciful, and extraordinary entranceinto her room through the wall, might well seem impossibilities to hershattered reason.“Do not call anyone—do not be alarmed,” said the count;“do not let a shade of suspicion or uneasiness remain in your breast; theman standing before you, Valentine (for this time it is no ghost), is nothingmore than the tenderest father and the most respectful friend you could dreamof.”Valentine could not reply; the voice which indicated the real presence of abeing in the room, alarmed her so much that she feared to utter a syllable;still the expression of her eyes seemed to inquire, “If your intentionsare pure, why are you here?” The count’s marvellous sagacityunderstood all that was passing in the young girl’s mind.“Listen to me,” he said, “or, rather, look upon me; look atmy face, paler even than usual, and my eyes, red with weariness—for fourdays I have not closed them, for I have been constantly watching you, toprotect and preserve you for Maximilian.”The blood mounted rapidly to the cheeks of Valentine, for the name justannounced by the count dispelled all the fear with which his presence hadinspired her.“Maximilian!” she exclaimed, and so sweet did the sound appear toher, that she repeated it—“Maximilian!—has he then owned allto you?”“Everything. He told me your life was his, and I have promised him thatyou shall live.”“You have promised him that I shall live?”“Yes.”“But, sir, you spoke of vigilance and protection. Are you adoctor?”“Yes; the best you could have at the present time, believe me.”“But you say you have watched?” said Valentine uneasily;“where have you been?—I have not seen you.”The count extended his hand towards the library.“I was hidden behind that door,” he said, “which leads intothe next house, which I have rented.”Valentine turned her eyes away, and, with an indignant expression of pride andmodest fear, exclaimed:“Sir, I think you have been guilty of an unparalleled intrusion, and thatwhat you call protection is more like an insult.”“Valentine,” he answered, “during my long watch over you, allI have observed has been what people visited you, what nourishment wasprepared, and what beverage was served; then, when the latter appeareddangerous to me, I entered, as I have now done, and substituted, in the placeof the poison, a healthful draught; which, instead of producing the deathintended, caused life to circulate in your veins.”“Poison—death!” exclaimed Valentine, half believing herselfunder the influence of some feverish hallucination; “what are you saying,sir?”“Hush, my child,” said Monte Cristo, again placing his finger uponher lips, “I did say poison and death. But drink some of this;” andthe count took a bottle from his pocket, containing a red liquid, of which hepoured a few drops into the glass. “Drink this, and then take nothingmore tonight.”Valentine stretched out her hand, but scarcely had she touched the glass whenshe drew back in fear. Monte Cristo took the glass, drank half its contents,and then presented it to Valentine, who smiled and swallowed the rest.“Oh, yes,” she exclaimed, “I recognize the flavor of mynocturnal beverage which refreshed me so much, and seemed to ease my achingbrain. Thank you, sir, thank you!”“This is how you have lived during the last four nights,Valentine,” said the count. “But, oh, how I passed that time! Oh,the wretched hours I have endured—the torture to which I have submittedwhen I saw the deadly poison poured into your glass, and how I trembled lestyou should drink it before I could find time to throw it away!”“Sir,” said Valentine, at the height of her terror, “you sayyou endured tortures when you saw the deadly poison poured into my glass; butif you saw this, you must also have seen the person who poured it?”“Yes.”Valentine raised herself in bed, and drew over her chest, which appeared whiterthan snow, the embroidered cambric, still moist with the cold dews of delirium,to which were now added those of terror. “You saw the person?”repeated the young girl.“Yes,” repeated the count.“What you tell me is horrible, sir. You wish to make me believe somethingtoo dreadful. What?—attempt to murder me in my father’s house, inmy room, on my bed of sickness? Oh, leave me, sir; you are temptingme—you make me doubt the goodness of Providence—it is impossible,it cannot be!”“Are you the first that this hand has stricken? Have you not seen M. deSaint-Méran, Madame de Saint-Méran, Barrois, all fall? Would not M. Noirtieralso have fallen a victim, had not the treatment he has been pursuing for thelast three years neutralized the effects of the poison?”“Oh, Heaven,” said Valentine; “is this the reason whygrandpapa has made me share all his beverages during the last month?”“And have they all tasted of a slightly bitter flavor, like that of driedorange-peel?”“Oh, yes, yes!”“Then that explains all,” said Monte Cristo. “Yourgrandfather knows, then, that a poisoner lives here; perhaps he even suspectsthe person. He has been fortifying you, his beloved child, against the fataleffects of the poison, which has failed because your system was alreadyimpregnated with it. But even this would have availed little against a moredeadly medium of death employed four days ago, which is generally but toofatal.”“But who, then, is this assassin, this murderer?”“Let me also ask you a question. Have you never seen anyone enter yourroom at night?”“Oh, yes; I have frequently seen shadows pass close to me, approach, anddisappear; but I took them for visions raised by my feverish imagination, andindeed when you entered I thought I was under the influence of delirium.”“Then you do not know who it is that attempts your life?”“No,” said Valentine; “who could desire my death?”“You shall know it now, then,” said Monte Cristo, listening.“How do you mean?” said Valentine, looking anxiously around.“Because you are not feverish or delirious tonight, but thoroughly awake;midnight is striking, which is the hour murderers choose.”“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, wiping off the drops which randown her forehead. Midnight struck slowly and sadly; every hour seemed tostrike with leaden weight upon the heart of the poor girl.“Valentine,” said the count, “summon up all your courage;still the beatings of your heart; do not let a sound escape you, and feign tobe asleep; then you will see.”Valentine seized the count’s hand. “I think I hear a noise,”she said; “leave me.”“Good-bye, for the present,” replied the count, walking upon tiptoetowards the library door, and smiling with an expression so sad and paternalthat the young girl’s heart was filled with gratitude.Before closing the door he turned around once more, and said, “Not amovement—not a word; let them think you asleep, or perhaps you may bekilled before I have the power of helping you.”And with this fearful injunction the count disappeared through the door, whichnoiselessly closed after him. Chapter 101. LocustaValentine was alone; twoother clocks, slower than that of Saint-Philippe-du-Roule, struck the hour ofmidnight from different directions, and excepting the rumbling of a fewcarriages all was silent. Then Valentine’s attention was engrossed by theclock in her room, which marked the seconds. She began counting them, remarkingthat they were much slower than the beatings of her heart; and still shedoubted,—the inoffensive Valentine could not imagine that anyone shoulddesire her death. Why should they? To what end? What had she done to excite themalice of an enemy?There was no fear of her falling asleep. One terrible idea pressed upon hermind,—that someone existed in the world who had attempted to assassinateher, and who was about to endeavor to do so again. Supposing this person,wearied at the inefficacy of the poison, should, as Monte Cristo intimated,have recourse to steel!—What if the count should have no time to run toher rescue!—What if her last moments were approaching, and she shouldnever again see Morrel!When this terrible chain of ideas presented itself, Valentine was nearlypersuaded to ring the bell, and call for help. But through the door she fanciedshe saw the luminous eye of the count—that eye which lived in her memory,and the recollection overwhelmed her with so much shame that she asked herselfwhether any amount of gratitude could ever repay his adventurous and devotedfriendship.Twenty minutes, twenty tedious minutes, passed thus, then ten more, and at lastthe clock struck the half-hour.Just then the sound of finger-nails slightly grating against the door of thelibrary informed Valentine that the count was still watching, and recommendedher to do the same; at the same time, on the opposite side, that is towardsEdward’s room, Valentine fancied that she heard the creaking of thefloor; she listened attentively, holding her breath till she was nearlysuffocated; the lock turned, and the door slowly opened. Valentine had raisedherself upon her elbow, and had scarcely time to throw herself down on the bedand shade her eyes with her arm; then, trembling, agitated, and her heartbeating with indescribable terror, she awaited the event.Someone approached the bed and drew back the curtains. Valentine summoned everyeffort, and breathed with that regular respiration which announces tranquilsleep.“Valentine!” said a low voice.The girl shuddered to the heart but did not reply.“Valentine,” repeated the same voice.Still silent: Valentine had promised not to wake. Then everything was still,excepting that Valentine heard the almost noiseless sound of some liquid beingpoured into the glass she had just emptied. Then she ventured to open hereyelids, and glance over her extended arm. She saw a woman in a whitedressing-gown pouring a liquor from a phial into her glass. During this shorttime Valentine must have held her breath, or moved in some slight degree, forthe woman, disturbed, stopped and leaned over the bed, in order the better toascertain whether Valentine slept: it was Madame de Villefort.On recognizing her step-mother, Valentine could not repress a shudder, whichcaused a vibration in the bed. Madame de Villefort instantly stepped back closeto the wall, and there, shaded by the bed-curtains, she silently andattentively watched the slightest movement of Valentine. The latter recollectedthe terrible caution of Monte Cristo; she fancied that the hand not holding thephial clasped a long sharp knife. Then collecting all her remaining strength,she forced herself to close her eyes; but this simple operation upon the mostdelicate organs of our frame, generally so easy to accomplish, became almostimpossible at this moment, so much did curiosity struggle to retain the eyelidopen and learn the truth. Madame de Villefort, however, reassured by thesilence, which was alone disturbed by the regular breathing of Valentine, againextended her hand, and half hidden by the curtains succeeded in emptying thecontents of the phial into the glass. Then she retired so gently that Valentinedid not know she had left the room. She only witnessed the withdrawal of thearm—the fair round arm of a woman but twenty-five years old, and who yetspread death around her.It is impossible to describe the sensations experienced by Valentine during theminute and a half Madame de Villefort remained in the room.The grating against the library-door aroused the young girl from the stupor inwhich she was plunged, and which almost amounted to insensibility. She raisedher head with an effort. The noiseless door again turned on its hinges, and theCount of Monte Cristo reappeared.“Well,” said he, “do you still doubt?”“Oh,” murmured the young girl.“Have you seen?”“Alas!”“Did you recognize?” Valentine groaned.“Oh, yes;” she said, “I saw, but I cannot believe!”“Would you rather die, then, and cause Maximilian’s death?”“Oh,” repeated the young girl, almost bewildered, “can I notleave the house?—can I not escape?”“Valentine, the hand which now threatens you will pursue you everywhere;your servants will be seduced with gold, and death will be offered to youdisguised in every shape. You will find it in the water you drink from thespring, in the fruit you pluck from the tree.”“But did you not say that my kind grandfather’s precaution hadneutralized the poison?”“Yes, but not against a strong dose; the poison will be changed, and thequantity increased.” He took the glass and raised it to his lips.“It is already done,” he said; “brucine is no longeremployed, but a simple narcotic! I can recognize the flavor of the alcohol inwhich it has been dissolved. If you had taken what Madame de Villefort haspoured into your glass, Valentine—Valentine—you would have beendoomed!”“But,” exclaimed the young girl, “why am I thuspursued?”“Why?—are you so kind—so good—so unsuspicious of ill,that you cannot understand, Valentine?”“No, I have never injured her.”“But you are rich, Valentine; you have 200,000 livres a year, and youprevent her son from enjoying these 200,000 livres.”“How so? The fortune is not her gift, but is inherited from myrelations.”“Certainly; and that is why M. and Madame de Saint-Méran have died; thatis why M. Noirtier was sentenced the day he made you his heir; that is why you,in your turn, are to die—it is because your father would inherit yourproperty, and your brother, his only son, succeed to his.”“Edward? Poor child! Are all these crimes committed on hisaccount?”“Ah, then you at length understand?”“Heaven grant that this may not be visited upon him!”“Valentine, you are an angel!”“But why is my grandfather allowed to live?”“It was considered, that you dead, the fortune would naturally revert toyour brother, unless he were disinherited; and besides, the crime appearinguseless, it would be folly to commit it.”“And is it possible that this frightful combination of crimes has beeninvented by a woman?”“Do you recollect in the arbor of the Hôtel des Postes, at Perugia,seeing a man in a brown cloak, whom your stepmother was questioning uponaqua tofana? Well, ever since then, the infernal project has beenripening in her brain.”“Ah, then, indeed, sir,” said the sweet girl, bathed in tears,“I see that I am condemned to die!”“No, Valentine, for I have foreseen all their plots; no, your enemy isconquered since we know her, and you will live, Valentine—live to behappy yourself, and to confer happiness upon a noble heart; but to insure thisyou must rely on me.”“Command me, sir—what am I to do?”“You must blindly take what I give you.”“Alas, were it only for my own sake, I should prefer to die!”“You must not confide in anyone—not even in your father.”“My father is not engaged in this fearful plot, is he, sir?” askedValentine, clasping her hands.“No; and yet your father, a man accustomed to judicial accusations, oughtto have known that all these deaths have not happened naturally; it is he whoshould have watched over you—he should have occupied my place—heshould have emptied that glass—he should have risen against the assassin.Spectre against spectre!” he murmured in a low voice, as he concluded hissentence.“Sir,” said Valentine, “I will do all I can to live, forthere are two beings who love me and will die if I die—my grandfather andMaximilian.”“I will watch over them as I have over you.”“Well, sir, do as you will with me;” and then she added, in a lowvoice, “oh, heavens, what will befall me?”“Whatever may happen, Valentine, do not be alarmed; though you suffer;though you lose sight, hearing, consciousness, fear nothing; though you shouldawake and be ignorant where you are, still do not fear; even though you shouldfind yourself in a sepulchral vault or coffin. Reassure yourself, then, and sayto yourself: ‘At this moment, a friend, a father, who lives for myhappiness and that of Maximilian, watches over me!’”“Alas, alas, what a fearful extremity!”“Valentine, would you rather denounce your stepmother?”“I would rather die a hundred times—oh, yes, die!”“No, you will not die; but will you promise me, whatever happens, thatyou will not complain, but hope?”“I will think of Maximilian!”“You are my own darling child, Valentine! I alone can save you, and Iwill.”Valentine in the extremity of her terror joined her hands,—for she feltthat the moment had arrived to ask for courage,—and began to pray, andwhile uttering little more than incoherent words, she forgot that her whiteshoulders had no other covering than her long hair, and that the pulsations ofher heart could be seen through the lace of her nightdress. Monte Cristo gentlylaid his hand on the young girl’s arm, drew the velvet coverlet close toher throat, and said with a paternal smile:“My child, believe in my devotion to you as you believe in the goodnessof Providence and the love of Maximilian.” Valentine gave him a look fullof gratitude, and remained as docile as a child.Then he drew from his waistcoat-pocket the little emerald box, raised thegolden lid, and took from it a pastille about the size of a pea, which heplaced in her hand. She took it, and looked attentively on the count; there wasan expression on the face of her intrepid protector which commanded herveneration. She evidently interrogated him by her look.“Yes,” said he.Valentine carried the pastille to her mouth, and swallowed it.“And now, my dear child, adieu for the present. I will try and gain alittle sleep, for you are saved.”“Go,” said Valentine, “whatever happens, I promise you not tofear.”Monte Cristo for some time kept his eyes fixed on the young girl, who graduallyfell asleep, yielding to the effects of the narcotic the count had given her.Then he took the glass, emptied three parts of the contents in the fireplace,that it might be supposed Valentine had taken it, and replaced it on the table;then he disappeared, after throwing a farewell glance on Valentine, who sleptwith the confidence and innocence of an angel at the feet of the Lord. Chapter 102. ValentineThe night-lightcontinued to burn on the chimney-piece, exhausting the last drops of oil whichfloated on the surface of the water. The globe of the lamp appeared of areddish hue, and the flame, brightening before it expired, threw out the lastflickerings which in an inanimate object have been so often compared with theconvulsions of a human creature in its final agonies. A dull and dismal lightwas shed over the bedclothes and curtains surrounding the young girl. All noisein the streets had ceased, and the silence was frightful.It was then that the door of Edward’s room opened, and a head we havebefore noticed appeared in the glass opposite; it was Madame de Villefort, whocame to witness the effects of the drink she had prepared. She stopped in thedoorway, listened for a moment to the flickering of the lamp, the only sound inthat deserted room, and then advanced to the table to see if Valentine’sglass were empty. It was still about a quarter full, as we before stated.Madame de Villefort emptied the contents into the ashes, which she disturbedthat they might the more readily absorb the liquid; then she carefully rinsedthe glass, and wiping it with her handkerchief replaced it on the table.If anyone could have looked into the room just then he would have noticed thehesitation with which Madame de Villefort approached the bed and looked fixedlyon Valentine. The dim light, the profound silence, and the gloomy thoughtsinspired by the hour, and still more by her own conscience, all combined toproduce a sensation of fear; the poisoner was terrified at the contemplation ofher own work.At length she rallied, drew aside the curtain, and leaning over the pillowgazed intently on Valentine. The young girl no longer breathed, no breathissued through the half-closed teeth; the white lips no longerquivered—the eyes were suffused with a bluish vapor, and the long blacklashes rested on a cheek white as wax. Madame de Villefort gazed upon the faceso expressive even in its stillness; then she ventured to raise the coverletand press her hand upon the young girl’s heart. It was cold andmotionless. She only felt the pulsation in her own fingers, and withdrew herhand with a shudder. One arm was hanging out of the bed; from shoulder to elbowit was moulded after the arms of Germain Pillon’s“Graces,”[23]but the fore-arm seemed to be slightly distorted by convulsion, and the hand,so delicately formed, was resting with stiff outstretched fingers on theframework of the bed. The nails, too, were turning blue.Madame de Villefort had no longer any doubt; all was over—she hadconsummated the last terrible work she had to accomplish. There was no more todo in the room, so the poisoner retired stealthily, as though fearing to hearthe sound of her own footsteps; but as she withdrew she still held aside thecurtain, absorbed in the irresistible attraction always exerted by the pictureof death, so long as it is merely mysterious and does not excite disgust.The minutes passed; Madame de Villefort could not drop the curtain which sheheld like a funeral pall over the head of Valentine. She was lost in reverie,and the reverie of crime is remorse.Just then the lamp again flickered; the noise startled Madame de Villefort, whoshuddered and dropped the curtain. Immediately afterwards the light expired,and the room was plunged in frightful obscurity, while the clock at that minutestruck half-past four.Overpowered with agitation, the poisoner succeeded in groping her way to thedoor, and reached her room in an agony of fear. The darkness lasted two hourslonger; then by degrees a cold light crept through the Venetian blinds, untilat length it revealed the objects in the room.About this time the nurse’s cough was heard on the stairs and the womanentered the room with a cup in her hand. To the tender eye of a father or alover, the first glance would have sufficed to reveal Valentine’scondition; but to this hireling, Valentine only appeared to sleep.“Good,” she exclaimed, approaching the table, “she has takenpart of her draught; the glass is three-quarters empty.”Then she went to the fireplace and lit the fire, and although she had just lefther bed, she could not resist the temptation offered by Valentine’ssleep, so she threw herself into an armchair to snatch a little more rest. Theclock striking eight awoke her. Astonished at the prolonged slumber of thepatient, and frightened to see that the arm was still hanging out of the bed,she advanced towards Valentine, and for the first time noticed the white lips.She tried to replace the arm, but it moved with a frightful rigidity whichcould not deceive a sick-nurse. She screamed aloud; then running to the doorexclaimed:“Help, help!”“What is the matter?” asked M. d’Avrigny, at the foot of thestairs, it being the hour he usually visited her.“What is it?” asked Villefort, rushing from his room.“Doctor, do you hear them call for help?”“Yes, yes; let us hasten up; it was in Valentine’s room.”But before the doctor and the father could reach the room, the servants whowere on the same floor had entered, and seeing Valentine pale and motionless onher bed, they lifted up their hands towards heaven and stood transfixed, asthough struck by lightening.“Call Madame de Villefort!—Wake Madame de Villefort!” criedthe procureur from the door of his chamber, which apparently he scarcely daredto leave. But instead of obeying him, the servants stood watching M.d’Avrigny, who ran to Valentine, and raised her in his arms.“What?—this one, too?” he exclaimed. “Oh, where will bethe end?”Villefort rushed into the room.“What are you saying, doctor?” he exclaimed, raising his hands toheaven.“I say that Valentine is dead!” replied d’Avrigny, in a voiceterrible in its solemn calmness.M. de Villefort staggered and buried his head in the bed. On the exclamation ofthe doctor and the cry of the father, the servants all fled with mutteredimprecations; they were heard running down the stairs and through the longpassages, then there was a rush in the court, afterwards all was still; theyhad, one and all, deserted the accursed house.Just then, Madame de Villefort, in the act of slipping on her dressing-gown,threw aside the drapery and for a moment stood motionless, as thoughinterrogating the occupants of the room, while she endeavored to call up somerebellious tears. On a sudden she stepped, or rather bounded, with outstretchedarms, towards the table. She saw d’Avrigny curiously examining the glass,which she felt certain of having emptied during the night. It was now a thirdfull, just as it was when she threw the contents into the ashes. The spectre ofValentine rising before the poisoner would have alarmed her less. It was,indeed, the same color as the draught she had poured into the glass, and whichValentine had drunk; it was indeed the poison, which could not deceive M.d’Avrigny, which he now examined so closely; it was doubtless a miraclefrom heaven, that, notwithstanding her precautions, there should be some trace,some proof remaining to reveal the crime.While Madame de Villefort remained rooted to the spot like a statue of terror,and Villefort, with his head hidden in the bedclothes, saw nothing around him,d’Avrigny approached the window, that he might the better examine thecontents of the glass, and dipping the tip of his finger in, tasted it.“Ah,” he exclaimed, “it is no longer brucine that is used;let me see what it is!”Then he ran to one of the cupboards in Valentine’s room, which had beentransformed into a medicine closet, and taking from its silver case a smallbottle of nitric acid, dropped a little of it into the liquor, whichimmediately changed to a blood-red color.“Ah,” exclaimed d’Avrigny, in a voice in which the horror ofa judge unveiling the truth was mingled with the delight of a student making adiscovery.Madame de Villefort was overpowered; her eyes first flashed and then swam, shestaggered towards the door and disappeared. Directly afterwards the distantsound of a heavy weight falling on the ground was heard, but no one paid anyattention to it; the nurse was engaged in watching the chemical analysis, andVillefort was still absorbed in grief. M. d’Avrigny alone had followedMadame de Villefort with his eyes, and watched her hurried retreat. He liftedup the drapery over the entrance to Edward’s room, and his eye reachingas far as Madame de Villefort’s apartment, he beheld her extendedlifeless on the floor.“Go to the assistance of Madame de Villefort,” he said to thenurse. “Madame de Villefort is ill.”“But Mademoiselle de Villefort——” stammered the nurse.“Mademoiselle de Villefort no longer requires help,” saidd’Avrigny, “since she is dead.”“Dead,—dead!” groaned forth Villefort, in a paroxysm ofgrief, which was the more terrible from the novelty of the sensation in theiron heart of that man.“Dead!” repeated a third voice. “Who said Valentine wasdead?”The two men turned round, and saw Morrel standing at the door, pale andterror-stricken. This is what had happened. At the usual time, Morrel hadpresented himself at the little door leading to Noirtier’s room. Contraryto custom, the door was open, and having no occasion to ring he entered. Hewaited for a moment in the hall and called for a servant to conduct him to M.Noirtier; but no one answered, the servants having, as we know, deserted thehouse. Morrel had no particular reason for uneasiness; Monte Cristo hadpromised him that Valentine should live, and so far he had always fulfilled hisword. Every night the count had given him news, which was the next morningconfirmed by Noirtier. Still this extraordinary silence appeared strange tohim, and he called a second and third time; still no answer. Then he determinedto go up. Noirtier’s room was opened, like all the rest. The first thinghe saw was the old man sitting in his armchair in his usual place, but his eyesexpressed alarm, which was confirmed by the pallor which overspread hisfeatures.“How are you, sir?” asked Morrel, with a sickness of heart.“Well,” answered the old man, by closing his eyes; but hisappearance manifested increasing uneasiness.“You are thoughtful, sir,” continued Morrel; “you wantsomething; shall I call one of the servants?”“Yes,” replied Noirtier.Morrel pulled the bell, but though he nearly broke the cord no one answered. Heturned towards Noirtier; the pallor and anguish expressed on his countenancemomentarily increased.“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, “why do they not come? Is anyone illin the house?” The eyes of Noirtier seemed as though they would startfrom their sockets. “What is the matter? You alarm me. Valentine?Valentine?”“Yes, yes,” signed Noirtier.Maximilian tried to speak, but he could articulate nothing; he staggered, andsupported himself against the wainscot. Then he pointed to the door.“Yes, yes, yes!” continued the old man.Maximilian rushed up the little staircase, while Noirtier’s eyes seemedto say,—“Quicker, quicker!”In a minute the young man darted through several rooms, till at length hereached Valentine’s.There was no occasion to push the door, it was wide open. A sob was the onlysound he heard. He saw as though in a mist, a black figure kneeling and buriedin a confused mass of white drapery. A terrible fear transfixed him. It wasthen he heard a voice exclaim “Valentine is dead!” and anothervoice which, like an echo repeated:“Dead,—dead!” Chapter 103.MaximilianVillefort rose,half-ashamed of being surprised in such a paroxysm of grief. The terribleoffice he had held for twenty-five years had succeeded in making him more orless than man. His glance, at first wandering, fixed itself upon Morrel.“Who are you, sir,” he asked, “that forget that this is notthe manner to enter a house stricken with death? Go, sir, go!”But Morrel remained motionless; he could not detach his eyes from thatdisordered bed, and the pale corpse of the young girl who was lying on it.“Go!—do you hear?” said Villefort, while d’Avrignyadvanced to lead Morrel out. Maximilian stared for a moment at the corpse,gazed all around the room, then upon the two men; he opened his mouth to speak,but finding it impossible to give utterance to the innumerable ideas thatoccupied his brain, he went out, thrusting his hands through his hair in such amanner that Villefort and d’Avrigny, for a moment diverted from theengrossing topic, exchanged glances, which seemed to say,—“He ismad!”But in less than five minutes the staircase groaned beneath an extraordinaryweight. Morrel was seen carrying, with superhuman strength, the armchaircontaining Noirtier upstairs. When he reached the landing he placed thearmchair on the floor and rapidly rolled it into Valentine’s room. Thiscould only have been accomplished by means of unnatural strength supplied bypowerful excitement. But the most fearful spectacle was Noirtier being pushedtowards the bed, his face expressing all his meaning, and his eyes supplyingthe want of every other faculty. That pale face and flaming glance appeared toVillefort like a frightful apparition. Each time he had been brought intocontact with his father, something terrible had happened.“See what they have done!” cried Morrel, with one hand leaning onthe back of the chair, and the other extended towards Valentine. “See, myfather, see!”Villefort drew back and looked with astonishment on the young man, who, almosta stranger to him, called Noirtier his father. At this moment the whole soul ofthe old man seemed centred in his eyes which became bloodshot; the veins of thethroat swelled; his cheeks and temples became purple, as though he was struckwith epilepsy; nothing was wanting to complete this but the utterance of a cry.And the cry issued from his pores, if we may thus speak—a cry frightfulin its silence. D’Avrigny rushed towards the old man and made him inhalea powerful restorative.“Sir,” cried Morrel, seizing the moist hand of the paralytic,“they ask me who I am, and what right I have to be here. Oh, you know it,tell them, tell them!” And the young man’s voice was choked bysobs.As for the old man, his chest heaved with his panting respiration. One couldhave thought that he was undergoing the agonies preceding death. At length,happier than the young man, who sobbed without weeping, tears glistened in theeyes of Noirtier.“Tell them,” said Morrel in a hoarse voice, “tell them that Iam her betrothed. Tell them she was my beloved, my noble girl, my only blessingin the world. Tell them—oh, tell them, that corpse belongs to me!”The young man overwhelmed by the weight of his anguish, fell heavily on hisknees before the bed, which his fingers grasped with convulsive energy.D’Avrigny, unable to bear the sight of this touching emotion, turnedaway; and Villefort, without seeking any further explanation, and attractedtowards him by the irresistible magnetism which draws us towards those who haveloved the people for whom we mourn, extended his hand towards the young man.But Morrel saw nothing; he had grasped the hand of Valentine, and unable toweep vented his agony in groans as he bit the sheets. For some time nothing washeard in that chamber but sobs, exclamations, and prayers. At length Villefort,the most composed of all, spoke:“Sir,” said he to Maximilian, “you say you loved Valentine,that you were betrothed to her. I knew nothing of this engagement, of thislove, yet I, her father, forgive you, for I see that your grief is real anddeep; and besides my own sorrow is too great for anger to find a place in myheart. But you see that the angel whom you hoped for has left thisearth—she has nothing more to do with the adoration of men. Take a lastfarewell, sir, of her sad remains; take the hand you expected to possess oncemore within your own, and then separate yourself from her forever. Valentinenow requires only the ministrations of the priest.”“You are mistaken, sir,” exclaimed Morrel, raising himself on oneknee, his heart pierced by a more acute pang than any he had yetfelt—“you are mistaken; Valentine, dying as she has, not onlyrequires a priest, but an avenger. You, M. de Villefort, send for thepriest; I will be the avenger.”“What do you mean, sir?” asked Villefort, trembling at the new ideainspired by the delirium of Morrel.“I tell you, sir, that two persons exist in you; the father has mournedsufficiently, now let the procureur fulfil his office.”The eyes of Noirtier glistened, and d’Avrigny approached.“Gentlemen,” said Morrel, reading all that passed through the mindsof the witnesses to the scene, “I know what I am saying, and you know aswell as I do what I am about to say—Valentine has beenassassinated!”Villefort hung his head, d’Avrigny approached nearer, and Noirtier said“Yes” with his eyes.“Now, sir,” continued Morrel, “in these days no one candisappear by violent means without some inquiries being made as to the cause ofher disappearance, even were she not a young, beautiful, and adorable creaturelike Valentine. Now, M. le Procureur du Roi,” said Morrel with increasingvehemence, “no mercy is allowed; I denounce the crime; it is your placeto seek the assassin.”The young man’s implacable eyes interrogated Villefort, who, on his side,glanced from Noirtier to d’Avrigny. But instead of finding sympathy inthe eyes of the doctor and his father, he only saw an expression as inflexibleas that of Maximilian.“Yes,” indicated the old man.“Assuredly,” said d’Avrigny.“Sir,” said Villefort, striving to struggle against this tripleforce and his own emotion,—“sir, you are deceived; no one commitscrimes here. I am stricken by fate. It is horrible, indeed, but no oneassassinates.”The eyes of Noirtier lighted up with rage, and d’Avrigny prepared tospeak. Morrel, however, extended his arm, and commanded silence.“And I say that murders are committed here,” said Morrel,whose voice, though lower in tone, lost none of its terrible distinctness:“I tell you that this is the fourth victim within the last four months. Itell you, Valentine’s life was attempted by poison four days ago, thoughshe escaped, owing to the precautions of M. Noirtier. I tell you that the dosehas been double, the poison changed, and that this time it has succeeded. Itell you that you know these things as well as I do, since this gentleman hasforewarned you, both as a doctor and as a friend.”“Oh, you rave, sir,” exclaimed Villefort, in vain endeavoring toescape the net in which he was taken.“I rave?” said Morrel; “well, then, I appeal to M.d’Avrigny himself. Ask him, sir, if he recollects the words he uttered inthe garden of this house on the night of Madame de Saint-Méran’s death.You thought yourselves alone, and talked about that tragical death, and thefatality you mentioned then is the same which has caused the murder ofValentine.” Villefort and d’Avrigny exchanged looks.“Yes, yes,” continued Morrel; “recall the scene, for thewords you thought were only given to silence and solitude fell into my ears.Certainly, after witnessing the culpable indolence manifested by M. deVillefort towards his own relations, I ought to have denounced him to theauthorities; then I should not have been an accomplice to thy death, as I nowam, sweet, beloved Valentine; but the accomplice shall become the avenger. Thisfourth murder is apparent to all, and if thy father abandon thee, Valentine, itis I, and I swear it, that shall pursue the assassin.”And this time, as though nature had at least taken compassion on the vigorousframe, nearly bursting with its own strength, the words of Morrel were stifledin his throat; his breast heaved; the tears, so long rebellious, gushed fromhis eyes; and he threw himself weeping on his knees by the side of the bed.Then d’Avrigny spoke. “And I, too,” he exclaimed in a lowvoice, “I unite with M. Morrel in demanding justice for crime; my bloodboils at the idea of having encouraged a murderer by my cowardlyconcession.”“Oh, merciful Heavens!” murmured Villefort. Morrel raised his head,and reading the eyes of the old man, which gleamed with unnaturallustre,—“Stay,” he said, “M. Noirtier wishes to speak.”“Yes,” indicated Noirtier, with an expression the more terrible,from all his faculties being centred in his glance.“Do you know the assassin?” asked Morrel.“Yes,” replied Noirtier.“And will you direct us?” exclaimed the young man. “Listen,M. d’Avrigny, listen!”Noirtier looked upon Morrel with one of those melancholy smiles which had sooften made Valentine happy, and thus fixed his attention. Then, having rivetedthe eyes of his interlocutor on his own, he glanced towards the door.“Do you wish me to leave?” said Morrel, sadly.“Yes,” replied Noirtier.“Alas, alas, sir, have pity on me!”The old man’s eyes remained fixed on the door.“May I, at least, return?” asked Morrel.“Yes.”“Must I leave alone?”“No.”“Whom am I to take with me? The procureur?”“No.”“The doctor?”“Yes.”“You wish to remain alone with M. de Villefort?”“Yes.”“But can he understand you?”“Yes.”“Oh,” said Villefort, inexpressibly delighted to think that theinquiries were to be made by him alone,—“oh, be satisfied, I canunderstand my father.” While uttering these words with this expression ofjoy, his teeth clashed together violently.D’Avrigny took the young man’s arm, and led him out of the room. Amore than deathlike silence then reigned in the house. At the end of a quarterof an hour a faltering footstep was heard, and Villefort appeared at the doorof the apartment where d’Avrigny and Morrel had been staying, oneabsorbed in meditation, the other in grief.“You can come,” he said, and led them back to Noirtier.Morrel looked attentively on Villefort. His face was livid, large drops rolleddown his face, and in his fingers he held the fragments of a quill pen which hehad torn to atoms.“Gentlemen,” he said in a hoarse voice, “give me your word ofhonor that this horrible secret shall forever remain buried amongstourselves!” The two men drew back.“I entreat you——” continued Villefort.“But,” said Morrel, “the culprit—the murderer—theassassin.”“Do not alarm yourself, sir; justice will be done,” said Villefort.“My father has revealed the culprit’s name; my father thirsts forrevenge as much as you do, yet even he conjures you as I do to keep thissecret. Do you not, father?”“Yes,” resolutely replied Noirtier. Morrel suffered an exclamationof horror and surprise to escape him.“Oh, sir,” said Villefort, arresting Maximilian by the arm,“if my father, the inflexible man, makes this request, it is because heknows, be assured, that Valentine will be terribly revenged. Is it not so,father?”The old man made a sign in the affirmative. Villefort continued:“He knows me, and I have pledged my word to him. Rest assured, gentlemen,that within three days, in a less time than justice would demand, the revenge Ishall have taken for the murder of my child will be such as to make the boldestheart tremble;” and as he spoke these words he ground his teeth, andgrasped the old man’s senseless hand.“Will this promise be fulfilled, M. Noirtier?” asked Morrel, whiled’Avrigny looked inquiringly.“Yes,” replied Noirtier with an expression of sinister joy.“Swear, then,” said Villefort, joining the hands of Morrel andd’Avrigny, “swear that you will spare the honor of my house, andleave me to avenge my child.”D’Avrigny turned round and uttered a very feeble “Yes,” butMorrel, disengaging his hand, rushed to the bed, and after having pressed thecold lips of Valentine with his own, hurriedly left, uttering a long, deepgroan of despair and anguish.We have before stated that all the servants had fled. M. de Villefort wastherefore obliged to request M. d’Avrigny to superintend all thearrangements consequent upon a death in a large city, more especially a deathunder such suspicious circumstances.It was something terrible to witness the silent agony, the mute despair ofNoirtier, whose tears silently rolled down his cheeks. Villefort retired to hisstudy, and d’Avrigny left to summon the doctor of the mayoralty, whoseoffice it is to examine bodies after decease, and who is expressly named“the doctor of the dead.” M. Noirtier could not be persuaded toquit his grandchild. At the end of a quarter of an hour M. d’Avrignyreturned with his associate; they found the outer gate closed, and not aservant remaining in the house; Villefort himself was obliged to open to them.But he stopped on the landing; he had not the courage to again visit the deathchamber. The two doctors, therefore, entered the room alone. Noirtier was nearthe bed, pale, motionless, and silent as the corpse. The district doctorapproached with the indifference of a man accustomed to spend half his timeamongst the dead; he then lifted the sheet which was placed over the face, andjust unclosed the lips.“Alas,” said d’Avrigny, “she is indeed dead, poorchild!”“Yes,” answered the doctor laconically, dropping the sheet he hadraised. Noirtier uttered a kind of hoarse, rattling sound; the old man’seyes sparkled, and the good doctor understood that he wished to behold hischild. He therefore approached the bed, and while his companion was dipping thefingers with which he had touched the lips of the corpse in chloride of lime,he uncovered the calm and pale face, which looked like that of a sleepingangel.A tear, which appeared in the old man’s eye, expressed his thanks to thedoctor. The doctor of the dead then laid his permit on the corner of the table,and having fulfilled his duty, was conducted out by d’Avrigny. Villefortmet them at the door of his study; having in a few words thanked the districtdoctor, he turned to d’Avrigny, and said:“And now the priest.”“Is there any particular priest you wish to pray with Valentine?”asked d’Avrigny.“No.” said Villefort; “fetch the nearest.”“The nearest,” said the district doctor, “is a good Italianabbé, who lives next door to you. Shall I call on him as I pass?”“D’Avrigny,” said Villefort, “be so kind, I beseechyou, as to accompany this gentleman. Here is the key of the door, so that youcan go in and out as you please; you will bring the priest with you, and willoblige me by introducing him into my child’s room.”“Do you wish to see him?”“I only wish to be alone. You will excuse me, will you not? A priest canunderstand a father’s grief.”And M. de Villefort, giving the key to d’Avrigny, again bade farewell tothe strange doctor, and retired to his study, where he began to work. For sometemperaments work is a remedy for all afflictions.As the doctors entered the street, they saw a man in a cassock standing on thethreshold of the next door.“This is the abbé of whom I spoke,” said the doctor tod’Avrigny. D’Avrigny accosted the priest.“Sir,” he said, “are you disposed to confer a greatobligation on an unhappy father who has just lost his daughter? I mean M. deVillefort, the king’s attorney.”“Ah,” said the priest, in a marked Italian accent; “yes, Ihave heard that death is in that house.”“Then I need not tell you what kind of service he requires of you.”“I was about to offer myself, sir,” said the priest; “it isour mission to forestall our duties.”“It is a young girl.”“I know it, sir; the servants who fled from the house informed me. I alsoknow that her name is Valentine, and I have already prayed for her.”“Thank you, sir,” said d’Avrigny; “since you havecommenced your sacred office, deign to continue it. Come and watch by the dead,and all the wretched family will be grateful to you.”“I am going, sir; and I do not hesitate to say that no prayers will bemore fervent than mine.”D’Avrigny took the priest’s hand, and without meeting Villefort,who was engaged in his study, they reached Valentine’s room, which on thefollowing night was to be occupied by the undertakers. On entering the room,Noirtier’s eyes met those of the abbé, and no doubt he read someparticular expression in them, for he remained in the room. D’Avrignyrecommended the attention of the priest to the living as well as to the dead,and the abbé promised to devote his prayers to Valentine and his attentions toNoirtier.In order, doubtless, that he might not be disturbed while fulfilling his sacredmission, the priest rose as soon as d’Avrigny departed, and not onlybolted the door through which the doctor had just left, but also that leadingto Madame de Villefort’s room. Chapter 104.Danglars’ SignatureThe next morning dawneddull and cloudy. During the night the undertakers had executed their melancholyoffice, and wrapped the corpse in the winding-sheet, which, whatever may besaid about the equality of death, is at least a last proof of the luxury sopleasing in life. This winding-sheet was nothing more than a beautiful piece ofcambric, which the young girl had bought a fortnight before.During the evening two men, engaged for the purpose, had carried Noirtier fromValentine’s room into his own, and contrary to all expectation there wasno difficulty in withdrawing him from his child. The Abbé Busoni had watchedtill daylight, and then left without calling anyone. D’Avrigny returnedabout eight o’clock in the morning; he met Villefort on his way toNoirtier’s room, and accompanied him to see how the old man had slept.They found him in the large armchair, which served him for a bed, enjoying acalm, nay, almost a smiling sleep. They both stood in amazement at the door.“See,” said d’Avrigny to Villefort, “nature knows howto alleviate the deepest sorrow. No one can say that M. Noirtier did not lovehis child, and yet he sleeps.”“Yes, you are right,” replied Villefort, surprised; “hesleeps, indeed! And this is the more strange, since the least contradictionkeeps him awake all night.”“Grief has stunned him,” replied d’Avrigny; and they bothreturned thoughtfully to the procureur’s study.“See, I have not slept,” said Villefort, showing his undisturbedbed; “grief does not stun me. I have not been in bed for two nights; butthen look at my desk; see what I have written during these two days and nights.I have filled those papers, and have made out the accusation against theassassin Benedetto. Oh, work, work,—my passion, my joy, mydelight,—it is for thee to alleviate my sorrows!” and heconvulsively grasped the hand of d’Avrigny.“Do you require my services now?” asked d’Avrigny.“No,” said Villefort; “only return again at eleveno’clock; at twelve the—the—oh, Heavens, my poor, poorchild!” and the procureur again becoming a man, lifted up his eyes andgroaned.“Shall you be present in the reception-room?”“No; I have a cousin who has undertaken this sad office. I shall work,doctor—when I work I forget everything.”And, indeed, no sooner had the doctor left the room, than he was again absorbedin work. On the doorsteps d’Avrigny met the cousin whom Villefort hadmentioned, a personage as insignificant in our story as in the world heoccupied—one of those beings designed from their birth to make themselvesuseful to others. He was punctual, dressed in black, with crape around his hat,and presented himself at his cousin’s with a face made up for theoccasion, and which he could alter as might be required.At eleven o’clock the mourning-coaches rolled into the paved court, andthe Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré was filled with a crowd of idlers, equallypleased to witness the festivities or the mourning of the rich, and who rushwith the same avidity to a funeral procession as to the marriage of a duchess.Gradually the reception-room filled, and some of our old friends made theirappearance—we mean Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp, accompanied byall the leading men of the day at the bar, in literature, or the army, for M.de Villefort moved in the first Parisian circles, less owing to his socialposition than to his personal merit.The cousin standing at the door ushered in the guests, and it was rather arelief to the indifferent to see a person as unmoved as themselves, and who didnot exact a mournful face or force tears, as would have been the case with afather, a brother, or a lover. Those who were acquainted soon formed intolittle groups. One of them was made of Debray, Château-Renaud, and Beauchamp.“Poor girl,” said Debray, like the rest, paying an involuntarytribute to the sad event,—“poor girl, so young, so rich, sobeautiful! Could you have imagined this scene, Château-Renaud, when we saw her,at the most three weeks ago, about to sign that contract?”“Indeed, no,” said Château-Renaud.”“Did you know her?”“I spoke to her once or twice at Madame de Morcerf’s, among therest; she appeared to me charming, though rather melancholy. Where is herstepmother? Do you know?”“She is spending the day with the wife of the worthy gentleman who isreceiving us.”“Who is he?”“Whom do you mean?”“The gentleman who receives us? Is he a deputy?”“Oh, no. I am condemned to witness those gentlemen every day,” saidBeauchamp; “but he is perfectly unknown to me.”“Have you mentioned this death in your paper?”“It has been mentioned, but the article is not mine; indeed, I doubt ifit will please M. Villefort, for it says that if four successive deaths hadhappened anywhere else than in the house of the king’s attorney, he wouldhave interested himself somewhat more about it.”“Still,” said Château-Renaud, “Dr. d’Avrigny, whoattends my mother, declares he is in despair about it. But whom are youseeking, Debray?”“I am seeking the Count of Monte Cristo” said the young man.“I met him on the boulevard, on my way here,” said Beauchamp.“I think he is about to leave Paris; he was going to his banker.”“His banker? Danglars is his banker, is he not?” askedChâteau-Renaud of Debray.“I believe so,” replied the secretary with slight uneasiness.“But Monte Cristo is not the only one I miss here; I do not seeMorrel.”“Morrel? Do they know him?” asked Château-Renaud. “I think hehas only been introduced to Madame de Villefort.”“Still, he ought to have been here,” said Debray; “I wonderwhat will be talked about tonight; this funeral is the news of the day. Buthush, here comes our minister of justice; he will feel obliged to make somelittle speech to the cousin,” and the three young men drew near tolisten.Beauchamp told the truth when he said that on his way to the funeral he had metMonte Cristo, who was directing his steps towards the Rue de la Chausséed’Antin, to M. Danglars’. The banker saw the carriage of the countenter the courtyard, and advanced to meet him with a sad, though affable smile.“Well,” said he, extending his hand to Monte Cristo, “Isuppose you have come to sympathize with me, for indeed misfortune has takenpossession of my house. When I perceived you, I was just asking myself whetherI had not wished harm towards those poor Morcerfs, which would have justifiedthe proverb of ‘He who wishes misfortunes to happen to others experiencesthem himself.’ Well, on my word of honor, I answered, ‘No!’ Iwished no ill to Morcerf; he was a little proud, perhaps, for a man who likemyself has risen from nothing; but we all have our faults. Do you know, count,that persons of our time of life—not that you belong to the class, youare still a young man,—but as I was saying, persons of our time of lifehave been very unfortunate this year. For example, look at the puritanicalprocureur, who has just lost his daughter, and in fact nearly all his family,in so singular a manner; Morcerf dishonored and dead; and then myself coveredwith ridicule through the villany of Benedetto; besides——”“Besides what?” asked the Count.“Alas, do you not know?”“What new calamity?”“My daughter——”“Mademoiselle Danglars?”“Eugénie has left us!”“Good heavens, what are you telling me?”“The truth, my dear count. Oh, how happy you must be in not having eitherwife or children!”“Do you think so?”“Indeed I do.”“And so Mademoiselle Danglars——”“She could not endure the insult offered to us by that wretch, so sheasked permission to travel.”“And is she gone?”“The other night she left.”“With Madame Danglars?”“No, with a relation. But still, we have quite lost our dear Eugénie; forI doubt whether her pride will ever allow her to return to France.”“Still, baron,” said Monte Cristo, “family griefs, or indeedany other affliction which would crush a man whose child was his only treasure,are endurable to a millionaire. Philosophers may well say, and practical menwill always support the opinion, that money mitigates many trials; and if youadmit the efficacy of this sovereign balm, you ought to be very easilyconsoled—you, the king of finance, the focus of immeasurablepower.”Danglars looked at him askance, as though to ascertain whether he spokeseriously.“Yes,” he answered, “if a fortune brings consolation, I oughtto be consoled; I am rich.”“So rich, dear sir, that your fortune resembles the pyramids; if youwished to demolish them you could not, and if it were possible, you would notdare!”Danglars smiled at the good-natured pleasantry of the count. “Thatreminds me,” he said, “that when you entered I was on the point ofsigning five little bonds; I have already signed two: will you allow me to dothe same to the others?”“Pray do so.”There was a moment’s silence, during which the noise of thebanker’s pen was alone heard, while Monte Cristo examined the giltmouldings on the ceiling.“Are they Spanish, Haitian, or Neapolitan bonds?” said MonteCristo.“No,” said Danglars, smiling, “they are bonds on the bank ofFrance, payable to bearer. Stay, count,” he added, “you, who may becalled the emperor, if I claim the title of king of finance, have you manypieces of paper of this size, each worth a million?”The count took into his hands the papers, which Danglars had so proudlypresented to him, and read:—“‘To the Governor of the Bank. Please pay to my order, from thefund deposited by me, the sum of a million, and charge the same to my account.“Baron Danglars.’”“One, two, three, four, five,” said Monte Cristo; “fivemillions—why what a Crœsus you are!”“This is how I transact business,” said Danglars.“It is really wonderful,” said the count; “above all, if, asI suppose, it is payable at sight.”“It is, indeed,” said Danglars.“It is a fine thing to have such credit; really, it is only in Francethese things are done. Five millions on five little scraps of paper!—itmust be seen to be believed.”“You do not doubt it?”“No!”“You say so with an accent—stay, you shall be convinced; take myclerk to the bank, and you will see him leave it with an order on the Treasuryfor the same sum.”“No,” said Monte Cristo folding the five notes, “mostdecidedly not; the thing is so curious, I will make the experiment myself. I amcredited on you for six millions. I have drawn nine hundred thousand francs,you therefore still owe me five millions and a hundred thousand francs. I willtake the five scraps of paper that I now hold as bonds, with your signaturealone, and here is a receipt in full for the six millions between us. I hadprepared it beforehand, for I am much in want of money today.”And Monte Cristo placed the bonds in his pocket with one hand, while with theother he held out the receipt to Danglars. If a thunderbolt had fallen at thebanker’s feet, he could not have experienced greater terror.“What,” he stammered, “do you mean to keep that money? Excuseme, excuse me, but I owe this money to the charity fund,—a deposit whichI promised to pay this morning.”“Oh, well, then,” said Monte Cristo, “I am not particularabout these five notes, pay me in a different form; I wished, from curiosity,to take these, that I might be able to say that without any advice orpreparation the house of Danglars had paid me five millions without aminute’s delay; it would have been remarkable. But here are your bonds;pay me differently;” and he held the bonds towards Danglars, who seizedthem like a vulture extending its claws to withhold the food that is beingwrested from its grasp.Suddenly he rallied, made a violent effort to restrain himself, and then asmile gradually widened the features of his disturbed countenance.“Certainly,” he said, “your receipt is money.”“Oh dear, yes; and if you were at Rome, the house of Thomson & Frenchwould make no more difficulty about paying the money on my receipt than youhave just done.”“Pardon me, count, pardon me.”“Then I may keep this money?”“Yes,” said Danglars, while the perspiration started from the rootsof his hair. “Yes, keep it—keep it.”Monte Cristo replaced the notes in his pocket with that indescribableexpression which seemed to say, “Come, reflect; if you repent there isstill time.”“No,” said Danglars, “no, decidedly no; keep my signatures.But you know none are so formal as bankers in transacting business; I intendedthis money for the charity fund, and I seemed to be robbing them if I did notpay them with these precise bonds. How absurd—as if one crown were not asgood as another. Excuse me;” and he began to laugh loudly, but nervously.“Certainly, I excuse you,” said Monte Cristo graciously, “andpocket them.” And he placed the bonds in his pocket-book.“But,” said Danglars, “there is still a sum of one hundredthousand francs?”“Oh, a mere nothing,” said Monte Cristo. “The balance wouldcome to about that sum; but keep it, and we shall be quits.”“Count,” said Danglars, “are you speaking seriously?”“I never joke with bankers,” said Monte Cristo in a freezingmanner, which repelled impertinence; and he turned to the door, just as thevalet de chambre announced:“M. de Boville, Receiver-General of the charities.”“Ma foi,” said Monte Cristo; “I think I arrived justin time to obtain your signatures, or they would have been disputed withme.”Danglars again became pale, and hastened to conduct the count out. Monte Cristoexchanged a ceremonious bow with M. de Boville, who was standing in thewaiting-room, and who was introduced into Danglars’ room as soon as thecount had left.The count’s serious face was illumined by a faint smile, as he noticedthe portfolio which the receiver-general held in his hand. At the door he foundhis carriage, and was immediately driven to the bank. Meanwhile Danglars,repressing all emotion, advanced to meet the receiver-general. We need not saythat a smile of condescension was stamped upon his lips.“Good-morning, creditor,” said he; “for I wager anything itis the creditor who visits me.”“You are right, baron,” answered M. de Boville; “thecharities present themselves to you through me; the widows and orphans deputeme to receive alms to the amount of five millions from you.”“And yet they say orphans are to be pitied,” said Danglars, wishingto prolong the jest. “Poor things!”“Here I am in their name,” said M. de Boville; “but did youreceive my letter yesterday?”“Yes.”“I have brought my receipt.”“My dear M. de Boville, your widows and orphans must oblige me by waitingtwenty-four hours, since M. de Monte Cristo whom you just saw leavinghere—you did see him, I think?”“Yes; well?”“Well, M. de Monte Cristo has just carried off their fivemillions.”“How so?”“The count has an unlimited credit upon me; a credit opened by Thomson& French, of Rome; he came to demand five millions at once, which I paidhim with checks on the bank. My funds are deposited there, and you canunderstand that if I draw out ten millions on the same day it will appearrather strange to the governor. Two days will be a different thing,” saidDanglars, smiling.“Come,” said Boville, with a tone of entire incredulity,“five millions to that gentleman who just left, and who bowed to me asthough he knew me?”“Perhaps he knows you, though you do not know him; M. de Monte Cristoknows everybody.”“Five millions!”“Here is his receipt. Believe your own eyes.” M. de Boville tookthe paper Danglars presented him, and read:“Received of Baron Danglars the sum of five million one hundred thousandfrancs, to be repaid on demand by the house of Thomson & French ofRome.”“It is really true,” said M. de Boville.“Do you know the house of Thomson & French?”“Yes, I once had business to transact with it to the amount of 200,000francs; but since then I have not heard it mentioned.”“It is one of the best houses in Europe,” said Danglars, carelesslythrowing down the receipt on his desk.“And he had five millions in your hands alone! Why, this Count of MonteCristo must be a nabob?”“Indeed I do not know what he is; he has three unlimitedcredits—one on me, one on Rothschild, one on Lafitte; and, yousee,” he added carelessly, “he has given me the preference, byleaving a balance of 100,000 francs.”M. de Boville manifested signs of extraordinary admiration.“I must visit him,” he said, “and obtain some pious grantfrom him.”“Oh, you may make sure of him; his charities alone amount to 20,000francs a month.”“It is magnificent! I will set before him the example of Madame deMorcerf and her son.”“What example?”“They gave all their fortune to the hospitals.”“What fortune?”“Their own—M. de Morcerf’s, who is deceased.”“For what reason?”“Because they would not spend money so guiltily acquired.”“And what are they to live upon?”“The mother retires into the country, and the son enters the army.”“Well, I must confess, these are scruples.”“I registered their deed of gift yesterday.”“And how much did they possess?”“Oh, not much—from twelve to thirteen hundred thousand francs. Butto return to our millions.”“Certainly,” said Danglars, in the most natural tone in the world.“Are you then pressed for this money?”“Yes; for the examination of our cash takes place tomorrow.”“Tomorrow? Why did you not tell me so before? Why, it is as good as acentury! At what hour does the examination take place?”“At two o’clock.”“Send at twelve,” said Danglars, smiling.M. de Boville said nothing, but nodded his head, and took up the portfolio.“Now I think of it, you can do better,” said Danglars.“How do you mean?”“The receipt of M. de Monte Cristo is as good as money; take it toRothschild’s or Lafitte’s, and they will take it off your hands atonce.”“What, though payable at Rome?”“Certainly; it will only cost you a discount of 5,000 or 6,000francs.”The receiver started back.“Ma foi!” he said, “I prefer waiting till tomorrow.What a proposition!”“I thought, perhaps,” said Danglars with supreme impertinence,“that you had a deficiency to make up?”“Indeed,” said the receiver.“And if that were the case it would be worth while to make somesacrifice.”“Thank you, no, sir.”“Then it will be tomorrow.”“Yes; but without fail.”“Ah, you are laughing at me; send tomorrow at twelve, and the bank shallbe notified.”“I will come myself.”“Better still, since it will afford me the pleasure of seeing you.”They shook hands.“By the way,” said M. de Boville, “are you not going to thefuneral of poor Mademoiselle de Villefort, which I met on my road here?”“No,” said the banker; “I have appeared rather ridiculoussince that affair of Benedetto, so I remain in the background.”“Bah, you are wrong. How were you to blame in that affair?”“Listen—when one bears an irreproachable name, as I do, one israther sensitive.”“Everybody pities you, sir; and, above all, Mademoiselle Danglars!”“Poor Eugénie!” said Danglars; “do you know she is going toembrace a religious life?”“No.”“Alas, it is unhappily but too true. The day after the event, she decidedon leaving Paris with a nun of her acquaintance; they are gone to seek a verystrict convent in Italy or Spain.”“Oh, it is terrible!” and M. de Boville retired with thisexclamation, after expressing acute sympathy with the father. But he hadscarcely left before Danglars, with an energy of action those can aloneunderstand who have seen Robert Macaire represented byFrédérick,[24]exclaimed:“Fool!”Then enclosing Monte Cristo’s receipt in a little pocket-book, headded:—“Yes, come at twelve o’clock; I shall then be faraway.”Then he double-locked his door, emptied all his drawers, collected about fiftythousand francs in bank-notes, burned several papers, left others exposed toview, and then commenced writing a letter which he addressed:“To Madame la Baronne Danglars.”“I will place it on her table myself tonight,” he murmured. Thentaking a passport from his drawer he said,—“Good, it is availablefor two months longer.” Chapter 105. The Cemeteryof Père-LachaiseM. de Boville had indeedmet the funeral procession which was taking Valentine to her last home onearth. The weather was dull and stormy, a cold wind shook the few remainingyellow leaves from the boughs of the trees, and scattered them among the crowdwhich filled the boulevards. M. de Villefort, a true Parisian, considered thecemetery of Père-Lachaise alone worthy of receiving the mortal remains of aParisian family; there alone the corpses belonging to him would be surroundedby worthy associates. He had therefore purchased a vault, which was quicklyoccupied by members of his family. On the front of the monument was inscribed:“The families of Saint-Méran and Villefort,” for such had been thelast wish expressed by poor Renée, Valentine’s mother. The pompousprocession therefore wended its way towards Père-Lachaise from the FaubourgSaint-Honoré. Having crossed Paris, it passed through the Faubourg du Temple,then leaving the exterior boulevards, it reached the cemetery. More than fiftyprivate carriages followed the twenty mourning-coaches, and behind them morethan five hundred persons joined in the procession on foot.These last consisted of all the young people whom Valentine’s death hadstruck like a thunderbolt, and who, notwithstanding the raw chilliness of theseason, could not refrain from paying a last tribute to the memory of thebeautiful, chaste, and adorable girl, thus cut off in the flower of her youth.As they left Paris, an equipage with four horses, at full speed, was seen todraw up suddenly; it contained Monte Cristo. The count left the carriage andmingled in the crowd who followed on foot. Château-Renaud perceived him andimmediately alighting from his coupé, joined him; Beauchamp did thesame.The count looked attentively through every opening in the crowd; he wasevidently watching for someone, but his search ended in disappointment.“Where is Morrel?” he asked; “do either of these gentlemenknow where he is?”“We have already asked that question,” said Château-Renaud,“for none of us has seen him.”The count was silent, but continued to gaze around him. At length they arrivedat the cemetery. The piercing eye of Monte Cristo glanced through clusters ofbushes and trees, and was soon relieved from all anxiety, for seeing a shadowglide between the yew-trees, Monte Cristo recognized him whom he sought.One funeral is generally very much like another in this magnificent metropolis.Black figures are seen scattered over the long white avenues; the silence ofearth and heaven is alone broken by the noise made by the crackling branches ofhedges planted around the monuments; then follows the melancholy chant of thepriests, mingled now and then with a sob of anguish, escaping from some womanconcealed behind a mass of flowers.The shadow Monte Cristo had noticed passed rapidly behind the tomb of Abélardand Héloïse, placed itself close to the heads of the horses belonging to thehearse, and following the undertaker’s men, arrived with them at the spotappointed for the burial. Each person’s attention was occupied. MonteCristo saw nothing but the shadow, which no one else observed. Twice the countleft the ranks to see whether the object of his interest had any concealedweapon beneath his clothes. When the procession stopped, this shadow wasrecognized as Morrel, who, with his coat buttoned up to his throat, his facelivid, and convulsively crushing his hat between his fingers, leaned against atree, situated on an elevation commanding the mausoleum, so that none of thefuneral details could escape his observation.Everything was conducted in the usual manner. A few men, the least impressed ofall by the scene, pronounced a discourse, some deploring this premature death,others expatiating on the grief of the father, and one very ingenious personquoting the fact that Valentine had solicited pardon of her father forcriminals on whom the arm of justice was ready to fall—until at lengththey exhausted their stores of metaphor and mournful speeches, elaboratevariations on the stanzas of Malherbe to Du Périer.Monte Cristo heard and saw nothing, or rather he only saw Morrel, whosecalmness had a frightful effect on those who knew what was passing in hisheart.“See,” said Beauchamp, pointing out Morrel to Debray. “Whatis he doing up there?” And they called Château-Renaud’s attentionto him.“How pale he is!” said Château-Renaud, shuddering.“He is cold,” said Debray.“Not at all,” said Château-Renaud, slowly; “I think he isviolently agitated. He is very susceptible.”“Bah,” said Debray; “he scarcely knew Mademoiselle deVillefort; you said so yourself.”“True. Still I remember he danced three times with her at Madame deMorcerf’s. Do you recollect that ball, count, where you produced such aneffect?”“No, I do not,” replied Monte Cristo, without even knowing of whator to whom he was speaking, so much was he occupied in watching Morrel, who washolding his breath with emotion.“The discourse is over; farewell, gentlemen,” said the count,unceremoniously.And he disappeared without anyone seeing whither he went.The funeral being over, the guests returned to Paris. Château-Renaud looked fora moment for Morrel; but while they were watching the departure of the count,Morrel had quitted his post, and Château-Renaud, failing in his search, joinedDebray and Beauchamp.Monte Cristo concealed himself behind a large tomb and awaited the arrival ofMorrel, who by degrees approached the tomb now abandoned by spectators andworkmen. Morrel threw a glance around, but before it reached the spot occupiedby Monte Cristo the latter had advanced yet nearer, still unperceived. Theyoung man knelt down. The count, with outstretched neck and glaring eyes, stoodin an attitude ready to pounce upon Morrel upon the first occasion. Morrel benthis head till it touched the stone, then clutching the grating with both hands,he murmured:“Oh, Valentine!”The count’s heart was pierced by the utterance of these two words; hestepped forward, and touching the young man’s shoulder, said:“I was looking for you, my friend.” Monte Cristo expected a burstof passion, but he was deceived, for Morrel turning round, said calmly,—“You see I was praying.” The scrutinizing glance of the countsearched the young man from head to foot. He then seemed more easy.“Shall I drive you back to Paris?” he asked.“No, thank you.”“Do you wish anything?”“Leave me to pray.”The count withdrew without opposition, but it was only to place himself in asituation where he could watch every movement of Morrel, who at length arose,brushed the dust from his knees, and turned towards Paris, without once lookingback. He walked slowly down the Rue de la Roquette. The count, dismissing hiscarriage, followed him about a hundred paces behind. Maximilian crossed thecanal and entered the Rue Meslay by the boulevards.Five minutes after the door had been closed on Morrel’s entrance, it wasagain opened for the count. Julie was at the entrance of the garden, where shewas attentively watching Penelon, who, entering with zeal into his professionof gardener, was very busy grafting some Bengal roses. “Ah, count,”she exclaimed, with the delight manifested by every member of the familywhenever he visited the Rue Meslay.“Maximilian has just returned, has he not, madame?” asked thecount.“Yes, I think I saw him pass; but pray, call Emmanuel.”“Excuse me, madame, but I must go up to Maximilian’s room thisinstant,” replied Monte Cristo, “I have something of the greatestimportance to tell him.”“Go, then,” she said with a charming smile, which accompanied himuntil he had disappeared.Monte Cristo soon ran up the staircase conducting from the ground floor toMaximilian’s room; when he reached the landing he listened attentively,but all was still. Like many old houses occupied by a single family, the roomdoor was panelled with glass; but it was locked, Maximilian was shut in, and itwas impossible to see what was passing in the room, because a red curtain wasdrawn before the glass. The count’s anxiety was manifested by a brightcolor which seldom appeared on the face of that imperturbable man.“What shall I do!” he uttered, and reflected for a moment;“shall I ring? No, the sound of a bell, announcing a visitor, will butaccelerate the resolution of one in Maximilian’s situation, and then thebell would be followed by a louder noise.”Monte Cristo trembled from head to foot and as if his determination had beentaken with the rapidity of lightning, he struck one of the panes of glass withhis elbow; the glass was shivered to atoms, then withdrawing the curtain he sawMorrel, who had been writing at his desk, bound from his seat at the noise ofthe broken window.“I beg a thousand pardons,” said the count, “there is nothingthe matter, but I slipped down and broke one of your panes of glass with myelbow. Since it is opened, I will take advantage of it to enter your room; donot disturb yourself—do not disturb yourself!”And passing his hand through the broken glass, the count opened the door.Morrel, evidently discomposed, came to meet Monte Cristo less with theintention of receiving him than to exclude his entry.“Ma foi,” said Monte Cristo, rubbing his elbow,“it’s all your servant’s fault; your stairs are so polished,it is like walking on glass.”“Are you hurt, sir?” coldly asked Morrel.“I believe not. But what are you about there? You were writing.”“I?”“Your fingers are stained with ink.”“Ah, true, I was writing. I do sometimes, soldier though I am.”Monte Cristo advanced into the room; Maximilian was obliged to let him pass,but he followed him.“You were writing?” said Monte Cristo with a searching look.“I have already had the honor of telling you I was,” said Morrel.The count looked around him.“Your pistols are beside your desk,” said Monte Cristo, pointingwith his finger to the pistols on the table.“I am on the point of starting on a journey,” replied Morreldisdainfully.“My friend,” exclaimed Monte Cristo in a tone of exquisitesweetness.“Sir?”“My friend, my dear Maximilian, do not make a hasty resolution, I entreatyou.”“I make a hasty resolution?” said Morrel, shrugging his shoulders;“is there anything extraordinary in a journey?”“Maximilian,” said the count, “let us both lay aside the maskwe have assumed. You no more deceive me with that false calmness than I imposeupon you with my frivolous solicitude. You can understand, can you not, that tohave acted as I have done, to have broken that glass, to have intruded on thesolitude of a friend—you can understand that, to have done all this, Imust have been actuated by real uneasiness, or rather by a terrible conviction.Morrel, you are going to destroy yourself!”“Indeed, count,” said Morrel, shuddering; “what has put thisinto your head?”“I tell you that you are about to destroy yourself,” continued thecount, “and here is proof of what I say;” and, approaching thedesk, he removed the sheet of paper which Morrel had placed over the letter hehad begun, and took the latter in his hands.Morrel rushed forward to tear it from him, but Monte Cristo perceiving hisintention, seized his wrist with his iron grasp.“You wish to destroy yourself,” said the count; “you havewritten it.”“Well,” said Morrel, changing his expression of calmness for one ofviolence—“well, and if I do intend to turn this pistol againstmyself, who shall prevent me—who will dare prevent me? All my hopes areblighted, my heart is broken, my life a burden, everything around me is sad andmournful; earth has become distasteful to me, and human voices distract me. Itis a mercy to let me die, for if I live I shall lose my reason and become mad.When, sir, I tell you all this with tears of heartfelt anguish, can you replythat I am wrong, can you prevent my putting an end to my miserable existence?Tell me, sir, could you have the courage to do so?”“Yes, Morrel,” said Monte Cristo, with a calmness which contrastedstrangely with the young man’s excitement; “yes, I would doso.”“You?” exclaimed Morrel, with increasing anger andreproach—“you, who have deceived me with false hopes, who havecheered and soothed me with vain promises, when I might, if not have saved her,at least have seen her die in my arms! You, who pretend to understandeverything, even the hidden sources of knowledge,—and who enact the partof a guardian angel upon earth, and could not even find an antidote to a poisonadministered to a young girl! Ah, sir, indeed you would inspire me with pity,were you not hateful in my eyes.”“Morrel——”“Yes; you tell me to lay aside the mask, and I will do so, be satisfied!When you spoke to me at the cemetery, I answered you—my heart wassoftened; when you arrived here, I allowed you to enter. But since you abuse myconfidence, since you have devised a new torture after I thought I hadexhausted them all, then, Count of Monte Cristo my pretendedbenefactor—then, Count of Monte Cristo, the universal guardian, besatisfied, you shall witness the death of your friend;” and Morrel, witha maniacal laugh, again rushed towards the pistols.“And I again repeat, you shall not commit suicide.”“Prevent me, then!” replied Morrel, with another struggle, which,like the first, failed in releasing him from the count’s iron grasp.“I will prevent you.”“And who are you, then, that arrogate to yourself this tyrannical rightover free and rational beings?”“Who am I?” repeated Monte Cristo. “Listen; I am the only manin the world having the right to say to you, ‘Morrel, your father’sson shall not die today;’” and Monte Cristo, with an expression ofmajesty and sublimity, advanced with arms folded toward the young man, who,involuntarily overcome by the commanding manner of this man, recoiled a step.“Why do you mention my father?” stammered he; “why do youmingle a recollection of him with the affairs of today?”“Because I am he who saved your father’s life when he wished todestroy himself, as you do today—because I am the man who sent the purseto your young sister, and the Pharaon to old Morrel—because I amthe Edmond Dantès who nursed you, a child, on my knees.”Morrel made another step back, staggering, breathless, crushed; then all hisstrength give way, and he fell prostrate at the feet of Monte Cristo. Then hisadmirable nature underwent a complete and sudden revulsion; he arose, rushedout of the room and to the stairs, exclaiming energetically, “Julie,Julie—Emmanuel, Emmanuel!”Monte Cristo endeavored also to leave, but Maximilian would have died ratherthan relax his hold of the handle of the door, which he closed upon the count.Julie, Emmanuel, and some of the servants, ran up in alarm on hearing the criesof Maximilian. Morrel seized their hands, and opening the door exclaimed in avoice choked with sobs:“On your knees—on your knees—he is our benefactor—thesaviour of our father! He is——”He would have added “Edmond Dantès,” but the count seized his armand prevented him.Julie threw herself into the arms of the count; Emmanuel embraced him as aguardian angel; Morrel again fell on his knees, and struck the ground with hisforehead. Then the iron-hearted man felt his heart swell in his breast; a flameseemed to rush from his throat to his eyes, he bent his head and wept. For awhile nothing was heard in the room but a succession of sobs, while the incensefrom their grateful hearts mounted to heaven. Julie had scarcely recovered fromher deep emotion when she rushed out of the room, descended to the next floor,ran into the drawing-room with childlike joy and raised the crystal globe whichcovered the purse given by the unknown of the Allées de Meilhan. Meanwhile,Emmanuel in a broken voice said to the count:“Oh, count, how could you, hearing us so often speak of our unknownbenefactor, seeing us pay such homage of gratitude and adoration to hismemory,—how could you continue so long without discovering yourself tous? Oh, it was cruel to us, and—dare I say it?—to you also.”“Listen, my friends,” said the count—“I may call you sosince we have really been friends for the last eleven years—the discoveryof this secret has been occasioned by a great event which you must never know.I wished to bury it during my whole life in my own bosom, but your brotherMaximilian wrested it from me by a violence he repents of now, I amsure.”Then turning around, and seeing that Morrel, still on his knees, had thrownhimself into an armchair, he added in a low voice, pressing Emmanuel’shand significantly, “Watch over him.”“Why so?” asked the young man, surprised.“I cannot explain myself; but watch over him.” Emmanuel lookedaround the room and caught sight of the pistols; his eyes rested on theweapons, and he pointed to them. Monte Cristo bent his head. Emmanuel wenttowards the pistols.“Leave them,” said Monte Cristo. Then walking towards Morrel, hetook his hand; the tumultuous agitation of the young man was succeeded by aprofound stupor. Julie returned, holding the silken purse in her hands, whiletears of joy rolled down her cheeks, like dewdrops on the rose.“Here is the relic,” she said; “do not think it will be lessdear to us now we are acquainted with our benefactor!”“My child,” said Monte Cristo, coloring, “allow me to takeback that purse? Since you now know my face, I wish to be remembered alonethrough the affection I hope you will grant me.“Oh,” said Julie, pressing the purse to her heart, “no, no, Ibeseech you do not take it, for some unhappy day you will leave us, will younot?”“You have guessed rightly, madame,” replied Monte Cristo, smiling;“in a week I shall have left this country, where so many persons whomerit the vengeance of Heaven lived happily, while my father perished of hungerand grief.”While announcing his departure, the count fixed his eyes on Morrel, andremarked that the words, “I shall have left this country,” hadfailed to rouse him from his lethargy. He then saw that he must make anotherstruggle against the grief of his friend, and taking the hands of Emmanuel andJulie, which he pressed within his own, he said with the mild authority of afather:“My kind friends, leave me alone with Maximilian.”Julie saw the means offered of carrying off her precious relic, which MonteCristo had forgotten. She drew her husband to the door. “Let us leavethem,” she said.The count was alone with Morrel, who remained motionless as a statue.“Come,” said Monte-Cristo, touching his shoulder with his finger,“are you a man again, Maximilian?”“Yes; for I begin to suffer again.”The count frowned, apparently in gloomy hesitation.“Maximilian, Maximilian,” he said, “the ideas you yield toare unworthy of a Christian.”“Oh, do not fear, my friend,” said Morrel, raising his head, andsmiling with a sweet expression on the count; “I shall no longer attemptmy life.”“Then we are to have no more pistols—no more despair?”“No; I have found a better remedy for my grief than either a bullet or aknife.”“Poor fellow, what is it?”“My grief will kill me of itself.”“My friend,” said Monte Cristo, with an expression of melancholyequal to his own, “listen to me. One day, in a moment of despair likeyours, since it led to a similar resolution, I also wished to kill myself; oneday your father, equally desperate, wished to kill himself too. If anyone hadsaid to your father, at the moment he raised the pistol to his head—ifanyone had told me, when in my prison I pushed back the food I had not tastedfor three days—if anyone had said to either of us then,‘Live—the day will come when you will be happy, and will blesslife!’—no matter whose voice had spoken, we should have heard himwith the smile of doubt, or the anguish of incredulity,—and yet how manytimes has your father blessed life while embracing you—how often have Imyself——”“Ah,” exclaimed Morrel, interrupting the count, “you had onlylost your liberty, my father had only lost his fortune, but I have lostValentine.”“Look at me,” said Monte Cristo, with that expression whichsometimes made him so eloquent and persuasive—“look at me. Thereare no tears in my eyes, nor is there fever in my veins, yet I see yousuffer—you, Maximilian, whom I love as my own son. Well, does not thistell you that in grief, as in life, there is always something to look forwardto beyond? Now, if I entreat, if I order you to live, Morrel, it is in theconviction that one day you will thank me for having preserved yourlife.”“Oh, heavens,” said the young man, “oh, heavens—whatare you saying, count? Take care. But perhaps you have never loved!”“Child!” replied the count.“I mean, as I love. You see, I have been a soldier ever since I attainedmanhood. I reached the age of twenty-nine without loving, for none of thefeelings I before then experienced merit the appellation of love. Well, attwenty-nine I saw Valentine; for two years I have loved her, for two years Ihave seen written in her heart, as in a book, all the virtues of a daughter andwife. Count, to possess Valentine would have been a happiness too infinite, tooecstatic, too complete, too divine for this world, since it has been denied me;but without Valentine the earth is desolate.”“I have told you to hope,” said the count.“Then have a care, I repeat, for you seek to persuade me, and if yousucceed I should lose my reason, for I should hope that I could again beholdValentine.”The count smiled.“My friend, my father,” said Morrel with excitement, “have acare, I again repeat, for the power you wield over me alarms me. Weigh yourwords before you speak, for my eyes have already become brighter, and my heartbeats strongly; be cautious, or you will make me believe in supernaturalagencies. I must obey you, though you bade me call forth the dead or walk uponthe water.”“Hope, my friend,” repeated the count.“Ah,” said Morrel, falling from the height of excitement to theabyss of despair—“ah, you are playing with me, like those good, orrather selfish mothers who soothe their children with honeyed words, becausetheir screams annoy them. No, my friend, I was wrong to caution you; do notfear, I will bury my grief so deep in my heart, I will disguise it so, that youshall not even care to sympathize with me. Adieu, my friend, adieu!”“On the contrary,” said the count, “after this time you mustlive with me—you must not leave me, and in a week we shall have leftFrance behind us.”“And you still bid me hope?”“I tell you to hope, because I have a method of curing you.”“Count, you render me sadder than before, if it be possible. You thinkthe result of this blow has been to produce an ordinary grief, and you wouldcure it by an ordinary remedy—change of scene.” And Morrel droppedhis head with disdainful incredulity.“What can I say more?” asked Monte Cristo. “I have confidencein the remedy I propose, and only ask you to permit me to assure you of itsefficacy.”“Count, you prolong my agony.”“Then,” said the count, “your feeble spirit will not evengrant me the trial I request? Come—do you know of what the Count of MonteCristo is capable? do you know that he holds terrestrial beings under hiscontrol? nay, that he can almost work a miracle? Well, wait for the miracle Ihope to accomplish, or——”“Or?” repeated Morrel.“Or, take care, Morrel, lest I call you ungrateful.”“Have pity on me, count!”“I feel so much pity towards you, Maximilian, that—listen to meattentively—if I do not cure you in a month, to the day, to the veryhour, mark my words, Morrel, I will place loaded pistols before you, and a cupof the deadliest Italian poison—a poison more sure and prompt than thatwhich has killed Valentine.”“Will you promise me?”“Yes; for I am a man, and have suffered like yourself, and alsocontemplated suicide; indeed, often since misfortune has left me I have longedfor the delights of an eternal sleep.”“But you are sure you will promise me this?” said Morrel,intoxicated.“I not only promise, but swear it!” said Monte Cristo extending hishand.“In a month, then, on your honor, if I am not consoled, you will let metake my life into my own hands, and whatever may happen you will not call meungrateful?”“In a month, to the day, the very hour and the date is a sacred one,Maximilian. I do not know whether you remember that this is the 5th ofSeptember; it is ten years today since I saved your father’s life, whowished to die.”Morrel seized the count’s hand and kissed it; the count allowed him topay the homage he felt due to him.“In a month you will find on the table, at which we shall be thensitting, good pistols and a delicious draught; but, on the other hand, you mustpromise me not to attempt your life before that time.”“Oh, I also swear it!”Monte Cristo drew the young man towards him, and pressed him for some time tohis heart. “And now,” he said, “after today, you will comeand live with me; you can occupy Haydée’s apartment, and my daughter willat least be replaced by my son.”“Haydée?” said Morrel, “what has become of her?”“She departed last night.”“To leave you?”“To wait for me. Hold yourself ready then to join me at theChamps-Élysées, and lead me out of this house without anyone seeing mydeparture.”Maximilian hung his head, and obeyed with childlike reverence. Chapter 106. Dividing theProceedsThe apartment on thefirst floor of the house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Prés, where Albert deMorcerf had selected a home for his mother, was let to a very mysteriousperson. This was a man whose face the concierge himself had never seen, for inthe winter his chin was buried in one of the large red handkerchiefs worn bygentlemen’s coachmen on a cold night, and in the summer he made a pointof always blowing his nose just as he approached the door. Contrary to custom,this gentleman had not been watched, for as the report ran that he was a personof high rank, and one who would allow no impertinent interference, hisincognito was strictly respected.His visits were tolerably regular, though occasionally he appeared a littlebefore or after his time, but generally, both in summer and winter, he tookpossession of his apartment about four o’clock, though he never spent thenight there. At half-past three in the winter the fire was lighted by thediscreet servant, who had the superintendence of the little apartment, and inthe summer ices were placed on the table at the same hour. At fouro’clock, as we have already stated, the mysterious personage arrived.Twenty minutes afterwards a carriage stopped at the house, a lady alighted in ablack or dark blue dress, and always thickly veiled; she passed like a shadowthrough the lodge, and ran upstairs without a sound escaping under the touch ofher light foot. No one ever asked her where she was going. Her face, therefore,like that of the gentleman, was perfectly unknown to the two concierges, whowere perhaps unequalled throughout the capital for discretion. We need not sayshe stopped at the first floor. Then she tapped in a peculiar manner at a door,which after being opened to admit her was again fastened, and curiositypenetrated no farther. They used the same precautions in leaving as in enteringthe house. The lady always left first, and as soon as she had stepped into hercarriage, it drove away, sometimes towards the right hand, sometimes to theleft; then about twenty minutes afterwards the gentleman would also leave,buried in his cravat or concealed by his handkerchief.The day after Monte Cristo had called upon Danglars, the mysterious lodgerentered at ten o’clock in the morning instead of four in the afternoon.Almost directly afterwards, without the usual interval of time, a cab arrived,and the veiled lady ran hastily upstairs. The door opened, but before it couldbe closed, the lady exclaimed:“Oh, Lucien—oh, my friend!”The concierge therefore heard for the first time that the lodger’s namewas Lucien; still, as he was the very perfection of a door-keeper, he made uphis mind not to tell his wife.“Well, what is the matter, my dear?” asked the gentleman whose namethe lady’s agitation revealed; “tell me what is the matter.”“Oh, Lucien, can I confide in you?”“Of course, you know you can do so. But what can be the matter? Your noteof this morning has completely bewildered me. This precipitation—thisunusual appointment. Come, ease me of my anxiety, or else frighten me atonce.”“Lucien, a great event has happened!” said the lady, glancinginquiringly at Lucien,—“M. Danglars left last night!”“Left?—M. Danglars left? Where has he gone?”“I do not know.”“What do you mean? Has he gone intending not to return?”“Undoubtedly;—at ten o’clock at night his horses took him tothe barrier of Charenton; there a post-chaise was waiting for him—heentered it with his valet de chambre, saying that he was going toFontainebleau.”“Then what did you mean——”“Stay—he left a letter for me.”“A letter?”“Yes; read it.”And the baroness took from her pocket a letter which she gave to Debray. Debraypaused a moment before reading, as if trying to guess its contents, or perhapswhile making up his mind how to act, whatever it might contain. No doubt hisideas were arranged in a few minutes, for he began reading the letter whichcaused so much uneasiness in the heart of the baroness, and which ran asfollows:“‘Madame and most faithful wife.’”Debray mechanically stopped and looked at the baroness, whose face becamecovered with blushes.“Read,” she said.Debray continued:“‘When you receive this, you will no longer have a husband. Oh, youneed not be alarmed, you will only have lost him as you have lost yourdaughter; I mean that I shall be travelling on one of the thirty or forty roadsleading out of France. I owe you some explanations for my conduct, and as youare a woman that can perfectly understand me, I will give them. Listen, then. Ireceived this morning five millions which I paid away; almost directlyafterwards another demand for the same sum was presented to me; I put thiscreditor off till tomorrow and I intend leaving today, to escape that tomorrow,which would be rather too unpleasant for me to endure. You understand this, doyou not, my most precious wife? I say you understand this, because you are asconversant with my affairs as I am; indeed, I think you understand them better,since I am ignorant of what has become of a considerable portion of my fortune,once very tolerable, while I am sure, madame, that you know perfectly well. Forwomen have infallible instincts; they can even explain the marvellous by analgebraic calculation they have invented; but I, who only understand my ownfigures, know nothing more than that one day these figures deceived me. Haveyou admired the rapidity of my fall? Have you been slightly dazzled at thesudden fusion of my ingots? I confess I have seen nothing but the fire; let ushope you have found some gold among the ashes. With this consoling idea, Ileave you, madame, and most prudent wife, without any conscientious reproachfor abandoning you; you have friends left, and the ashes I have alreadymentioned, and above all the liberty I hasten to restore to you. And here,madame, I must add another word of explanation. So long as I hoped you wereworking for the good of our house and for the fortune of our daughter, Iphilosophically closed my eyes; but as you have transformed that house into avast ruin I will not be the foundation of another man’s fortune. You wererich when I married you, but little respected. Excuse me for speaking so verycandidly, but as this is intended only for ourselves, I do not see why I shouldweigh my words. I have augmented our fortune, and it has continued to increaseduring the last fifteen years, till extraordinary and unexpected catastropheshave suddenly overturned it,—without any fault of mine, I can honestlydeclare. You, madame, have only sought to increase your own, and I am convincedthat you have succeeded. I leave you, therefore, as I took you,—rich, butlittle respected. Adieu! I also intend from this time to work on my ownaccount. Accept my acknowledgments for the example you have set me, and which Iintend following.“‘Your very devoted husband,“‘Baron Danglars.’”The baroness had watched Debray while he read this long and painful letter, andsaw him, notwithstanding his self-control, change color once or twice. When hehad ended the perusal, he folded the letter and resumed his pensive attitude.“Well?” asked Madame Danglars, with an anxiety easy to beunderstood.“Well, madame?” unhesitatingly repeated Debray.“With what ideas does that letter inspire you?”“Oh, it is simple enough, madame; it inspires me with the idea that M.Danglars has left suspiciously.”“Certainly; but is this all you have to say to me?”“I do not understand you,” said Debray with freezing coldness.“He is gone! Gone, never to return!”“Oh, madame, do not think that!”“I tell you he will never return. I know his character; he is inflexiblein any resolutions formed for his own interests. If he could have made any useof me, he would have taken me with him; he leaves me in Paris, as ourseparation will conduce to his benefit;—therefore he has gone, and I amfree forever,” added Madame Danglars, in the same supplicating tone.Debray, instead of answering, allowed her to remain in an attitude of nervousinquiry.“Well?” she said at length, “do you not answer me?”“I have but one question to ask you,—what do you intend todo?”“I was going to ask you,” replied the baroness with a beatingheart.“Ah, then, you wish to ask advice of me?”“Yes; I do wish to ask your advice,” said Madame Danglars withanxious expectation.“Then if you wish to take my advice,” said the young man coldly,“I would recommend you to travel.”“To travel!” she murmured.“Certainly; as M. Danglars says, you are rich, and perfectly free. In myopinion, a withdrawal from Paris is absolutely necessary after the doublecatastrophe of Mademoiselle Danglars’ broken contract and M.Danglars’ disappearance. The world will think you abandoned and poor, forthe wife of a bankrupt would never be forgiven, were she to keep up anappearance of opulence. You have only to remain in Paris for about a fortnight,telling the world you are abandoned, and relating the details of this desertionto your best friends, who will soon spread the report. Then you can quit yourhouse, leaving your jewels and giving up your jointure, and everyone’smouth will be filled with praises of your disinterestedness. They will know youare deserted, and think you also poor, for I alone know your real financialposition, and am quite ready to give up my accounts as an honestpartner.”The dread with which the pale and motionless baroness listened to this, wasequalled by the calm indifference with which Debray had spoken.“Deserted?” she repeated; “ah, yes, I am, indeed, deserted!You are right, sir, and no one can doubt my position.”These were the only words that this proud and violently enamoured woman couldutter in response to Debray.“But then you are rich,—very rich, indeed,” continued Debray,taking out some papers from his pocket-book, which he spread upon the table.Madame Danglars did not see them; she was engaged in stilling the beatings ofher heart, and restraining the tears which were ready to gush forth. At lengtha sense of dignity prevailed, and if she did not entirely master her agitation,she at least succeeded in preventing the fall of a single tear.“Madame,” said Debray, “it is nearly six months since we havebeen associated. You furnished a principal of 100,000 francs. Our partnershipbegan in the month of April. In May we commenced operations, and in the courseof the month gained 450,000 francs. In June the profit amounted to 900,000. InJuly we added 1,700,000 francs,—it was, you know, the month of theSpanish bonds. In August we lost 300,000 francs at the beginning of the month,but on the 13th we made up for it, and we now find that our accounts, reckoningfrom the first day of partnership up to yesterday, when I closed them, showed acapital of 2,400,000 francs, that is, 1,200,000 for each of us. Now,madame,” said Debray, delivering up his accounts in the methodical mannerof a stockbroker, “there are still 80,000 francs, the interest of thismoney, in my hands.”“But,” said the baroness, “I thought you never put the moneyout to interest.”“Excuse me, madame,” said Debray coldly, “I had yourpermission to do so, and I have made use of it. There are, then, 40,000 francsfor your share, besides the 100,000 you furnished me to begin with, making inall 1,340,000 francs for your portion. Now, madame, I took the precaution ofdrawing out your money the day before yesterday; it is not long ago, you see,and I was in continual expectation of being called on to deliver up myaccounts. There is your money,—half in bank-notes, the other half inchecks payable to bearer. I say there, for as I did not consider myhouse safe enough, or lawyers sufficiently discreet, and as landed propertycarries evidence with it, and moreover since you have no right to possessanything independent of your husband, I have kept this sum, now your wholefortune, in a chest concealed under that closet, and for greater security Imyself concealed it there.“Now, madame,” continued Debray, first opening the closet, then thechest;—“now, madame, here are 800 notes of 1,000 francs each,resembling, as you see, a large book bound in iron; to this I add a certificatein the funds of 25,000 francs; then, for the odd cash, making I think about110,000 francs, here is a check upon my banker, who, not being M. Danglars,will pay you the amount, you may rest assured.”Madame Danglars mechanically took the check, the bond, and the heap ofbank-notes. This enormous fortune made no great appearance on the table. MadameDanglars, with tearless eyes, but with her breast heaving with concealedemotion, placed the bank-notes in her bag, put the certificate and check intoher pocket-book, and then, standing pale and mute, awaited one kind word ofconsolation.But she waited in vain.“Now, madame,” said Debray, “you have a splendid fortune, anincome of about 60,000 livres a year, which is enormous for a woman who cannotkeep an establishment here for a year, at least. You will be able to indulgeall your fancies; besides, should you find your income insufficient, you can,for the sake of the past, madame, make use of mine; and I am ready to offer youall I possess, on loan.”“Thank you, sir—thank you,” replied the baroness; “youforget that what you have just paid me is much more than a poor woman requires,who intends for some time, at least, to retire from the world.”Debray was, for a moment, surprised, but immediately recovering himself, hebowed with an air which seemed to say, “As you please, madame.”Madame Danglars had until then, perhaps, hoped for something; but when she sawthe careless bow of Debray, and the glance by which it was accompanied,together with his significant silence, she raised her head, and without passionor violence or even hesitation, ran downstairs, disdaining to address a lastfarewell to one who could thus part from her.“Bah,” said Debray, when she had left, “these are fineprojects! She will remain at home, read novels, and speculate at cards, sinceshe can no longer do so on the Bourse.”Then taking up his account book, he cancelled with the greatest care all theentries of the amounts he had just paid away.“I have 1,060,000 francs remaining,” he said. “What a pityMademoiselle de Villefort is dead! She suited me in every respect, and I wouldhave married her.”And he calmly waited until the twenty minutes had elapsed after MadameDanglars’ departure before he left the house. During this time heoccupied himself in making figures, with his watch by his side.Asmodeus—that diabolical personage, who would have been created by everyfertile imagination if Le Sage had not acquired the priority in his greatmasterpiece—would have enjoyed a singular spectacle, if he had lifted upthe roof of the little house in the Rue Saint-Germain-des-Prés, while Debraywas casting up his figures.Above the room in which Debray had been dividing two millions and a half withMadame Danglars was another, inhabited by persons who have played too prominenta part in the incidents we have related for their appearance not to create someinterest.Mercédès and Albert were in that room.Mercédès was much changed within the last few days; not that even in her daysof fortune she had ever dressed with the magnificent display which makes us nolonger able to recognize a woman when she appears in a plain and simple attire;nor indeed, had she fallen into that state of depression where it is impossibleto conceal the garb of misery; no, the change in Mercédès was that her eye nolonger sparkled, her lips no longer smiled, and there was now a hesitation inuttering the words which formerly sprang so fluently from her ready wit.It was not poverty which had broken her spirit; it was not a want of couragewhich rendered her poverty burdensome. Mercédès, although deposed from theexalted position she had occupied, lost in the sphere she had now chosen, likea person passing from a room splendidly lighted into utter darkness, appearedlike a queen, fallen from her palace to a hovel, and who, reduced to strictnecessity, could neither become reconciled to the earthen vessels she washerself forced to place upon the table, nor to the humble pallet which hadbecome her bed.The beautiful Catalane and noble countess had lost both her proud glance andcharming smile, because she saw nothing but misery around her; the walls werehung with one of the gray papers which economical landlords choose as notlikely to show the dirt; the floor was uncarpeted; the furniture attracted theattention to the poor attempt at luxury; indeed, everything offended eyesaccustomed to refinement and elegance.Madame de Morcerf had lived there since leaving her house; the continualsilence of the spot oppressed her; still, seeing that Albert continuallywatched her countenance to judge the state of her feelings, she constrainedherself to assume a monotonous smile of the lips alone, which, contrasted withthe sweet and beaming expression that usually shone from her eyes, seemed like“moonlight on a statue,”—yielding light without warmth.Albert, too, was ill at ease; the remains of luxury prevented him from sinkinginto his actual position. If he wished to go out without gloves, his handsappeared too white; if he wished to walk through the town, his boots seemed toohighly polished. Yet these two noble and intelligent creatures, united by theindissoluble ties of maternal and filial love, had succeeded in tacitlyunderstanding one another, and economizing their stores, and Albert had beenable to tell his mother without extorting a change of countenance:“Mother, we have no more money.”Mercédès had never known misery; she had often, in her youth, spoken ofpoverty, but between want and necessity, those synonymous words, there is awide difference.Amongst the Catalans, Mercédès wished for a thousand things, but still shenever really wanted any. So long as the nets were good, they caught fish; andso long as they sold their fish, they were able to buy twine for new nets. Andthen, shut out from friendship, having but one affection, which could not bemixed up with her ordinary pursuits, she thought of herself—of no one butherself. Upon the little she earned she lived as well as she could; now therewere two to be supported, and nothing to live upon.Winter approached. Mercédès had no fire in that cold and naked room—she,who was accustomed to stoves which heated the house from the hall to theboudoir; she had not even one little flower—she whose apartment had beena conservatory of costly exotics. But she had her son. Hitherto the excitementof fulfilling a duty had sustained them. Excitement, like enthusiasm, sometimesrenders us unconscious to the things of earth. But the excitement had calmeddown, and they felt themselves obliged to descend from dreams to reality; afterhaving exhausted the ideal, they found they must talk of the actual.“Mother,” exclaimed Albert, just as Madame Danglars was descendingthe stairs, “let us reckon our riches, if you please; I want capital tobuild my plans upon.”“Capital—nothing!” replied Mercédès with a mournful smile.“No, mother,—capital 3,000 francs. And I have an idea of ourleading a delightful life upon this 3,000 francs.”“Child!” sighed Mercédès.“Alas, dear mother,” said the young man, “I have unhappilyspent too much of your money not to know the value of it. These 3,000 francsare enormous, and I intend building upon this foundation a miraculous certaintyfor the future.”“You say this, my dear boy; but do you think we ought to accept these3,000 francs?” said Mercédès, coloring.“I think so,” answered Albert in a firm tone. “We will acceptthem the more readily, since we have them not here; you know they are buried inthe garden of the little house in the Allées de Meilhan, at Marseilles. With200 francs we can reach Marseilles.”“With 200 francs?—are you sure, Albert?”“Oh, as for that, I have made inquiries respecting the diligences andsteamboats, and my calculations are made. You will take your place in thecoupé to Châlons. You see, mother, I treat you handsomely forthirty-five francs.”Albert then took a pen, and wrote:                                                         Frs.  Coupé, thirty-five francs.............................. 35.  From Châlons to Lyons you will go on by the steamboat..  6.  From Lyons to Avignon (still by steamboat)............. 16.  From Avignon to Marseilles, seven francs...............  7.  Expenses on the road, about fifty francs............... 50.  Total................................................. 114 frs.“Let us put down 120,” added Albert, smiling. “You see I amgenerous, am I not, mother?”“But you, my poor child?”“I? do you not see that I reserve eighty francs for myself? A young mandoes not require luxuries; besides, I know what travelling is.”“With a post-chaise and valet de chambre?”“Any way, mother.”“Well, be it so. But these 200 francs?”“Here they are, and 200 more besides. See, I have sold my watch for 100francs, and the guard and seals for 300. How fortunate that the ornaments wereworth more than the watch. Still the same story of superfluities! Now I thinkwe are rich, since instead of the 114 francs we require for the journey we findourselves in possession of 250.”“But we owe something in this house?”“Thirty francs; but I pay that out of my 150 francs,—that isunderstood,—and as I require only eighty francs for my journey, you see Iam overwhelmed with luxury. But that is not all. What do you say to this,mother?”And Albert took out of a little pocket-book with golden clasps, a remnant ofhis old fancies, or perhaps a tender souvenir from one of the mysterious andveiled ladies who used to knock at his little door,—Albert took out ofthis pocket-book a note of 1,000 francs.“What is this?” asked Mercédès.“A thousand francs.”“But whence have you obtained them?”“Listen to me, mother, and do not yield too much to agitation.” AndAlbert, rising, kissed his mother on both cheeks, then stood looking at her.“You cannot imagine, mother, how beautiful I think you!” said theyoung man, impressed with a profound feeling of filial love. “You are,indeed, the most beautiful and most noble woman I ever saw!”“Dear child!” said Mercédès, endeavoring in vain to restrain a tearwhich glistened in the corner of her eye. “Indeed, you only wantedmisfortune to change my love for you to admiration. I am not unhappy while Ipossess my son!”“Ah, just so,” said Albert; “here begins the trial. Do youknow the decision we have come to, mother?”“Have we come to any?”“Yes; it is decided that you are to live at Marseilles, and that I am toleave for Africa, where I will earn for myself the right to use the name I nowbear, instead of the one I have thrown aside.” Mercédès sighed.“Well, mother, I yesterday engaged myself as substitute in theSpahis,”[25]added the young man, lowering his eyes with a certain feeling of shame, foreven he was unconscious of the sublimity of his self-abasement. “Ithought my body was my own, and that I might sell it. I yesterday took theplace of another. I sold myself for more than I thought I was worth,” headded, attempting to smile; “I fetched 2,000 francs.”“Then these 1,000 francs——” said Mercédès, shuddering.“Are the half of the sum, mother; the other will be paid in ayear.”Mercédès raised her eyes to heaven with an expression it would be impossible todescribe, and tears, which had hitherto been restrained, now yielded to heremotion, and ran down her cheeks.“The price of his blood!” she murmured.“Yes, if I am killed,” said Albert, laughing. “But I assureyou, mother, I have a strong intention of defending my person, and I never felthalf so strong an inclination to live as I do now.”“Merciful Heavens!”“Besides, mother, why should you make up your mind that I am to bekilled? Has Lamoricière, that Ney of the South, been killed? Has Changarnierbeen killed? Has Bedeau been killed? Has Morrel, whom we know, been killed?Think of your joy, mother, when you see me return with an embroidered uniform!I declare, I expect to look magnificent in it, and chose that regiment onlyfrom vanity.”Mercédès sighed while endeavoring to smile; the devoted mother felt that sheought not to allow the whole weight of the sacrifice to fall upon her son.“Well, now you understand, mother!” continued Albert; “hereare more than 4,000 francs settled on you; upon these you can live at least twoyears.”“Do you think so?” said Mercédès.These words were uttered in so mournful a tone that their real meaning did notescape Albert; he felt his heart beat, and taking his mother’s handwithin his own he said, tenderly:“Yes, you will live!”“I shall live!—then you will not leave me, Albert?”“Mother, I must go,” said Albert in a firm, calm voice; “youlove me too well to wish me to remain useless and idle with you; besides, Ihave signed.”“You will obey your own wish and the will of Heaven!”“Not my own wish, mother, but reason—necessity. Are we not twodespairing creatures? What is life to you?—Nothing. What is life tome?—Very little without you, mother; for believe me, but for you I shouldhave ceased to live on the day I doubted my father and renounced his name.Well, I will live, if you promise me still to hope; and if you grant me thecare of your future prospects, you will redouble my strength. Then I will go tothe governor of Algeria; he has a royal heart, and is essentially a soldier; Iwill tell him my gloomy story. I will beg him to turn his eyes now and thentowards me, and if he keep his word and interest himself for me, in six monthsI shall be an officer, or dead. If I am an officer, your fortune is certain,for I shall have money enough for both, and, moreover, a name we shall both beproud of, since it will be our own. If I am killed—well then mother, youcan also die, and there will be an end of our misfortunes.”“It is well,” replied Mercédès, with her eloquent glance;“you are right, my love; let us prove to those who are watching ouractions that we are worthy of compassion.”“But let us not yield to gloomy apprehensions,” said the young man;“I assure you we are, or rather we shall be, very happy. You are a womanat once full of spirit and resignation; I have become simple in my tastes, andam without passion, I hope. Once in service, I shall be rich—once in M.Dantès’ house, you will be at rest. Let us strive, I beseechyou,—let us strive to be cheerful.”“Yes, let us strive, for you ought to live, and to be happy,Albert.”“And so our division is made, mother,” said the young man,affecting ease of mind. “We can now part; come, I shall engage yourpassage.”“And you, my dear boy?”“I shall stay here for a few days longer; we must accustom ourselves toparting. I want recommendations and some information relative to Africa. I willjoin you again at Marseilles.”“Well, be it so—let us part,” said Mercédès, folding aroundher shoulders the only shawl she had taken away, and which accidentallyhappened to be a valuable black cashmere. Albert gathered up his papershastily, rang the bell to pay the thirty francs he owed to the landlord, andoffering his arm to his mother, they descended the stairs.Someone was walking down before them, and this person, hearing the rustling ofa silk dress, turned around. “Debray!” muttered Albert.“You, Morcerf?” replied the secretary, resting on the stairs.Curiosity had vanquished the desire of preserving his incognito, and hewas recognized. It was, indeed, strange in this unknown spot to find the youngman whose misfortunes had made so much noise in Paris.“Morcerf!” repeated Debray. Then noticing in the dim light thestill youthful and veiled figure of Madame de Morcerf:“Pardon me,” he added with a smile, “I leave you,Albert.” Albert understood his thoughts.“Mother,” he said, turning towards Mercédès, “this is M.Debray, secretary of the Minister for the Interior, once a friend ofmine.”“How once?” stammered Debray; “what do you mean?”“I say so, M. Debray, because I have no friends now, and I ought not tohave any. I thank you for having recognized me, sir.” Debray steppedforward, and cordially pressed the hand of his interlocutor.“Believe me, dear Albert,” he said, with all the emotion he wascapable of feeling,—“believe me, I feel deeply for yourmisfortunes, and if in any way I can serve you, I am yours.”“Thank you, sir,” said Albert, smiling. “In the midst of ourmisfortunes, we are still rich enough not to require assistance from anyone. Weare leaving Paris, and when our journey is paid, we shall have 5,000 francsleft.”The blood mounted to the temples of Debray, who held a million in hispocket-book, and unimaginative as he was he could not help reflecting that thesame house had contained two women, one of whom, justly dishonored, had left itpoor with 1,500,000 francs under her cloak, while the other, unjustly stricken,but sublime in her misfortune, was yet rich with a few deniers. This paralleldisturbed his usual politeness, the philosophy he witnessed appalled him, hemuttered a few words of general civility and ran downstairs.That day the minister’s clerks and the subordinates had a great deal toput up with from his ill-humor. But that same night, he found himself thepossessor of a fine house, situated on the Boulevard de la Madeleine, and anincome of 50,000 livres.The next day, just as Debray was signing the deed, that is about fiveo’clock in the afternoon, Madame de Morcerf, after having affectionatelyembraced her son, entered the coupé of the diligence, which closed uponher.A man was hidden in Lafitte’s banking-house, behind one of the littlearched windows which are placed above each desk; he saw Mercédès enter thediligence, and he also saw Albert withdraw. Then he passed his hand across hisforehead, which was clouded with doubt.“Alas,” he exclaimed, “how can I restore the happiness I havetaken away from these poor innocent creatures? God help me!” Chapter 107. TheLions’ DenOne division of LaForce, in which the most dangerous and desperate prisoners are confined, iscalled the court of Saint-Bernard. The prisoners, in their expressive language,have named it the “Lions’ Den,” probably because the captivespossess teeth which frequently gnaw the bars, and sometimes the keepers also.It is a prison within a prison; the walls are double the thickness of the rest.The gratings are every day carefully examined by jailers, whose herculeanproportions and cold pitiless expression prove them to have been chosen toreign over their subjects for their superior activity and intelligence.The courtyard of this quarter is enclosed by enormous walls, over which the sunglances obliquely, when it deigns to penetrate into this gulf of moral andphysical deformity. On this paved yard are to be seen,—pacing to and frofrom morning till night, pale, careworn, and haggard, like so manyshadows,—the men whom justice holds beneath the steel she is sharpening.There, crouched against the side of the wall which attracts and retains themost heat, they may be seen sometimes talking to one another, but morefrequently alone, watching the door, which sometimes opens to call forth onefrom the gloomy assemblage, or to throw in another outcast from society.The court of Saint-Bernard has its own particular apartment for the receptionof guests; it is a long rectangle, divided by two upright gratings placed at adistance of three feet from one another to prevent a visitor from shaking handswith or passing anything to the prisoners. It is a wretched, damp, nay, evenhorrible spot, more especially when we consider the agonizing conferences whichhave taken place between those iron bars. And yet, frightful though this spotmay be, it is looked upon as a kind of paradise by the men whose days arenumbered; it is so rare for them to leave the Lions’ Den for any otherplace than the barrier Saint-Jacques, the galleys! or solitary confinement.In the court which we have attempted to describe, and from which a damp vaporwas rising, a young man with his hands in his pockets, who had excited muchcuriosity among the inhabitants of the “Den,” might be seenwalking. The cut of his clothes would have made him pass for an elegant man, ifthose clothes had not been torn to shreds; still they did not show signs ofwear, and the fine cloth, beneath the careful hands of the prisoner, soonrecovered its gloss in the parts which were still perfect, for the wearer triedhis best to make it assume the appearance of a new coat. He bestowed the sameattention upon the cambric front of a shirt, which had considerably changed incolor since his entrance into the prison, and he polished his varnished bootswith the corner of a handkerchief embroidered with initials surmounted by acoronet.Some of the inmates of the “Lions’ Den” were watching theoperations of the prisoner’s toilet with considerable interest.“See, the prince is pluming himself,” said one of the thieves.“He’s a fine looking fellow,” said another; “if he hadonly a comb and hair-grease, he’d take the shine off the gentlemen inwhite kids.”“His coat looks nearly new, and his boots are brilliant. It is pleasantto have such well-dressed brethren; and those gendarmes behaved shamefully.What jealousy; to tear such clothes!”“He looks like a big-bug,” said another; “dresses in finestyle. And, then, to be here so young! Oh, what larks!”Meanwhile the object of this hideous admiration approached the wicket, againstwhich one of the keepers was leaning.“Come, sir,” he said, “lend me twenty francs; you will soonbe paid; you run no risks with me. Remember, I have relations who possess moremillions than you have deniers. Come, I beseech you, lend me twenty francs, sothat I may buy a dressing-gown; it is intolerable always to be in a coat andboots! And what a coat, sir, for a prince of the Cavalcanti!”The keeper turned his back, and shrugged his shoulders; he did not even laughat what would have caused anyone else to do so; he had heard so many utter thesame things,—indeed, he heard nothing else.“Come,” said Andrea, “you are a man void of compassion;I’ll have you turned out.”This made the keeper turn around, and he burst into a loud laugh. The prisonersthen approached and formed a circle.“I tell you that with that wretched sum,” continued Andrea,“I could obtain a coat, and a room in which to receive the illustriousvisitor I am daily expecting.”“Of course—of course,” said theprisoners;—“anyone can see he’s a gentleman!”“Well, then, lend him the twenty francs,” said the keeper, leaningon the other shoulder; “surely you will not refuse a comrade!”“I am no comrade of these people,” said the young man, proudly,“you have no right to insult me thus.”The thieves looked at one another with low murmurs, and a storm gathered overthe head of the aristocratic prisoner, raised less by his own words than by themanner of the keeper. The latter, sure of quelling the tempest when the wavesbecame too violent, allowed them to rise to a certain pitch that he might berevenged on the importunate Andrea, and besides it would afford him somerecreation during the long day.The thieves had already approached Andrea, some screaming, “Lasavate—La savate!”[26]a cruel operation, which consists in cuffing a comrade who may have fallen intodisgrace, not with an old shoe, but with an iron-heeled one. Others proposedthe anguille, another kind of recreation, in which a handkerchief isfilled with sand, pebbles, and two-sous pieces, when they have them, which thewretches beat like a flail over the head and shoulders of the unhappy sufferer.“Let us horsewhip the fine gentleman!” said others.But Andrea, turning towards them, winked his eyes, rolled his tongue around hischeeks, and smacked his lips in a manner equivalent to a hundred words amongthe bandits when forced to be silent. It was a Masonic sign Caderousse hadtaught him. He was immediately recognized as one of them; the handkerchief wasthrown down, and the iron-heeled shoe replaced on the foot of the wretch towhom it belonged.Some voices were heard to say that the gentleman was right; that he intended tobe civil, in his way, and that they would set the example of liberty ofconscience,—and the mob retired. The keeper was so stupefied at thisscene that he took Andrea by the hands and began examining his person,attributing the sudden submission of the inmates of the Lions’ Den tosomething more substantial than mere fascination.Andrea made no resistance, although he protested against it. Suddenly a voicewas heard at the wicket.“Benedetto!” exclaimed an inspector. The keeper relaxed his hold.“I am called,” said Andrea.“To the visitors’ room!” said the same voice.“You see someone pays me a visit. Ah, my dear sir, you will see whether aCavalcanti is to be treated like a common person!”And Andrea, gliding through the court like a black shadow, rushed out throughthe wicket, leaving his comrades, and even the keeper, lost in wonder.Certainly a call to the visitors’ room had scarcely astonished Andrealess than themselves, for the wily youth, instead of making use of hisprivilege of waiting to be claimed on his entry into La Force, had maintained arigid silence.“Everything,” he said, “proves me to be under the protectionof some powerful person,—this sudden fortune, the facility with which Ihave overcome all obstacles, an unexpected family and an illustrious nameawarded to me, gold showered down upon me, and the most splendid alliancesabout to be entered into. An unhappy lapse of fortune and the absence of myprotector have cast me down, certainly, but not forever. The hand which hasretreated for a while will be again stretched forth to save me at the verymoment when I shall think myself sinking into the abyss. Why should I risk animprudent step? It might alienate my protector. He has two means of extricatingme from this dilemma,—the one by a mysterious escape, managed throughbribery; the other by buying off my judges with gold. I will say and do nothinguntil I am convinced that he has quite abandoned me, andthen——”Andrea had formed a plan which was tolerably clever. The unfortunate youth wasintrepid in the attack, and rude in the defence. He had borne with the publicprison, and with privations of all sorts; still, by degrees nature, or rathercustom, had prevailed, and he suffered from being naked, dirty, and hungry. Itwas at this moment of discomfort that the inspector’s voice called him tothe visiting-room. Andrea felt his heart leap with joy. It was too soon for avisit from the examining magistrate, and too late for one from the director ofthe prison, or the doctor; it must, then, be the visitor he hoped for. Behindthe grating of the room into which Andrea had been led, he saw, while his eyesdilated with surprise, the dark and intelligent face of M. Bertuccio, who wasalso gazing with sad astonishment upon the iron bars, the bolted doors, and theshadow which moved behind the other grating.“Ah,” said Andrea, deeply affected.“Good morning, Benedetto,” said Bertuccio, with his deep, hollowvoice.“You—you?” said the young man, looking fearfully around him.“Do you not recognize me, unhappy child?”“Silence,—be silent!” said Andrea, who knew the delicatesense of hearing possessed by the walls; “for Heaven’s sake, do notspeak so loud!”“You wish to speak with me alone, do you not?” said Bertuccio.“Oh, yes.”“That is well.”And Bertuccio, feeling in his pocket, signed to a keeper whom he saw throughthe window of the wicket.“Read?” he said.“What is that?” asked Andrea.“An order to conduct you to a room, and to leave you there to talk tome.”“Oh,” cried Andrea, leaping with joy. Then he mentallyadded,—“Still my unknown protector! I am not forgotten. They wishfor secrecy, since we are to converse in a private room. I understand,Bertuccio has been sent by my protector.”The keeper spoke for a moment with an official, then opened the iron gates andconducted Andrea to a room on the first floor. The room was whitewashed, as isthe custom in prisons, but it looked quite brilliant to a prisoner, though astove, a bed, a chair, and a table formed the whole of its sumptuous furniture.Bertuccio sat down upon the chair, Andrea threw himself upon the bed; thekeeper retired.“Now,” said the steward, “what have you to tell me?”“And you?” said Andrea.“You speak first.”“Oh, no. You must have much to tell me, since you have come to seekme.”“Well, be it so. You have continued your course of villany; you haverobbed—you have assassinated.”“Well, I should say! If you had me taken to a private room only to tellme this, you might have saved yourself the trouble. I know all these things.But there are some with which, on the contrary, I am not acquainted. Let ustalk of those, if you please. Who sent you?”“Come, come, you are going on quickly, M. Benedetto!”“Yes, and to the point. Let us dispense with useless words. Who sendsyou?”“No one.”“How did you know I was in prison?”“I recognized you, some time since, as the insolent dandy who sogracefully mounted his horse in the Champs-Élysées.”“Oh, the Champs-Élysées? Ah, yes; we burn, as they say at the game ofpincette. The Champs-Élysées? Come, let us talk a little about myfather.”“Who, then, am I?”“You, sir?—you are my adopted father. But it was not you, Ipresume, who placed at my disposal 100,000 francs, which I spent in four orfive months; it was not you who manufactured an Italian gentleman for myfather; it was not you who introduced me into the world, and had me invited toa certain dinner at Auteuil, which I fancy I am eating at this moment, incompany with the most distinguished people in Paris—amongst the rest witha certain procureur, whose acquaintance I did very wrong not to cultivate, forhe would have been very useful to me just now;—it was not you, in fact,who bailed me for one or two millions, when the fatal discovery of my littlesecret took place. Come, speak, my worthy Corsican, speak!”“What do you wish me to say?”“I will help you. You were speaking of the Champs-Élysées just now,worthy foster-father.”“Well?”“Well, in the Champs-Élysées there resides a very rich gentleman.”“At whose house you robbed and murdered, did you not?”“I believe I did.”“The Count of Monte Cristo?”“’Tis you who have named him, as M. Racine says. Well, am I to rushinto his arms, and strain him to my heart, crying, ‘My father, myfather!’ like MonsieurPixérécourt.”[27]“Do not let us jest,” gravely replied Bertuccio, “and darenot to utter that name again as you have pronounced it.”“Bah,” said Andrea, a little overcome, by the solemnity ofBertuccio’s manner, “why not?”“Because the person who bears it is too highly favored by Heaven to bethe father of such a wretch as you.”“Oh, these are fine words.”“And there will be fine doings, if you do not take care.”“Menaces—I do not fear them. I will say——”“Do you think you are engaged with a pygmy like yourself?” saidBertuccio, in so calm a tone, and with so steadfast a look, that Andrea wasmoved to the very soul. “Do you think you have to do with galley-slaves,or novices in the world? Benedetto, you are fallen into terrible hands; theyare ready to open for you—make use of them. Do not play with thethunderbolt they have laid aside for a moment, but which they can take up againinstantly, if you attempt to intercept their movements.”“My father—I will know who my father is,” said the obstinateyouth; “I will perish if I must, but I will know it. What doesscandal signify to me? What possessions, what reputation, what‘pull,’ as Beauchamp says,—have I? You great people alwayslose something by scandal, notwithstanding your millions. Come, who is myfather?”“I came to tell you.”“Ah,” cried Benedetto, his eyes sparkling with joy. Just then thedoor opened, and the jailer, addressing himself to Bertuccio, said:“Excuse me, sir, but the examining magistrate is waiting for theprisoner.”“And so closes our interview,” said Andrea to the worthy steward;“I wish the troublesome fellow were at the devil!”“I will return tomorrow,” said Bertuccio.“Good! Gendarmes, I am at your service. Ah, sir, do leave a few crownsfor me at the gate that I may have some things I am in need of!”“It shall be done,” replied Bertuccio.Andrea extended his hand; Bertuccio kept his own in his pocket, and merelyjingled a few pieces of money.“That’s what I mean,” said Andrea, endeavoring to smile,quite overcome by the strange tranquillity of Bertuccio.“Can I be deceived?” he murmured, as he stepped into the oblong andgrated vehicle which they call “the salad basket.”“Never mind, we shall see! Tomorrow, then!” he added, turningtowards Bertuccio.“Tomorrow!” replied the steward. Chapter 108. The JudgeWe remember that theAbbé Busoni remained alone with Noirtier in the chamber of death, and that theold man and the priest were the sole guardians of the young girl’s body.Perhaps it was the Christian exhortations of the abbé, perhaps his kindcharity, perhaps his persuasive words, which had restored the courage ofNoirtier, for ever since he had conversed with the priest his violent despairhad yielded to a calm resignation which surprised all who knew his excessiveaffection for Valentine.M. de Villefort had not seen his father since the morning of the death. Thewhole establishment had been changed; another valet was engaged for himself, anew servant for Noirtier, two women had entered Madame de Villefort’sservice,—in fact, everywhere, to the concierge and coachmen, new faceswere presented to the different masters of the house, thus widening thedivision which had always existed between the members of the same family. Theassizes, also, were about to begin, and Villefort, shut up in his room, exertedhimself with feverish anxiety in drawing up the case against the murderer ofCaderousse. This affair, like all those in which the Count of Monte Cristo hadinterfered, caused a great sensation in Paris. The proofs were certainly notconvincing, since they rested upon a few words written by an escapedgalley-slave on his death-bed, and who might have been actuated by hatred orrevenge in accusing his companion. But the mind of the procureur was made up;he felt assured that Benedetto was guilty, and he hoped by his skill inconducting this aggravated case to flatter his self-love, which was about theonly vulnerable point left in his frozen heart.The case was therefore prepared owing to the incessant labor of Villefort, whowished it to be the first on the list in the coming assizes. He had beenobliged to seclude himself more than ever, to evade the enormous number ofapplications presented to him for the purpose of obtaining tickets of admissionto the court on the day of trial. And then so short a time had elapsed sincethe death of poor Valentine, and the gloom which overshadowed the house was sorecent, that no one wondered to see the father so absorbed in his professionalduties, which were the only means he had of dissipating his grief.Once only had Villefort seen his father; it was the day after that upon whichBertuccio had paid his second visit to Benedetto, when the latter was to learnhis father’s name. The magistrate, harassed and fatigued, had descendedto the garden of his house, and in a gloomy mood, similar to that in whichTarquin lopped off the tallest poppies, he began knocking off with his cane thelong and dying branches of the rose-trees, which, placed along the avenue,seemed like the spectres of the brilliant flowers which had bloomed in the pastseason.More than once he had reached that part of the garden where the famous boardedgate stood overlooking the deserted enclosure, always returning by the samepath, to begin his walk again, at the same pace and with the same gesture, whenhe accidentally turned his eyes towards the house, whence he heard the noisyplay of his son, who had returned from school to spend the Sunday and Mondaywith his mother.While doing so, he observed M. Noirtier at one of the open windows, where theold man had been placed that he might enjoy the last rays of the sun which yetyielded some heat, and was now shining upon the dying flowers and red leaves ofthe creeper which twined around the balcony.The eye of the old man was riveted upon a spot which Villefort could scarcelydistinguish. His glance was so full of hate, of ferocity, and savageimpatience, that Villefort turned out of the path he had been pursuing, to seeupon what person this dark look was directed.Then he saw beneath a thick clump of linden-trees, which were nearly divestedof foliage, Madame de Villefort sitting with a book in her hand, the perusal ofwhich she frequently interrupted to smile upon her son, or to throw back hiselastic ball, which he obstinately threw from the drawing-room into the garden.Villefort became pale; he understood the old man’s meaning.Noirtier continued to look at the same object, but suddenly his glance wastransferred from the wife to the husband, and Villefort himself had to submitto the searching investigation of eyes, which, while changing their directionand even their language, had lost none of their menacing expression. Madame deVillefort, unconscious of the passions that exhausted their fire over her head,at that moment held her son’s ball, and was making signs to him toreclaim it with a kiss. Edward begged for a long while, the maternal kissprobably not offering sufficient recompense for the trouble he must take toobtain it; however at length he decided, leaped out of the window into acluster of heliotropes and daisies, and ran to his mother, his foreheadstreaming with perspiration. Madame de Villefort wiped his forehead, pressedher lips upon it, and sent him back with the ball in one hand and some bonbonsin the other.Villefort, drawn by an irresistible attraction, like that of the bird to theserpent, walked towards the house. As he approached it, Noirtier’s gazefollowed him, and his eyes appeared of such a fiery brightness that Villefortfelt them pierce to the depths of his heart. In that earnest look might be reada deep reproach, as well as a terrible menace. Then Noirtier raised his eyes toheaven, as though to remind his son of a forgotten oath.“It is well, sir,” replied Villefort from below,—“it iswell; have patience but one day longer; what I have said I will do.”Noirtier seemed to be calmed by these words, and turned his eyes withindifference to the other side. Villefort violently unbuttoned his greatcoat,which seemed to strangle him, and passing his livid hand across his forehead,entered his study.The night was cold and still; the family had all retired to rest but Villefort,who alone remained up, and worked till five o’clock in the morning,reviewing the last interrogatories made the night before by the examiningmagistrates, compiling the depositions of the witnesses, and putting thefinishing stroke to the deed of accusation, which was one of the most energeticand best conceived of any he had yet delivered.The next day, Monday, was the first sitting of the assizes. The morning dawneddull and gloomy, and Villefort saw the dim gray light shine upon the lines hehad traced in red ink. The magistrate had slept for a short time while the lampsent forth its final struggles; its flickerings awoke him, and he found hisfingers as damp and purple as though they had been dipped in blood.He opened the window; a bright yellow streak crossed the sky, and seemed todivide in half the poplars, which stood out in black relief on the horizon. Inthe clover-fields beyond the chestnut-trees, a lark was mounting up to heaven,while pouring out her clear morning song. The damps of the dew bathed the headof Villefort, and refreshed his memory.“Today,” he said with an effort,—“today the man whoholds the blade of justice must strike wherever there is guilt.”Involuntarily his eyes wandered towards the window of Noirtier’s room,where he had seen him the preceding night. The curtain was drawn, and yet theimage of his father was so vivid to his mind that he addressed the closedwindow as though it had been open, and as if through the opening he had beheldthe menacing old man.“Yes,” he murmured,—“yes, be satisfied.”His head dropped upon his chest, and in this position he paced his study; thenhe threw himself, dressed as he was, upon a sofa, less to sleep than to resthis limbs, cramped with cold and study. By degrees everyone awoke. Villefort,from his study, heard the successive noises which accompany the life of ahouse,—the opening and shutting of doors, the ringing of Madame deVillefort’s bell, to summon the waiting-maid, mingled with the firstshouts of the child, who rose full of the enjoyment of his age. Villefort alsorang; his new valet brought him the papers, and with them a cup of chocolate.“What are you bringing me?” said he.“A cup of chocolate.”“I did not ask for it. Who has paid me this attention?”“My mistress, sir. She said you would have to speak a great deal in themurder case, and that you should take something to keep up yourstrength;” and the valet placed the cup on the table nearest to the sofa,which was, like all the rest, covered with papers.The valet then left the room. Villefort looked for an instant with a gloomyexpression, then, suddenly, taking it up with a nervous motion, he swallowedits contents at one draught. It might have been thought that he hoped thebeverage would be mortal, and that he sought for death to deliver him from aduty which he would rather die than fulfil. He then rose, and paced his roomwith a smile it would have been terrible to witness. The chocolate wasinoffensive, for M. de Villefort felt no effects.The breakfast-hour arrived, but M. de Villefort was not at table. The valetre-entered.“Madame de Villefort wishes to remind you, sir,” he said,“that eleven o’clock has just struck, and that the trial commencesat twelve.”“Well,” said Villefort, “what then?”“Madame de Villefort is dressed; she is quite ready, and wishes to knowif she is to accompany you, sir?”“Where to?”“To the Palais.”“What to do?”“My mistress wishes much to be present at the trial.”“Ah,” said Villefort, with a startling accent; “does she wishthat?”The servant drew back and said, “If you wish to go alone, sir, I will goand tell my mistress.”Villefort remained silent for a moment, and dented his pale cheeks with hisnails.“Tell your mistress,” he at length answered, “that I wish tospeak to her, and I beg she will wait for me in her own room.”“Yes, sir.”“Then come to dress and shave me.”“Directly, sir.”The valet re-appeared almost instantly, and, having shaved his master, assistedhim to dress entirely in black. When he had finished, he said:“My mistress said she should expect you, sir, as soon as you had finisheddressing.”“I am going to her.”And Villefort, with his papers under his arm and hat in hand, directed hissteps toward the apartment of his wife.At the door he paused for a moment to wipe his damp, pale brow. He then enteredthe room. Madame de Villefort was sitting on an ottoman and impatiently turningover the leaves of some newspapers and pamphlets which young Edward, by way ofamusing himself, was tearing to pieces before his mother could finish readingthem. She was dressed to go out, her bonnet was placed beside her on a chair,and her gloves were on her hands.“Ah, here you are, monsieur,” she said in her naturally calm voice;“but how pale you are! Have you been working all night? Why did you notcome down to breakfast? Well, will you take me, or shall I take Edward?”Madame de Villefort had multiplied her questions in order to gain one answer,but to all her inquiries M. de Villefort remained mute and cold as a statue.“Edward,” said Villefort, fixing an imperious glance on the child,“go and play in the drawing-room, my dear; I wish to speak to yourmamma.”Madame de Villefort shuddered at the sight of that cold countenance, thatresolute tone, and the awfully strange preliminaries. Edward raised his head,looked at his mother, and then, finding that she did not confirm the order,began cutting off the heads of his leaden soldiers.“Edward,” cried M. de Villefort, so harshly that the child startedup from the floor, “do you hear me?—Go!”The child, unaccustomed to such treatment, arose, pale and trembling; it wouldbe difficult to say whether his emotion were caused by fear or passion. Hisfather went up to him, took him in his arms, and kissed his forehead.“Go,” he said: “go, my child.” Edward ran out.M. de Villefort went to the door, which he closed behind the child, and bolted.“Dear me!” said the young woman, endeavoring to read herhusband’s inmost thoughts, while a smile passed over her countenancewhich froze the impassibility of Villefort; “what is the matter?”“Madame, where do you keep the poison you generally use?” said themagistrate, without any introduction, placing himself between his wife and thedoor.Madame de Villefort must have experienced something of the sensation of a birdwhich, looking up, sees the murderous trap closing over its head.A hoarse, broken tone, which was neither a cry nor a sigh, escaped from her,while she became deadly pale.“Monsieur,” she said, “I—I do not understandyou.”And, in her first paroxysm of terror, she had raised herself from the sofa, inthe next, stronger very likely than the other, she fell down again on thecushions.“I asked you,” continued Villefort, in a perfectly calm tone,“where you conceal the poison by the aid of which you have killed myfather-in-law, M. de Saint-Méran, my mother-in-law, Madame de Saint-Méran,Barrois, and my daughter Valentine.”“Ah, sir,” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, clasping her hands,“what do you say?”“It is not for you to interrogate, but to answer.”“Is it to the judge or to the husband?” stammered Madame deVillefort.“To the judge—to the judge, madame!” It was terrible tobehold the frightful pallor of that woman, the anguish of her look, thetrembling of her whole frame.“Ah, sir,” she muttered, “ah, sir,” and this was all.“You do not answer, madame!” exclaimed the terrible interrogator.Then he added, with a smile yet more terrible than his anger, “It istrue, then; you do not deny it!” She moved forward. “And you cannotdeny it!” added Villefort, extending his hand toward her, as though toseize her in the name of justice. “You have accomplished these differentcrimes with impudent address, but which could only deceive those whoseaffections for you blinded them. Since the death of Madame de Saint-Méran, Ihave known that a poisoner lived in my house. M. d’Avrigny warned me ofit. After the death of Barrois my suspicions were directed towards anangel,—those suspicions which, even when there is no crime, are alwaysalive in my heart; but after the death of Valentine, there has been no doubt inmy mind, madame, and not only in mine, but in those of others; thus your crime,known by two persons, suspected by many, will soon become public, and, as Itold you just now, you no longer speak to the husband, but to the judge.”The young woman hid her face in her hands.“Oh, sir,” she stammered, “I beseech you, do not believeappearances.”“Are you, then, a coward?” cried Villefort, in a contemptuousvoice. “But I have always observed that poisoners were cowards. Can yoube a coward, you, who have had the courage to witness the death of two old menand a young girl murdered by you?”“Sir! sir!”“Can you be a coward?” continued Villefort, with increasingexcitement, “you, who could count, one by one, the minutes of four deathagonies? You, who have arranged your infernal plans, and removed thebeverages with a talent and precision almost miraculous? Have you, then, whohave calculated everything with such nicety, have you forgotten to calculateone thing—I mean where the revelation of your crimes will lead you to?Oh, it is impossible—you must have saved some surer, more subtle anddeadly poison than any other, that you might escape the punishment that youdeserve. You have done this—I hope so, at least.”Madame de Villefort stretched out her hands, and fell on her knees.“I understand,” he said, “you confess; but a confession madeto the judges, a confession made at the last moment, extorted when the crimecannot be denied, diminishes not the punishment inflicted on the guilty!”“The punishment?” exclaimed Madame de Villefort, “thepunishment, monsieur? Twice you have pronounced that word!”“Certainly. Did you hope to escape it because you were four times guilty?Did you think the punishment would be withheld because you are the wife of himwho pronounces it?—No, madame, no; the scaffold awaits the poisoner,whoever she may be, unless, as I just said, the poisoner has taken theprecaution of keeping for herself a few drops of her deadliest poison.”Madame de Villefort uttered a wild cry, and a hideous and uncontrollable terrorspread over her distorted features.“Oh, do not fear the scaffold, madame,” said the magistrate;“I will not dishonor you, since that would be dishonor to myself; no, ifyou have heard me distinctly, you will understand that you are not to die onthe scaffold.”“No, I do not understand; what do you mean?” stammered the unhappywoman, completely overwhelmed.“I mean that the wife of the first magistrate in the capital shall not,by her infamy, soil an unblemished name; that she shall not, with one blow,dishonor her husband and her child.”“No, no—oh, no!”“Well, madame, it will be a laudable action on your part, and I willthank you for it!”“You will thank me—for what?”“For what you have just said.”“What did I say? Oh, my brain whirls; I no longer understand anything.Oh, my God, my God!”And she rose, with her hair dishevelled, and her lips foaming.“Have you answered the question I put to you on entering theroom?—where do you keep the poison you generally use, madame?”Madame de Villefort raised her arms to heaven, and convulsively struck one handagainst the other.“No, no,” she vociferated, “no, you cannot wish that!”“What I do not wish, madame, is that you should perish on the scaffold.Do you understand?” asked Villefort.“Oh, mercy, mercy, monsieur!”“What I require is, that justice be done. I am on the earth to punish,madame,” he added, with a flaming glance; “any other woman, were itthe queen herself, I would send to the executioner; but to you I shall bemerciful. To you I will say, ‘Have you not, madame, put aside some of thesurest, deadliest, most speedy poison?’”“Oh, pardon me, sir; let me live!”“She is cowardly,” said Villefort.“Reflect that I am your wife!”“You are a poisoner.”“In the name of Heaven!”“No!”“In the name of the love you once bore me!”“No, no!”“In the name of our child! Ah, for the sake of our child, let melive!”“No, no, no, I tell you; one day, if I allow you to live, you willperhaps kill him, as you have the others!”“I?—I kill my boy?” cried the distracted mother, rushingtoward Villefort; “I kill my son? Ha, ha, ha!” and a frightful,demoniac laugh finished the sentence, which was lost in a hoarse rattle.Madame de Villefort fell at her husband’s feet. He approached her.“Think of it, madame,” he said; “if, on my return, justicehas not been satisfied, I will denounce you with my own mouth, and arrest youwith my own hands!”She listened, panting, overwhelmed, crushed; her eye alone lived, and glaredhorribly.“Do you understand me?” he said. “I am going down there topronounce the sentence of death against a murderer. If I find you alive on myreturn, you shall sleep tonight in the conciergerie.”Madame de Villefort sighed; her nerves gave way, and she sunk on the carpet.The king’s attorney seemed to experience a sensation of pity; he lookedupon her less severely, and, bowing to her, said slowly:“Farewell, madame, farewell!”That farewell struck Madame de Villefort like the executioner’s knife.She fainted. The procureur went out, after having double-locked the door. Chapter 109. TheAssizesThe Benedetto affair, asit was called at the Palais, and by people in general, had produced atremendous sensation. Frequenting the Café de Paris, the Boulevard de Gand, andthe Bois de Boulogne, during his brief career of splendor, the false Cavalcantihad formed a host of acquaintances. The papers had related his variousadventures, both as the man of fashion and the galley-slave; and as everyonewho had been personally acquainted with Prince Andrea Cavalcanti experienced alively curiosity in his fate, they all determined to spare no trouble inendeavoring to witness the trial of M. Benedetto for the murder of his comradein chains.In the eyes of many, Benedetto appeared, if not a victim to, at least aninstance of, the fallibility of the law. M. Cavalcanti, his father, had beenseen in Paris, and it was expected that he would re-appear to claim theillustrious outcast. Many, also, who were not aware of the circumstancesattending his withdrawal from Paris, were struck with the worthy appearance,the gentlemanly bearing, and the knowledge of the world displayed by the oldpatrician, who certainly played the nobleman very well, so long as he saidnothing, and made no arithmetical calculations.As for the accused himself, many remembered him as being so amiable, sohandsome, and so liberal, that they chose to think him the victim of someconspiracy, since in this world large fortunes frequently excite themalevolence and jealousy of some unknown enemy.Everyone, therefore, ran to the court; some to witness the sight, others tocomment upon it. From seven o’clock in the morning a crowd was stationedat the iron gates, and an hour before the trial commenced the hall was full ofthe privileged. Before the entrance of the magistrates, and indeed frequentlyafterwards, a court of justice, on days when some especial trial is to takeplace, resembles a drawing-room where many persons recognize each other andconverse if they can do so without losing their seats; or, if they areseparated by too great a number of lawyers, communicate by signs.It was one of the magnificent autumn days which make amends for a short summer;the clouds which M. de Villefort had perceived at sunrise had all disappearedas if by magic, and one of the softest and most brilliant days of Septembershone forth in all its splendor.Beauchamp, one of the kings of the press, and therefore claiming the right of athrone everywhere, was eying everybody through his monocle. He perceivedChâteau-Renaud and Debray, who had just gained the good graces of asergeant-at-arms, and who had persuaded the latter to let them stand before,instead of behind him, as they ought to have done. The worthy sergeant hadrecognized the minister’s secretary and the millionnaire, and, by way ofpaying extra attention to his noble neighbors, promised to keep their placeswhile they paid a visit to Beauchamp.“Well,” said Beauchamp, “we shall see our friend!”“Yes, indeed!” replied Debray. “That worthy prince. Deucetake those Italian princes!”“A man, too, who could boast of Dante for a genealogist, and could reckonback to the Divina Comedia.”“A nobility of the rope!” said Château-Renaud phlegmatically.“He will be condemned, will he not?” asked Debray of Beauchamp.“My dear fellow, I think we should ask you that question; you know suchnews much better than we do. Did you see the president at the minister’slast night?”“Yes.”“What did he say?”“Something which will surprise you.”“Oh, make haste and tell me, then; it is a long time since that hashappened.”“Well, he told me that Benedetto, who is considered a serpent of subtletyand a giant of cunning, is really but a very commonplace, silly rascal, andaltogether unworthy of the experiments that will be made on his phrenologicalorgans after his death.”“Bah,” said Beauchamp, “he played the prince verywell.”“Yes, for you who detest those unhappy princes, Beauchamp, and are alwaysdelighted to find fault with them; but not for me, who discover a gentleman byinstinct, and who scent out an aristocratic family like a very bloodhound ofheraldry.”“Then you never believed in the principality?”“Yes.—in the principality, but not in the prince.”“Not so bad,” said Beauchamp; “still, I assure you, he passedvery well with many people; I saw him at the ministers’ houses.”“Ah, yes,” said Château-Renaud. “The idea of thinkingministers understand anything about princes!”“There is something in what you have just said,” said Beauchamp,laughing.“But,” said Debray to Beauchamp, “if I spoke to thepresident, you must have been with the procureur.”“It was an impossibility; for the last week M. de Villefort has secludedhimself. It is natural enough; this strange chain of domestic afflictions,followed by the no less strange death of his daughter——”“Strange? What do you mean, Beauchamp?”“Oh, yes; do you pretend that all this has been unobserved at theminister’s?” said Beauchamp, placing his eye-glass in his eye,where he tried to make it remain.“My dear sir,” said Château-Renaud, “allow me to tell youthat you do not understand that manœuvre with the eye-glass half so well asDebray. Give him a lesson, Debray.”“Stay,” said Beauchamp, “surely I am not deceived.”“What is it?”“It is she!”“Whom do you mean?”“They said she had left.”“Mademoiselle Eugénie?” said Château-Renaud; “has shereturned?”“No, but her mother.”“Madame Danglars? Nonsense! Impossible!” said Château-Renaud;“only ten days after the flight of her daughter, and three days from thebankruptcy of her husband?”Debray colored slightly, and followed with his eyes the direction ofBeauchamp’s glance.“Come,” he said, “it is only a veiled lady, some foreignprincess, perhaps the mother of Cavalcanti. But you were just speaking on avery interesting topic, Beauchamp.”“I?”“Yes; you were telling us about the extraordinary death ofValentine.”“Ah, yes, so I was. But how is it that Madame de Villefort is nothere?”“Poor, dear woman,” said Debray, “she is no doubt occupied indistilling balm for the hospitals, or in making cosmetics for herself orfriends. Do you know she spends two or three thousand crowns a year in thisamusement? But I wonder she is not here. I should have been pleased to see her,for I like her very much.”“And I hate her,” said Château-Renaud.“Why?”“I do not know. Why do we love? Why do we hate? I detest her, fromantipathy.”“Or, rather, by instinct.”“Perhaps so. But to return to what you were saying, Beauchamp.”“Well, do you know why they die so multitudinously at M. deVillefort’s?”“‘Multitudinously’ is good,” said Château-Renaud.“My good fellow, you’ll find the word in Saint-Simon.”“But the thing itself is at M. de Villefort’s; but let’s getback to the subject.”“Talking of that,” said Debray, “Madame was making inquiriesabout that house, which for the last three months has been hung withblack.”“Who is Madame?” asked Château-Renaud.“The minister’s wife, pardieu!”“Oh, your pardon! I never visit ministers; I leave that to theprinces.”“Really, you were only before sparkling, but now you are brilliant; takecompassion on us, or, like Jupiter, you will wither us up.”“I will not speak again,” said Château-Renaud; “pray havecompassion upon me, and do not take up every word I say.”“Come, let us endeavor to get to the end of our story, Beauchamp; I toldyou that yesterday Madame made inquiries of me upon the subject; enlighten me,and I will then communicate my information to her.”“Well, gentlemen, the reason people die so multitudinously (I like theword) at M. de Villefort’s is that there is an assassin in thehouse!”The two young men shuddered, for the same idea had more than once occurred tothem.“And who is the assassin;” they asked together.“Young Edward!” A burst of laughter from the auditors did not inthe least disconcert the speaker, who continued,—“Yes, gentlemen;Edward, the infant phenomenon, who is quite an adept in the art ofkilling.”“You are jesting.”“Not at all. I yesterday engaged a servant, who had just left M. deVillefort—I intend sending him away tomorrow, for he eats so enormously,to make up for the fast imposed upon him by his terror in that house. Well, nowlisten.”“We are listening.”“It appears the dear child has obtained possession of a bottle containingsome drug, which he every now and then uses against those who have displeasedhim. First, M. and Madame de Saint-Méran incurred his displeasure, so he pouredout three drops of his elixir—three drops were sufficient; then followedBarrois, the old servant of M. Noirtier, who sometimes rebuffed this littlewretch—he therefore received the same quantity of the elixir; the samehappened to Valentine, of whom he was jealous; he gave her the same dose as theothers, and all was over for her as well as the rest.”“Why, what nonsense are you telling us?” said Château-Renaud.“Yes, it is an extraordinary story,” said Beauchamp; “is itnot?”“It is absurd,” said Debray.“Ah,” said Beauchamp, “you doubt me? Well, you can ask myservant, or rather him who will no longer be my servant tomorrow, it was thetalk of the house.”“And this elixir, where is it? what is it?”“The child conceals it.”“But where did he find it?”“In his mother’s laboratory.”“Does his mother then, keep poisons in her laboratory?”“How can I tell? You are questioning me like a king’s attorney. Ionly repeat what I have been told, and like my informant I can do no more. Thepoor devil would eat nothing, from fear.”“It is incredible!”“No, my dear fellow, it is not at all incredible. You saw the child passthrough the Rue Richelieu last year, who amused himself with killing hisbrothers and sisters by sticking pins in their ears while they slept. Thegeneration who follow us are very precocious.”“Come, Beauchamp,” said Château-Renaud, “I will bet anythingyou do not believe a word of all you have been telling us. But I do not see theCount of Monte Cristo here.”“He is worn out,” said Debray; “besides, he could not wellappear in public, since he has been the dupe of the Cavalcanti, who, itappears, presented themselves to him with false letters of credit, and cheatedhim out of 100,000 francs upon the hypothesis of this principality.”“By the way, M. de Château-Renaud,” asked Beauchamp, “how isMorrel?”“Ma foi, I have called three times without once seeing him. Still,his sister did not seem uneasy, and told me that though she had not seen himfor two or three days, she was sure he was well.”“Ah, now I think of it, the Count of Monte Cristo cannot appear in thehall,” said Beauchamp.“Why not?”“Because he is an actor in the drama.”“Has he assassinated anyone, then?”“No, on the contrary, they wished to assassinate him. You know that itwas in leaving his house that M. de Caderousse was murdered by his friendBenedetto. You know that the famous waistcoat was found in his house,containing the letter which stopped the signature of the marriage-contract. Doyou see the waistcoat? There it is, all blood-stained, on the desk, as atestimony of the crime.”“Ah, very good.”“Hush, gentlemen, here is the court; let us go back to our places.”A noise was heard in the hall; the sergeant called his two patrons with anenergetic “hem!” and the door-keeper appearing, called out withthat shrill voice peculiar to his order, ever since the days of Beaumarchais:“The court, gentlemen!” Chapter 110. TheIndictmentThe judges took theirplaces in the midst of the most profound silence; the jury took their seats; M.de Villefort, the object of unusual attention, and we had almost said ofgeneral admiration, sat in the armchair and cast a tranquil glance around him.Everyone looked with astonishment on that grave and severe face, whose calmexpression personal griefs had been unable to disturb, and the aspect of a manwho was a stranger to all human emotions excited something very like terror.“Gendarmes,” said the president, “lead in the accused.”At these words the public attention became more intense, and all eyes wereturned towards the door through which Benedetto was to enter. The door soonopened and the accused appeared.The same impression was experienced by all present, and no one was deceived bythe expression of his countenance. His features bore no sign of that deepemotion which stops the beating of the heart and blanches the cheek. His hands,gracefully placed, one upon his hat, the other in the opening of his whitewaistcoat, were not at all tremulous; his eye was calm and even brilliant.Scarcely had he entered the hall when he glanced at the whole body ofmagistrates and assistants; his eye rested longer on the president, and stillmore so on the king’s attorney.By the side of Andrea was stationed the lawyer who was to conduct his defence,and who had been appointed by the court, for Andrea disdained to pay anyattention to those details, to which he appeared to attach no importance. Thelawyer was a young man with light hair whose face expressed a hundred timesmore emotion than that which characterized the prisoner.The president called for the indictment, revised as we know, by the clever andimplacable pen of Villefort. During the reading of this, which was long, thepublic attention was continually drawn towards Andrea, who bore the inspectionwith Spartan unconcern. Villefort had never been so concise and eloquent. Thecrime was depicted in the most vivid colors; the former life of the prisoner,his transformation, a review of his life from the earliest period, were setforth with all the talent that a knowledge of human life could furnish to amind like that of the procureur. Benedetto was thus forever condemned in publicopinion before the sentence of the law could be pronounced.Andrea paid no attention to the successive charges which were brought againsthim. M. de Villefort, who examined him attentively, and who no doubt practicedupon him all the psychological studies he was accustomed to use, in vainendeavored to make him lower his eyes, notwithstanding the depth and profundityof his gaze. At length the reading of the indictment was ended.“Accused,” said the president, “your name and surname?”Andrea arose.“Excuse me, Mr. President,” he said, in a clear voice, “but Isee you are going to adopt a course of questions through which I cannot followyou. I have an idea, which I will explain by and by, of making an exception tothe usual form of accusation. Allow me, then, if you please, to answer indifferent order, or I will not do so at all.”The astonished president looked at the jury, who in turn looked at Villefort.The whole assembly manifested great surprise, but Andrea appeared quiteunmoved.“Your age?” said the president; “will you answer thatquestion?”“I will answer that question, as well as the rest, Mr. President, but inits turn.”“Your age?” repeated the president.“I am twenty-one years old, or rather I shall be in a few days, as I wasborn the night of the 27th of September, 1817.”M. de Villefort, who was busy taking down some notes, raised his head at themention of this date.“Where were you born?” continued the president.“At Auteuil, near Paris.”M. de Villefort a second time raised his head, looked at Benedetto as if he hadbeen gazing at the head of Medusa, and became livid. As for Benedetto, hegracefully wiped his lips with a fine cambric pocket-handkerchief.“Your profession?”“First I was a forger,” answered Andrea, as calmly as possible;“then I became a thief, and lately have become an assassin.”A murmur, or rather storm, of indignation burst from all parts of the assembly.The judges themselves appeared to be stupefied, and the jury manifested tokensof disgust for a cynicism so unexpected in a man of fashion. M. de Villefortpressed his hand upon his brow, which, at first pale, had become red andburning; then he suddenly arose and looked around as though he had lost hissenses—he wanted air.“Are you looking for anything, Mr. Procureur?” asked Benedetto,with his most ingratiating smile.M. de Villefort answered nothing, but sat, or rather threw himself down againupon his chair.“And now, prisoner, will you consent to tell your name?” said thepresident. “The brutal affectation with which you have enumerated andclassified your crimes calls for a severe reprimand on the part of the court,both in the name of morality, and for the respect due to humanity. You appearto consider this a point of honor, and it may be for this reason, that you havedelayed acknowledging your name. You wished it to be preceded by all thesetitles.”“It is quite wonderful, Mr. President, how entirely you have read mythoughts,” said Benedetto, in his softest voice and most polite manner.“This is, indeed, the reason why I begged you to alter the order of thequestions.”The public astonishment had reached its height. There was no longer any deceitor bravado in the manner of the accused. The audience felt that a startlingrevelation was to follow this ominous prelude.“Well,” said the president; “your name?”“I cannot tell you my name, since I do not know it; but I know myfather’s, and can tell it to you.”A painful giddiness overwhelmed Villefort; great drops of acrid sweat fell fromhis face upon the papers which he held in his convulsed hand.“Repeat your father’s name,” said the president.Not a whisper, not a breath, was heard in that vast assembly; everyone waitedanxiously.“My father is king’s attorney,” replied Andrea calmly.“King’s attorney?” said the president, stupefied, and withoutnoticing the agitation which spread over the face of M. de Villefort;“king’s attorney?”“Yes; and if you wish to know his name, I will tell it,—he is namedVillefort.”The explosion, which had been so long restrained from a feeling of respect tothe court of justice, now burst forth like thunder from the breasts of allpresent; the court itself did not seek to restrain the feelings of theaudience. The exclamations, the insults addressed to Benedetto, who remainedperfectly unconcerned, the energetic gestures, the movement of the gendarmes,the sneers of the scum of the crowd always sure to rise to the surface in caseof any disturbance—all this lasted five minutes, before the door-keepersand magistrates were able to restore silence. In the midst of this tumult thevoice of the president was heard to exclaim:“Are you playing with justice, accused, and do you dare set yourfellow-citizens an example of disorder which even in these times has never beenequalled?”Several persons hurried up to M. de Villefort, who sat half bowed over in hischair, offering him consolation, encouragement, and protestations of zeal andsympathy. Order was re-established in the hall, except that a few people stillmoved about and whispered to one another. A lady, it was said, had justfainted; they had supplied her with a smelling-bottle, and she had recovered.During the scene of tumult, Andrea had turned his smiling face towards theassembly; then, leaning with one hand on the oaken rail of the dock, in themost graceful attitude possible, he said:“Gentlemen, I assure you I had no idea of insulting the court, or ofmaking a useless disturbance in the presence of this honorable assembly. Theyask my age; I tell it. They ask where I was born; I answer. They ask my name, Icannot give it, since my parents abandoned me. But though I cannot give my ownname, not possessing one, I can tell them my father’s. Now I repeat, myfather is named M. de Villefort, and I am ready to prove it.”There was an energy, a conviction, and a sincerity in the manner of the youngman, which silenced the tumult. All eyes were turned for a moment towards theprocureur, who sat as motionless as though a thunderbolt had changed him into acorpse.“Gentlemen,” said Andrea, commanding silence by his voice andmanner; “I owe you the proofs and explanations of what I havesaid.”“But,” said the irritated president, “you called yourselfBenedetto, declared yourself an orphan, and claimed Corsica as yourcountry.”“I said anything I pleased, in order that the solemn declaration I havejust made should not be withheld, which otherwise would certainly have been thecase. I now repeat that I was born at Auteuil on the night of the 27th ofSeptember, 1817, and that I am the son of the procureur, M. de Villefort. Doyou wish for any further details? I will give them. I was born in No. 28, Ruede la Fontaine, in a room hung with red damask; my father took me in his arms,telling my mother I was dead, wrapped me in a napkin marked with an H and an N,and carried me into a garden, where he buried me alive.”A shudder ran through the assembly when they saw that the confidence of theprisoner increased in proportion to the terror of M. de Villefort.“But how have you become acquainted with all these details?” askedthe president.“I will tell you, Mr. President. A man who had sworn vengeance against myfather, and had long watched his opportunity to kill him, had introducedhimself that night into the garden in which my father buried me. He wasconcealed in a thicket; he saw my father bury something in the ground, andstabbed him; then thinking the deposit might contain some treasure he turned upthe ground, and found me still living. The man carried me to the foundlingasylum, where I was registered under the number 37. Three months afterwards, awoman travelled from Rogliano to Paris to fetch me, and having claimed me asher son, carried me away. Thus, you see, though born in Paris, I was brought upin Corsica.”There was a moment’s silence, during which one could have fancied thehall empty, so profound was the stillness.“Proceed,” said the president.“Certainly, I might have lived happily amongst those good people, whoadored me, but my perverse disposition prevailed over the virtues which myadopted mother endeavored to instil into my heart. I increased in wickednesstill I committed crime. One day when I cursed Providence for making me sowicked, and ordaining me to such a fate, my adopted father said to me,‘Do not blaspheme, unhappy child, the crime is that of your father, notyours,—of your father, who consigned you to hell if you died, and tomisery if a miracle preserved you alive.’ After that I ceased toblaspheme, but I cursed my father. That is why I have uttered the words forwhich you blame me; that is why I have filled this whole assembly with horror.If I have committed an additional crime, punish me, but if you will allow thatever since the day of my birth my fate has been sad, bitter, and lamentable,then pity me.”“But your mother?” asked the president.“My mother thought me dead; she is not guilty. I did not even wish toknow her name, nor do I know it.”Just then a piercing cry, ending in a sob, burst from the centre of the crowd,who encircled the lady who had before fainted, and who now fell into a violentfit of hysterics. She was carried out of the hall, the thick veil whichconcealed her face dropped off, and Madame Danglars was recognized.Notwithstanding his shattered nerves, the ringing sensation in his ears, andthe madness which turned his brain, Villefort rose as he perceived her.“The proofs, the proofs!” said the president; “remember thistissue of horrors must be supported by the clearest proofs.”“The proofs?” said Benedetto, laughing; “do you wantproofs?”“Yes.”“Well, then, look at M. de Villefort, and then ask me for proofs.”Everyone turned towards the procureur, who, unable to bear the universal gazenow riveted on him alone, advanced staggering into the midst of the tribunal,with his hair dishevelled and his face indented with the mark of his nails. Thewhole assembly uttered a long murmur of astonishment.“Father,” said Benedetto, “I am asked for proofs, do you wishme to give them?”“No, no, it is useless,” stammered M. de Villefort in a hoarsevoice; “no, it is useless!”“How useless?” cried the president, “what do you mean?”“I mean that I feel it impossible to struggle against this deadly weightwhich crushes me. Gentlemen, I know I am in the hands of an avenging God! Weneed no proofs; everything relating to this young man is true.”A dull, gloomy silence, like that which precedes some awful phenomenon ofnature, pervaded the assembly, who shuddered in dismay.“What, M. de Villefort,” cried the president, “do you yieldto an hallucination? What, are you no longer in possession of your senses? Thisstrange, unexpected, terrible accusation has disordered your reason. Come,recover.”The procureur dropped his head; his teeth chattered like those of a man under aviolent attack of fever, and yet he was deadly pale.“I am in possession of all my senses, sir,” he said; “my bodyalone suffers, as you may suppose. I acknowledge myself guilty of all the youngman has brought against me, and from this hour hold myself under the authorityof the procureur who will succeed me.”And as he spoke these words with a hoarse, choking voice, he staggered towardsthe door, which was mechanically opened by a door-keeper. The whole assemblywere dumb with astonishment at the revelation and confession which had produceda catastrophe so different from that which had been expected during the lastfortnight by the Parisian world.“Well,” said Beauchamp, “let them now say that drama isunnatural!”“Ma foi!” said Château-Renaud, “I would rather end mycareer like M. de Morcerf; a pistol-shot seems quite delightful compared withthis catastrophe.”“And moreover, it kills,” said Beauchamp.“And to think that I had an idea of marrying his daughter,” saidDebray. “She did well to die, poor girl!”“The sitting is adjourned, gentlemen,” said the president;“fresh inquiries will be made, and the case will be tried next session byanother magistrate.”As for Andrea, who was calm and more interesting than ever, he left the hall,escorted by gendarmes, who involuntarily paid him some attention.“Well, what do you think of this, my fine fellow?” asked Debray ofthe sergeant-at-arms, slipping a louis into his hand.“There will be extenuating circumstances,” he replied. Chapter 111. ExpiationNotwithstanding thedensity of the crowd, M. de Villefort saw it open before him. There issomething so awe-inspiring in great afflictions that even in the worst timesthe first emotion of a crowd has generally been to sympathize with the suffererin a great catastrophe. Many people have been assassinated in a tumult, buteven criminals have rarely been insulted during trial. Thus Villefort passedthrough the mass of spectators and officers of the Palais, and withdrew. Thoughhe had acknowledged his guilt, he was protected by his grief. There are somesituations which men understand by instinct, but which reason is powerless toexplain; in such cases the greatest poet is he who gives utterance to the mostnatural and vehement outburst of sorrow. Those who hear the bitter cry are asmuch impressed as if they listened to an entire poem, and when the sufferer issincere they are right in regarding his outburst as sublime.It would be difficult to describe the state of stupor in which Villefort leftthe Palais. Every pulse beat with feverish excitement, every nerve wasstrained, every vein swollen, and every part of his body seemed to sufferdistinctly from the rest, thus multiplying his agony a thousand-fold. He madehis way along the corridors through force of habit; he threw aside hismagisterial robe, not out of deference to etiquette, but because it was anunbearable burden, a veritable garb of Nessus, insatiate in torture. Havingstaggered as far as the Rue Dauphine, he perceived his carriage, awoke hissleeping coachman by opening the door himself, threw himself on the cushions,and pointed towards the Faubourg Saint-Honoré; the carriage drove on.All the weight of his fallen fortune seemed suddenly to crush him; he could notforesee the consequences; he could not contemplate the future with theindifference of the hardened criminal who merely faces a contingency alreadyfamiliar.God was still in his heart. “God,” he murmured, not knowing what hesaid,—“God—God!” Behind the event that had overwhelmedhim he saw the hand of God. The carriage rolled rapidly onward. Villefort,while turning restlessly on the cushions, felt something press against him. Heput out his hand to remove the object; it was a fan which Madame de Villeforthad left in the carriage; this fan awakened a recollection which darted throughhis mind like lightning. He thought of his wife.“Oh!” he exclaimed, as though a red-hot iron were piercing hisheart.During the last hour his own crime had alone been presented to his mind; nowanother object, not less terrible, suddenly presented itself. His wife! He hadjust acted the inexorable judge with her, he had condemned her to death, andshe, crushed by remorse, struck with terror, covered with the shame inspired bythe eloquence of his irreproachable virtue,—she, a poor, weakwoman, without help or the power of defending herself against his absolute andsupreme will,—she might at that very moment, perhaps, be preparing todie!An hour had elapsed since her condemnation; at that moment, doubtless, she wasrecalling all her crimes to her memory; she was asking pardon for her sins;perhaps she was even writing a letter imploring forgiveness from her virtuoushusband—a forgiveness she was purchasing with her death! Villefort againgroaned with anguish and despair.“Ah,” he exclaimed, “that woman became criminal only fromassociating with me! I carried the infection of crime with me, and she hascaught it as she would the typhus fever, the cholera, the plague! And yet Ihave punished her—I have dared to tell her—Ihave—‘Repent and die!’ But no, she must not die; she shalllive, and with me. We will flee from Paris and go as far as the earth reaches.I told her of the scaffold; oh, Heavens, I forgot that it awaits me also! Howcould I pronounce that word? Yes, we will fly; I will confess all toher,—I will tell her daily that I also have committed a crime!—Oh,what an alliance—the tiger and the serpent; worthy wife of such as I am!She must live that my infamy may diminish hers.”And Villefort dashed open the window in front of the carriage.“Faster, faster!” he cried, in a tone which electrified thecoachman. The horses, impelled by fear, flew towards the house.“Yes, yes,” repeated Villefort, as he approached hishome—“yes, that woman must live; she must repent, and educate myson, the sole survivor, with the exception of the indestructible old man, ofthe wreck of my house. She loves him; it was for his sake she has committedthese crimes. We ought never to despair of softening the heart of a mother wholoves her child. She will repent, and no one will know that she has beenguilty. The events which have taken place in my house, though they now occupythe public mind, will be forgotten in time, or if, indeed, a few enemies shouldpersist in remembering them, why then I will add them to my list of crimes.What will it signify if one, two, or three more are added? My wife and childshall escape from this gulf, carrying treasures with them; she will live andmay yet be happy, since her child, in whom all her love is centred, will bewith her. I shall have performed a good action, and my heart will belighter.”And the procureur breathed more freely than he had done for some time.The carriage stopped at the door of the house. Villefort leaped out of thecarriage, and saw that his servants were surprised at his early return; hecould read no other expression on their features. Neither of them spoke to him;they merely stood aside to let him pass by, as usual, nothing more. As hepassed by M. Noirtier’s room, he perceived two figures through thehalf-open door; but he experienced no curiosity to know who was visiting hisfather; anxiety carried him on further.“Come,” he said, as he ascended the stairs leading to hiswife’s room, “nothing is changed here.”He then closed the door of the landing.“No one must disturb us,” he said; “I must speak freely toher, accuse myself, and say”—he approached the door, touched thecrystal handle, which yielded to his hand. “Not locked,” he cried;“that is well.”And he entered the little room in which Edward slept; for though the child wentto school during the day, his mother could not allow him to be separated fromher at night. With a single glance Villefort’s eye ran through the room.“Not here,” he said; “doubtless she is in her bedroom.”He rushed towards the door, found it bolted, and stopped, shuddering.“Héloïse!” he cried. He fancied he heard the sound of a piece offurniture being removed.“Héloïse!” he repeated.“Who is there?” answered the voice of her he sought. He thoughtthat voice more feeble than usual.“Open the door!” cried Villefort. “Open; it is I.”But notwithstanding this request, notwithstanding the tone of anguish in whichit was uttered, the door remained closed. Villefort burst it open with aviolent blow. At the entrance of the room which led to her boudoir, Madame deVillefort was standing erect, pale, her features contracted, and her eyesglaring horribly.“Héloïse, Héloïse!” he said, “what is the matter?Speak!” The young woman extended her stiff white hands towards him.“It is done, monsieur,” she said with a rattling noise which seemedto tear her throat. “What more do you want?” and she fell fulllength on the floor.Villefort ran to her and seized her hand, which convulsively clasped a crystalbottle with a golden stopper. Madame de Villefort was dead. Villefort, maddenedwith horror, stepped back to the threshhold of the door, fixing his eyes on thecorpse.“My son!” he exclaimed suddenly, “where is myson?—Edward, Edward!” and he rushed out of the room, still crying,“Edward, Edward!” The name was pronounced in such a tone of anguishthat the servants ran up.“Where is my son?” asked Villefort; “let him be removed fromthe house, that he may not see——”“Master Edward is not downstairs, sir,” replied the valet.“Then he must be playing in the garden; go and see.”“No, sir; Madame de Villefort sent for him half an hour ago; he went intoher room, and has not been downstairs since.”A cold perspiration burst out on Villefort’s brow; his legs trembled, andhis thoughts flew about madly in his brain like the wheels of a disorderedwatch.“In Madame de Villefort’s room?” he murmured and slowlyreturned, with one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supportinghimself against the wall. To enter the room he must again see the body of hisunfortunate wife. To call Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room whichnow appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the silence ofthe tomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.“Edward!” he stammered—“Edward!”The child did not answer. Where, then, could he be, if he had entered hismother’s room and not since returned? He stepped forward. The corpse ofMadame de Villefort was stretched across the doorway leading to the room inwhich Edward must be; those glaring eyes seemed to watch over the threshold,and the lips bore the stamp of a terrible and mysterious irony. Through theopen door was visible a portion of the boudoir, containing an upright piano anda blue satin couch. Villefort stepped forward two or three paces, and beheldhis child lying—no doubt asleep—on the sofa. The unhappy manuttered an exclamation of joy; a ray of light seemed to penetrate the abyss ofdespair and darkness. He had only to step over the corpse, enter the boudoir,take the child in his arms, and flee far, far away.Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt unto death,gnashing his teeth in his wound. He no longer feared realities, but phantoms.He leaped over the corpse as if it had been a burning brazier. He took thechild in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called him, but the child made noresponse. He pressed his burning lips to the cheeks, but they were icy cold andpale; he felt the stiffened limbs; he pressed his hand upon the heart, but itno longer beat,—the child was dead.A folded paper fell from Edward’s breast. Villefort, thunderstruck, fellupon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the floor by theside of its mother. He picked up the paper, and, recognizing his wife’swriting, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents; it ran as follows:“You know that I was a good mother, since it was for my son’s sakeI became criminal. A good mother cannot depart without her son.”Villefort could not believe his eyes,—he could not believe his reason; hedragged himself towards the child’s body, and examined it as a lionesscontemplates its dead cub. Then a piercing cry escaped from his breast, and hecried,“Still the hand of God.”The presence of the two victims alarmed him; he could not bear solitude sharedonly by two corpses. Until then he had been sustained by rage, by his strengthof mind, by despair, by the supreme agony which led the Titans to scale theheavens, and Ajax to defy the gods. He now arose, his head bowed beneath theweight of grief, and, shaking his damp, dishevelled hair, he who had never feltcompassion for anyone determined to seek his father, that he might have someoneto whom he could relate his misfortunes,—someone by whose side he mightweep.He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and enteredNoirtier’s room. The old man appeared to be listening attentively and asaffectionately as his infirmities would allow to the Abbé Busoni, who lookedcold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving the abbé, passed his hand acrosshis brow. The past came to him like one of those waves whose wrath foamsfiercer than the others.He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at Auteuil, andthen the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on the day ofValentine’s death.“You here, sir!” he exclaimed; “do you, then, never appearbut to act as an escort to death?”Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on themagistrate’s face, the savage lustre of his eyes, he understood that therevelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this he was ignorant.“I came to pray over the body of your daughter.”“And now why are you here?”“I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your debt, and thatfrom this moment I will pray to God to forgive you, as I do.”“Good heavens!” exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully,“surely that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!”“No!” The abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, nolonger confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.“It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!” exclaimed theprocureur, with a haggard expression.“You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must go fartherback.”“That voice, that voice!—where did I first hear it?”“You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three years ago,the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran. Refer to yourpapers.”“You are not Busoni?—you are not Monte Cristo? Oh, heavens! youare, then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! I must have wronged youin some way at Marseilles. Oh, woe to me!”“Yes; you are now on the right path,” said the count, crossing hisarms over his broad chest; “search—search!”“But what have I done to you?” exclaimed Villefort, whose mind wasbalancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a dreamnor reality; “what have I done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!”“You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed my father; youdeprived me of liberty, of love, and happiness.”“Who are you, then? Who are you?”“I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Châteaud’If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count of Monte Cristo when heat length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds, and ledhim to you!”“Ah, I recognize you—I recognize you!” exclaimed theking’s attorney; “you are——”“I am Edmond Dantès!”“You are Edmond Dantès,” cried Villefort, seizing the count by thewrist; “then come here!”And up the stairs he dragged Monte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had happened,followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new catastrophe.“There, Edmond Dantès!” he said, pointing to the bodies of his wifeand child, “see, are you well avenged?”Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had passedbeyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say, “God isfor and with me.” With an expression of indescribable anguish he threwhimself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt its pulse, and thenrushed with him into Valentine’s room, of which he double-locked thedoor.“My child,” cried Villefort, “he carries away the body of mychild! Oh, curses, woe, death to you!”He tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was transfixed tothe spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting through thesockets; he griped the flesh on his chest until his nails were stained withblood; the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as though they would bursttheir narrow boundary, and deluge his brain with living fire. This lastedseveral minutes, until the frightful overturn of reason was accomplished; thenuttering a loud cry followed by a burst of laughter, he rushed down the stairs.A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine’s room opened, andMonte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all the noblefeatures of that face, usually so calm and serene, were overcast by grief. Inhis arms he held the child, whom no skill had been able to recall to life.Bending on one knee, he placed it reverently by the side of its mother, withits head upon her breast. Then, rising, he went out, and meeting a servant onthe stairs, he asked:“Where is M. de Villefort?”The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. Monte Cristo ran downthe steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld Villefort,encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and digging the earth withfury.“It is not here!” he cried. “It is not here!”And then he moved farther on, and began again to dig.Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with an expression almosthumble:“Sir, you have indeed lost a son; but——”Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard.“Oh, I will find it,” he cried; “you may pretend he isnot here, but I will find him, though I dig forever!”Monte Cristo drew back in horror.“Oh,” he said, “he is mad!” And as though he fearedthat the walls of the accursed house would crumble around him, he rushed intothe street, for the first time doubting whether he had the right to do as hehad done. “Oh, enough of this,—enough of this,” he cried;“let me save the last.” On entering his house, he met Morrel, whowandered about like a ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to thetomb.“Prepare yourself, Maximilian,” he said with a smile; “weleave Paris tomorrow.”“Have you nothing more to do there?” asked Morrel.“No,” replied Monte Cristo; “God grant I may not have donetoo much already.”The next day they indeed left, accompanied only by Baptistin. Haydée had takenaway Ali, and Bertuccio remained with Noirtier. Chapter 112. TheDepartureThe recent events formedthe theme of conversation throughout all Paris. Emmanuel and his wife conversedwith natural astonishment in their little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon thethree successive, sudden, and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf,Danglars, and Villefort. Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened totheir conversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomedstate of apathy.“Indeed,” said Julie, “might we not almost fancy, Emmanuel,that those people, so rich, so happy but yesterday, had forgotten in theirprosperity that an evil genius—like the wicked fairies inPerrault’s stories who present themselves unbidden at a wedding orbaptism—hovered over them, and appeared all at once to revenge himselffor their fatal neglect?”“What a dire misfortune!” said Emmanuel, thinking of Morcerf andDanglars.“What dreadful sufferings!” said Julie, remembering Valentine, butwhom, with a delicacy natural to women, she did not name before her brother.“If the Supreme Being has directed the fatal blow,” said Emmanuel,“it must be that he in his great goodness has perceived nothing in thepast lives of these people to merit mitigation of their awfulpunishment.”“Do you not form a very rash judgment, Emmanuel?” said Julie.“When my father, with a pistol in his hand, was once on the point ofcommitting suicide, had anyone then said, ‘This man deserves hismisery,’ would not that person have been deceived?”“Yes; but your father was not allowed to fall. A being was commissionedto arrest the fatal hand of death about to descend on him.”Emmanuel had scarcely uttered these words when the sound of the bell was heard,the well-known signal given by the porter that a visitor had arrived. Nearly atthe same instant the door was opened and the Count of Monte Cristo appeared onthe threshold. The young people uttered a cry of joy, while Maximilian raisedhis head, but let it fall again immediately.“Maximilian,” said the count, without appearing to notice thedifferent impressions which his presence produced on the little circle,“I come to seek you.”“To seek me?” repeated Morrel, as if awakening from a dream.“Yes,” said Monte Cristo; “has it not been agreed that Ishould take you with me, and did I not tell you yesterday to prepare fordeparture?”“I am ready,” said Maximilian; “I came expressly to wish themfarewell.”“Whither are you going, count?” asked Julie.“In the first instance to Marseilles, madame.”“To Marseilles!” exclaimed the young couple.“Yes, and I take your brother with me.”“Oh, count.” said Julie, “will you restore him to us cured ofhis melancholy?” Morrel turned away to conceal the confusion of hiscountenance.“You perceive, then, that he is not happy?” said the count.“Yes,” replied the young woman; “and fear much that he findsour home but a dull one.”“I will undertake to divert him,” replied the count.“I am ready to accompany you, sir,” said Maximilian. “Adieu,my kind friends! Emmanuel—Julie—farewell!”“How farewell?” exclaimed Julie; “do you leave us thus, sosuddenly, without any preparations for your journey, without even apassport?”“Needless delays but increase the grief of parting,” said MonteCristo, “and Maximilian has doubtless provided himself with everythingrequisite; at least, I advised him to do so.”“I have a passport, and my clothes are ready packed,” said Morrelin his tranquil but mournful manner.“Good,” said Monte Cristo, smiling; “in these promptarrangements we recognize the order of a well-disciplined soldier.”“And you leave us,” said Julie, “at a moment’s warning?you do not give us a day—no, not even an hour before yourdeparture?”“My carriage is at the door, madame, and I must be in Rome in fivedays.”“But does Maximilian go to Rome?” exclaimed Emmanuel.“I am going wherever it may please the count to take me,” saidMorrel, with a smile full of grief; “I am under his orders for the nextmonth.”“Oh, heavens, how strangely he expresses himself, count!” saidJulie.“Maximilian goes with me,” said the count, in his kindestand most persuasive manner; “therefore do not make yourself uneasy onyour brother’s account.”“Once more farewell, my dear sister; Emmanuel, adieu!” Morrelrepeated.“His carelessness and indifference touch me to the heart,” saidJulie. “Oh, Maximilian, Maximilian, you are certainly concealingsomething from us.”“Pshaw!” said Monte Cristo, “you will see him return to yougay, smiling, and joyful.”Maximilian cast a look of disdain, almost of anger, on the count.“We must leave you,” said Monte Cristo.“Before you quit us, count,” said Julie, “will you permit usto express to you all that the other day——”“Madame,” interrupted the count, taking her two hands in his,“all that you could say in words would never express what I read in youreyes; the thoughts of your heart are fully understood by mine. Like benefactorsin romances, I should have left you without seeing you again, but that wouldhave been a virtue beyond my strength, because I am a weak and vain man, fondof the tender, kind, and thankful glances of my fellow-creatures. On the eve ofdeparture I carry my egotism so far as to say, ‘Do not forget me, my kindfriends, for probably you will never see me again.’”“Never see you again?” exclaimed Emmanuel, while two large tearsrolled down Julie’s cheeks, “never behold you again? It is not aman, then, but some angel that leaves us, and this angel is on the point ofreturning to heaven after having appeared on earth to do good.”“Say not so,” quickly returned Monte Cristo—“say notso, my friends; angels never err, celestial beings remain where they wish tobe. Fate is not more powerful than they; it is they who, on the contrary,overcome fate. No, Emmanuel, I am but a man, and your admiration is asunmerited as your words are sacrilegious.”And pressing his lips on the hand of Julie, who rushed into his arms, heextended his other hand to Emmanuel; then tearing himself from this abode ofpeace and happiness, he made a sign to Maximilian, who followed him passively,with the indifference which had been perceptible in him ever since the death ofValentine had so stunned him.“Restore my brother to peace and happiness,” whispered Julie toMonte Cristo. And the count pressed her hand in reply, as he had done elevenyears before on the staircase leading to Morrel’s study.“You still confide, then, in Sinbad the Sailor?” asked he, smiling.“Oh, yes,” was the ready answer.“Well, then, sleep in peace, and put your trust in the Lord.”As we have before said, the post-chaise was waiting; four powerful horses werealready pawing the ground with impatience, while Ali, apparently just arrivedfrom a long walk, was standing at the foot of the steps, his face bathed inperspiration.“Well,” asked the count in Arabic, “have you been to see theold man?” Ali made a sign in the affirmative.“And have you placed the letter before him, as I ordered you todo?”The slave respectfully signalized that he had.“And what did he say, or rather do?” Ali placed himself in thelight, so that his master might see him distinctly, and then imitating in hisintelligent manner the countenance of the old man, he closed his eyes, asNoirtier was in the custom of doing when saying “Yes.”“Good; he accepts,” said Monte Cristo. “Now let us go.”These words had scarcely escaped him, when the carriage was on its way, and thefeet of the horses struck a shower of sparks from the pavement. Maximiliansettled himself in his corner without uttering a word. Half an hour had passedwhen the carriage stopped suddenly; the count had just pulled the silkencheck-string, which was fastened to Ali’s finger. The Nubian immediatelydescended and opened the carriage door. It was a lovely starlightnight—they had just reached the top of the hill Villejuif, from whenceParis appears like a sombre sea tossing its millions of phosphoric waves intolight—waves indeed more noisy, more passionate, more changeable, morefurious, more greedy, than those of the tempestuous ocean,—waves whichnever rest as those of the sea sometimes do,—waves ever dashing, everfoaming, ever ingulfing what falls within their grasp.The count stood alone, and at a sign from his hand, the carriage went on for ashort distance. With folded arms, he gazed for some time upon the great city.When he had fixed his piercing look on this modern Babylon, which equallyengages the contemplation of the religious enthusiast, the materialist, and thescoffer,—“Great city,” murmured he, inclining his head, and joining hishands as if in prayer, “less than six months have elapsed since first Ientered thy gates. I believe that the Spirit of God led my steps to thee andthat he also enables me to quit thee in triumph; the secret cause of mypresence within thy walls I have confided alone to him who only has had thepower to read my heart. God only knows that I retire from thee without pride orhatred, but not without many regrets; he only knows that the power confided tome has never been made subservient to my personal good or to any useless cause.Oh, great city, it is in thy palpitating bosom that I have found that which Isought; like a patient miner, I have dug deep into thy very entrails to rootout evil thence. Now my work is accomplished, my mission is terminated, nowthou canst neither afford me pain nor pleasure. Adieu, Paris, adieu!”His look wandered over the vast plain like that of some genius of the night; hepassed his hand over his brow, got into the carriage, the door was closed onhim, and the vehicle quickly disappeared down the other side of the hill in awhirlwind of dust and noise.Ten leagues were passed and not a single word was uttered. Morrel was dreaming,and Monte Cristo was looking at the dreamer.“Morrel,” said the count to him at length, “do you repenthaving followed me?”“No, count; but to leave Paris——”“If I thought happiness might await you in Paris, Morrel, I would haveleft you there.”“Valentine reposes within the walls of Paris, and to leave Paris is likelosing her a second time.”“Maximilian,” said the count, “the friends that we have lostdo not repose in the bosom of the earth, but are buried deep in our hearts, andit has been thus ordained that we may always be accompanied by them. I have twofriends, who in this way never depart from me; the one who gave me being, andthe other who conferred knowledge and intelligence on me. Their spirits live inme. I consult them when doubtful, and if I ever do any good, it is due to theirbeneficent counsels. Listen to the voice of your heart, Morrel, and ask itwhether you ought to preserve this melancholy exterior towards me.”“My friend,” said Maximilian, “the voice of my heart is verysorrowful, and promises me nothing but misfortune.”“It is the way of weakened minds to see everything through a black cloud.The soul forms its own horizons; your soul is darkened, and consequently thesky of the future appears stormy and unpromising.”“That may possibly be true,” said Maximilian, and he again subsidedinto his thoughtful mood.The journey was performed with that marvellous rapidity which the unlimitedpower of the count ever commanded. Towns fled from them like shadows on theirpath, and trees shaken by the first winds of autumn seemed like giants madlyrushing on to meet them, and retreating as rapidly when once reached. Thefollowing morning they arrived at Châlons, where the count’s steamboatwaited for them. Without the loss of an instant, the carriage was placed onboard and the two travellers embarked without delay. The boat was built forspeed; her two paddle-wheels were like two wings with which she skimmed thewater like a bird.Morrel was not insensible to that sensation of delight which is generallyexperienced in passing rapidly through the air, and the wind which occasionallyraised the hair from his forehead seemed on the point of dispelling momentarilythe clouds collected there.As the distance increased between the travellers and Paris, almost superhumanserenity appeared to surround the count; he might have been taken for an exileabout to revisit his native land.Ere long Marseilles presented herself to view,—Marseilles, white, fervid,full of life and energy,—Marseilles, the younger sister of Tyre andCarthage, the successor to them in the empire of theMediterranean,—Marseilles, old, yet always young. Powerful memories werestirred within them by the sight of the round tower, Fort Saint-Nicolas, theCity Hall designed by Puget,[28]the port with its brick quays, where they had both played in childhood, and itwas with one accord that they stopped on the Canebière.A vessel was setting sail for Algiers, on board of which the bustle usuallyattending departure prevailed. The passengers and their relations crowded onthe deck, friends taking a tender but sorrowful leave of each other, someweeping, others noisy in their grief, the whole forming a spectacle that mightbe exciting even to those who witnessed similar sights daily, but which had nopower to disturb the current of thought that had taken possession of the mindof Maximilian from the moment he had set foot on the broad pavement of thequay.“Here,” said he, leaning heavily on the arm of MonteCristo,—“here is the spot where my father stopped, when thePharaon entered the port; it was here that the good old man, whom yousaved from death and dishonor, threw himself into my arms. I yet feel his warmtears on my face, and his were not the only tears shed, for many who witnessedour meeting wept also.”Monte Cristo gently smiled and said,—“I was there;” at thesame time pointing to the corner of a street. As he spoke, and in the verydirection he indicated, a groan, expressive of bitter grief, was heard, and awoman was seen waving her hand to a passenger on board the vessel about tosail. Monte Cristo looked at her with an emotion that must have been remarkedby Morrel had not his eyes been fixed on the vessel.“Oh, heavens!” exclaimed Morrel, “I do not deceivemyself—that young man who is waving his hat, that youth in the uniform ofa lieutenant, is Albert de Morcerf!”“Yes,” said Monte Cristo, “I recognized him.”“How so?—you were looking the other way.”The count smiled, as he was in the habit of doing when he did not want to makeany reply, and he again turned towards the veiled woman, who soon disappearedat the corner of the street. Turning to his friend:“Dear Maximilian,” said the count, “have you nothing to do inthis land?”“I have to weep over the grave of my father,” replied Morrel in abroken voice.“Well, then, go,—wait for me there, and I will soon joinyou.”“You leave me, then?”“Yes; I also have a pious visit to pay.”Morrel allowed his hand to fall into that which the count extended to him; thenwith an inexpressibly sorrowful inclination of the head he quitted the countand bent his steps to the east of the city. Monte Cristo remained on the samespot until Maximilian was out of sight; he then walked slowly towards theAllées de Meilhan to seek out a small house with which our readers were madefamiliar at the beginning of this story.It yet stood, under the shade of the fine avenue of lime-trees, which forms oneof the most frequent walks of the idlers of Marseilles, covered by an immensevine, which spreads its aged and blackened branches over the stone front, burntyellow by the ardent sun of the south. Two stone steps worn away by thefriction of many feet led to the door, which was made of three planks; the doorhad never been painted or varnished, so great cracks yawned in it during thedry season to close again when the rains came on. The house, with all itscrumbling antiquity and apparent misery, was yet cheerful and picturesque, andwas the same that old Dantès formerly inhabited—the only difference beingthat the old man occupied merely the garret, while the whole house was nowplaced at the command of Mercédès by the count.The woman whom the count had seen leave the ship with so much regret enteredthis house; she had scarcely closed the door after her when Monte Cristoappeared at the corner of a street, so that he found and lost her again almostat the same instant. The worn out steps were old acquaintances of his; he knewbetter than anyone else how to open that weather-beaten door with the largeheaded nail which served to raise the latch within. He entered withoutknocking, or giving any other intimation of his presence, as if he had been afriend or the master of the place. At the end of a passage paved with bricks,was a little garden, bathed in sunshine, and rich in warmth and light. In thisgarden Mercédès had found, at the place indicated by the count, the sum ofmoney which he, through a sense of delicacy, had described as having beenplaced there twenty-four years previously. The trees of the garden were easilyseen from the steps of the street-door.Monte Cristo, on stepping into the house, heard a sigh that was almost a deepsob; he looked in the direction whence it came, and there under an arbor ofVirginia jessamine,[29]with its thick foliage and beautiful long purple flowers, he saw Mercédèsseated, with her head bowed, and weeping bitterly. She had raised her veil, andwith her face hidden by her hands was giving free scope to the sighs and tearswhich had been so long restrained by the presence of her son.Monte Cristo advanced a few steps, which were heard on the gravel. Mercédèsraised her head, and uttered a cry of terror on beholding a man before her.“Madame,” said the count, “it is no longer in my power torestore you to happiness, but I offer you consolation; will you deign to acceptit as coming from a friend?”“I am, indeed, most wretched,” replied Mercédès. “Alone inthe world, I had but my son, and he has left me!”“He possesses a noble heart, madame,” replied the count, “andhe has acted rightly. He feels that every man owes a tribute to his country;some contribute their talents, others their industry; these devote their blood,those their nightly labors, to the same cause. Had he remained with you, hislife must have become a hateful burden, nor would he have participated in yourgriefs. He will increase in strength and honor by struggling with adversity,which he will convert into prosperity. Leave him to build up the future foryou, and I venture to say you will confide it to safe hands.”“Oh,” replied the wretched woman, mournfully shaking her head,“the prosperity of which you speak, and which, from the bottom of myheart, I pray God in his mercy to grant him, I can never enjoy. The bitter cupof adversity has been drained by me to the very dregs, and I feel that thegrave is not far distant. You have acted kindly, count, in bringing me back tothe place where I have enjoyed so much bliss. I ought to meet death on the samespot where happiness was once all my own.”“Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “your words sear and embitter myheart, the more so as you have every reason to hate me. I have been the causeof all your misfortunes; but why do you pity, instead of blaming me? You renderme still more unhappy——”“Hate you, blame you—you, Edmond! Hate, reproach, the manthat has spared my son’s life! For was it not your fatal and sanguinaryintention to destroy that son of whom M. de Morcerf was so proud? Oh, look atme closely, and discover, if you can, even the semblance of a reproach inme.”The count looked up and fixed his eyes on Mercédès, who arose partly from herseat and extended both her hands towards him.“Oh, look at me,” continued she, with a feeling of profoundmelancholy, “my eyes no longer dazzle by their brilliancy, for the timehas long fled since I used to smile on Edmond Dantès, who anxiously looked outfor me from the window of yonder garret, then inhabited by his old father.Years of grief have created an abyss between those days and the present. Ineither reproach you nor hate you, my friend. Oh, no, Edmond, it is myself thatI blame, myself that I hate! Oh, miserable creature that I am!” criedshe, clasping her hands, and raising her eyes to heaven. “I oncepossessed piety, innocence, and love, the three ingredients of the happiness ofangels, and now what am I?”Monte Cristo approached her, and silently took her hand.“No,” said she, withdrawing it gently—“no, my friend,touch me not. You have spared me, yet of all those who have fallen under yourvengeance I was the most guilty. They were influenced by hatred, by avarice,and by self-love; but I was base, and for want of courage acted against myjudgment. Nay, do not press my hand, Edmond; you are thinking, I am sure, ofsome kind speech to console me, but do not utter it to me, reserve it forothers more worthy of your kindness. See” (and she exposed her facecompletely to view)—“see, misfortune has silvered my hair, my eyeshave shed so many tears that they are encircled by a rim of purple, and my browis wrinkled. You, Edmond, on the contrary,—you are still young, handsome,dignified; it is because you have had faith; because you have had strength,because you have had trust in God, and God has sustained you. But as for me, Ihave been a coward; I have denied God and he has abandoned me.”Mercédès burst into tears; her woman’s heart was breaking under its loadof memories. Monte Cristo took her hand and imprinted a kiss on it; but sheherself felt that it was a kiss of no greater warmth than he would havebestowed on the hand of some marble statue of a saint.“It often happens,” continued she, “that a first faultdestroys the prospects of a whole life. I believed you dead; why did I surviveyou? What good has it done me to mourn for you eternally in the secret recessesof my heart?—only to make a woman of thirty-nine look like a woman offifty. Why, having recognized you, and I the only one to do so—why was Iable to save my son alone? Ought I not also to have rescued the man that I hadaccepted for a husband, guilty though he were? Yet I let him die! What do Isay? Oh, merciful heavens, was I not accessory to his death by my supineinsensibility, by my contempt for him, not remembering, or not willing toremember, that it was for my sake he had become a traitor and a perjurer? Inwhat am I benefited by accompanying my son so far, since I now abandon him, andallow him to depart alone to the baneful climate of Africa? Oh, I have beenbase, cowardly, I tell you; I have abjured my affections, and like allrenegades I am of evil omen to those who surround me!”“No, Mercédès,” said Monte Cristo, “no; you judge yourselfwith too much severity. You are a noble-minded woman, and it was your griefthat disarmed me. Still I was but an agent, led on by an invisible and offendedDeity, who chose not to withhold the fatal blow that I was destined to hurl. Itake that God to witness, at whose feet I have prostrated myself daily for thelast ten years, that I would have sacrificed my life to you, and with my lifethe projects that were indissolubly linked with it. But—and I say it withsome pride, Mercédès—God needed me, and I lived. Examine the past and thepresent, and endeavor to dive into futurity, and then say whether I am not adivine instrument. The most dreadful misfortunes, the most frightfulsufferings, the abandonment of all those who loved me, the persecution of thosewho did not know me, formed the trials of my youth; when suddenly, fromcaptivity, solitude, misery, I was restored to light and liberty, and becamethe possessor of a fortune so brilliant, so unbounded, so unheard-of, that Imust have been blind not to be conscious that God had endowed me with it towork out his own great designs. From that time I looked upon this fortune assomething confided to me for a particular purpose. Not a thought was given to alife which you once, Mercédès, had the power to render blissful; not one hourof peaceful calm was mine; but I felt myself driven on like an exterminatingangel. Like adventurous captains about to embark on some enterprise full ofdanger, I laid in my provisions, I loaded my weapons, I collected every meansof attack and defence; I inured my body to the most violent exercises, my soulto the bitterest trials; I taught my arm to slay, my eyes to beholdexcruciating sufferings, and my mouth to smile at the most horrid spectacles.Good-natured, confiding, and forgiving as I had been, I became revengeful,cunning, and wicked, or rather, immovable as fate. Then I launched out into thepath that was opened to me. I overcame every obstacle, and reached the goal;but woe to those who stood in my pathway!”“Enough,” said Mercédès; “enough, Edmond! Believe me, thatshe who alone recognized you has been the only one to comprehend you; and hadshe crossed your path, and you had crushed her like glass, still, Edmond, stillshe must have admired you! Like the gulf between me and the past, there is anabyss between you, Edmond, and the rest of mankind; and I tell you freely thatthe comparison I draw between you and other men will ever be one of my greatesttortures. No, there is nothing in the world to resemble you in worth andgoodness! But we must say farewell, Edmond, and let us part.”“Before I leave you, Mercédès, have you no request to make?” saidthe count.“I desire but one thing in this world, Edmond,—the happiness of myson.”“Pray to the Almighty to spare his life, and I will take upon myself topromote his happiness.”“Thank you, Edmond.”“But have you no request to make for yourself, Mercédès?”“For myself I want nothing. I live, as it were, between two graves. Oneis that of Edmond Dantès, lost to me long, long since. He had my love! Thatword ill becomes my faded lip now, but it is a memory dear to my heart, and onethat I would not lose for all that the world contains. The other grave is thatof the man who met his death from the hand of Edmond Dantès. I approve of thedeed, but I must pray for the dead.”“Your son shall be happy, Mercédès,” repeated the count.“Then I shall enjoy as much happiness as this world can possiblyconfer.”“But what are your intentions?”Mercédès smiled sadly.“To say that I shall live here, like the Mercédès of other times, gainingmy bread by labor, would not be true, nor would you believe me. I have nolonger the strength to do anything but to spend my days in prayer. However, Ishall have no occasion to work, for the little sum of money buried by you, andwhich I found in the place you mentioned, will be sufficient to maintain me.Rumor will probably be busy respecting me, my occupations, my manner ofliving—that will signify but little, that concerns God, you, andmyself.”“Mercédès,” said the count, “I do not say it to blame you,but you made an unnecessary sacrifice in relinquishing the whole of the fortuneamassed by M. de Morcerf; half of it at least by right belonged to you, invirtue of your vigilance and economy.”“I perceive what you are intending to propose to me; but I cannot acceptit, Edmond—my son would not permit it.”“Nothing shall be done without the full approbation of Albert de Morcerf.I will make myself acquainted with his intentions and will submit to them. Butif he be willing to accept my offers, will you oppose them?”“You well know, Edmond, that I am no longer a reasoning creature; I haveno will, unless it be the will never to decide. I have been so overwhelmed bythe many storms that have broken over my head, that I am become passive in thehands of the Almighty, like a sparrow in the talons of an eagle. I live,because it is not ordained for me to die. If succor be sent to me, I willaccept it.”“Ah, madame,” said Monte Cristo, “you should not talk thus!It is not so we should evince our resignation to the will of heaven; on thecontrary, we are all free agents.”“Alas!” exclaimed Mercédès, “if it were so, if I possessedfree-will, but without the power to render that will efficacious, it woulddrive me to despair.”Monte Cristo dropped his head and shrank from the vehemence of her grief.“Will you not even say you will see me again?” he asked.“On the contrary, we shall meet again,” said Mercédès, pointing toheaven with solemnity. “I tell you so to prove to you that I stillhope.”And after pressing her own trembling hand upon that of the count, Mercédèsrushed up the stairs and disappeared. Monte Cristo slowly left the house andturned towards the quay. But Mercédès did not witness his departure, althoughshe was seated at the little window of the room which had been occupied by oldDantès. Her eyes were straining to see the ship which was carrying her son overthe vast sea; but still her voice involuntarily murmured softly:“Edmond, Edmond, Edmond!” Chapter 113. The PastThe count departed witha sad heart from the house in which he had left Mercédès, probably never tobehold her again. Since the death of little Edward a great change had takenplace in Monte Cristo. Having reached the summit of his vengeance by a long andtortuous path, he saw an abyss of doubt yawning before him. More than this, theconversation which had just taken place between Mercédès and himself hadawakened so many recollections in his heart that he felt it necessary to combatwith them. A man of the count’s temperament could not long indulge inthat melancholy which can exist in common minds, but which destroys superiorones. He thought he must have made an error in his calculations if he now foundcause to blame himself.“I cannot have deceived myself,” he said; “I must look uponthe past in a false light. What!” he continued, “can I have beenfollowing a false path?—can the end which I proposed be a mistakenend?—can one hour have sufficed to prove to an architect that the workupon which he founded all his hopes was an impossible, if not a sacrilegious,undertaking? I cannot reconcile myself to this idea—it would madden me.The reason why I am now dissatisfied is that I have not a clear appreciation ofthe past. The past, like the country through which we walk, becomes indistinctas we advance. My position is like that of a person wounded in a dream; hefeels the wound, though he cannot recollect when he received it.“Come, then, thou regenerate man, thou extravagant prodigal, thouawakened sleeper, thou all-powerful visionary, thou invinciblemillionaire,—once again review thy past life of starvation andwretchedness, revisit the scenes where fate and misfortune conducted, and wheredespair received thee. Too many diamonds, too much gold and splendor, are nowreflected by the mirror in which Monte Cristo seeks to behold Dantès. Hide thydiamonds, bury thy gold, shroud thy splendor, exchange riches for poverty,liberty for a prison, a living body for a corpse!”As he thus reasoned, Monte Cristo walked down the Rue de la Caisserie. It wasthe same through which, twenty-four years ago, he had been conducted by asilent and nocturnal guard; the houses, today so smiling and animated, were onthat night dark, mute, and closed.“And yet they were the same,” murmured Monte Cristo, “onlynow it is broad daylight instead of night; it is the sun which brightens theplace, and makes it appear so cheerful.”He proceeded towards the quay by the Rue Saint-Laurent, and advanced to theConsigne; it was the point where he had embarked. A pleasure-boat with stripedawning was going by. Monte Cristo called the owner, who immediately rowed up tohim with the eagerness of a boatman hoping for a good fare.The weather was magnificent, and the excursion a treat. The sun, red andflaming, was sinking into the embrace of the welcoming ocean. The sea, smoothas crystal, was now and then disturbed by the leaping of fish, which werepursued by some unseen enemy and sought for safety in another element; while onthe extreme verge of the horizon might be seen the fishermen’s boats,white and graceful as the sea-gull, or the merchant vessels bound for Corsicaor Spain.But notwithstanding the serene sky, the gracefully formed boats, and the goldenlight in which the whole scene was bathed, the Count of Monte Cristo, wrappedin his cloak, could think only of this terrible voyage, the details of whichwere one by one recalled to his memory. The solitary light burning at theCatalans; that first sight of the Château d’If, which told him whitherthey were leading him; the struggle with the gendarmes when he wished to throwhimself overboard; his despair when he found himself vanquished, and thesensation when the muzzle of the carbine touched his forehead—all thesewere brought before him in vivid and frightful reality.Like the streams which the heat of the summer has dried up, and which after theautumnal storms gradually begin oozing drop by drop, so did the count feel hisheart gradually fill with the bitterness which formerly nearly overwhelmedEdmond Dantès. Clear sky, swift-flitting boats, and brilliant sunshinedisappeared; the heavens were hung with black, and the gigantic structure ofthe Château d’If seemed like the phantom of a mortal enemy. As theyreached the shore, the count instinctively shrunk to the extreme end of theboat, and the owner was obliged to call out, in his sweetest tone of voice:“Sir, we are at the landing.”Monte Cristo remembered that on that very spot, on the same rock, he had beenviolently dragged by the guards, who forced him to ascend the slope at thepoints of their bayonets. The journey had seemed very long to Dantès, but MonteCristo found it equally short. Each stroke of the oar seemed to awaken a newthrong of ideas, which sprang up with the flying spray of the sea.There had been no prisoners confined in the Château d’If since therevolution of July; it was only inhabited by a guard, kept there for theprevention of smuggling. A concierge waited at the door to exhibit to visitorsthis monument of curiosity, once a scene of terror.The count inquired whether any of the ancient jailers were still there; butthey had all been pensioned, or had passed on to some other employment. Theconcierge who attended him had only been there since 1830. He visited his owndungeon. He again beheld the dull light vainly endeavoring to penetrate thenarrow opening. His eyes rested upon the spot where had stood his bed, sincethen removed, and behind the bed the new stones indicated where the breach madeby the Abbé Faria had been. Monte Cristo felt his limbs tremble; he seatedhimself upon a log of wood.“Are there any stories connected with this prison besides the onerelating to the poisoning of Mirabeau?” asked the count; “are thereany traditions respecting these dismal abodes,—in which it is difficultto believe men can ever have imprisoned their fellow-creatures?”“Yes, sir; indeed, the jailer Antoine told me one connected with thisvery dungeon.”Monte Cristo shuddered; Antoine had been his jailer. He had almost forgottenhis name and face, but at the mention of the name he recalled his person as heused to see it, the face encircled by a beard, wearing the brown jacket, thebunch of keys, the jingling of which he still seemed to hear. The count turnedaround, and fancied he saw him in the corridor, rendered still darker by thetorch carried by the concierge.“Would you like to hear the story, sir?”“Yes; relate it,” said Monte Cristo, pressing his hand to his heartto still its violent beatings; he felt afraid of hearing his own history.“This dungeon,” said the concierge, “was, it appears, sometime ago occupied by a very dangerous prisoner, the more so since he was fullof industry. Another person was confined in the Château at the same time, buthe was not wicked, he was only a poor mad priest.”“Ah, indeed?—mad!” repeated Monte Cristo; “and what washis mania?”“He offered millions to anyone who would set him at liberty.”Monte Cristo raised his eyes, but he could not see the heavens; there was astone veil between him and the firmament. He thought that there had been noless thick a veil before the eyes of those to whom Faria offered the treasures.“Could the prisoners see each other?” he asked.“Oh, no, sir, it was expressly forbidden; but they eluded the vigilanceof the guards, and made a passage from one dungeon to the other.”“And which of them made this passage?”“Oh, it must have been the young man, certainly, for he was strong andindustrious, while the abbé was aged and weak; besides, his mind was toovacillating to allow him to carry out an idea.”“Blind fools!” murmured the count.“However, be that as it may, the young man made a tunnel, how or by whatmeans no one knows; but he made it, and there is the evidence yet remaining ofhis work. Do you see it?” and the man held the torch to the wall.“Ah, yes; I see,” said the count, in a voice hoarse from emotion.“The result was that the two men communicated with one another; how longthey did so, nobody knows. One day the old man fell ill and died. Now guesswhat the young one did?”“Tell me.”“He carried off the corpse, which he placed in his own bed with its faceto the wall; then he entered the empty dungeon, closed the entrance, andslipped into the sack which had contained the dead body. Did you ever hear ofsuch an idea?”Monte Cristo closed his eyes, and seemed again to experience all the sensationshe had felt when the coarse canvas, yet moist with the cold dews of death, hadtouched his face.The jailer continued:“Now this was his project. He fancied that they buried the dead at theChâteau d’If, and imagining they would not expend much labor on the graveof a prisoner, he calculated on raising the earth with his shoulders, butunfortunately their arrangements at the Château frustrated his projects. Theynever buried the dead; they merely attached a heavy cannon-ball to the feet,and then threw them into the sea. This is what was done. The young man wasthrown from the top of the rock; the corpse was found on the bed next day, andthe whole truth was guessed, for the men who performed the office thenmentioned what they had not dared to speak of before, that at the moment thecorpse was thrown into the deep, they heard a shriek, which was almostimmediately stifled by the water in which it disappeared.”The count breathed with difficulty; the cold drops ran down his forehead, andhis heart was full of anguish.“No,” he muttered, “the doubt I felt was but the commencementof forgetfulness; but here the wound reopens, and the heart again thirsts forvengeance. And the prisoner,” he continued aloud, “was he everheard of afterwards?”“Oh, no; of course not. You can understand that one of two things musthave happened; he must either have fallen flat, in which case the blow, from aheight of ninety feet, must have killed him instantly, or he must have fallenupright, and then the weight would have dragged him to the bottom, where heremained—poor fellow!”“Then you pity him?” said the count.“Ma foi, yes; though he was in his own element.”“What do you mean?”“The report was that he had been a naval officer, who had been confinedfor plotting with the Bonapartists.”“Great is truth,” muttered the count, “fire cannot burn, norwater drown it! Thus the poor sailor lives in the recollection of those whonarrate his history; his terrible story is recited in the chimney-corner, and ashudder is felt at the description of his transit through the air to beswallowed by the deep.” Then, the count added aloud, “Was his nameever known?”“Oh, yes; but only as No. 34.”“Oh, Villefort, Villefort,” murmured the count, “this scenemust often have haunted thy sleepless hours!”“Do you wish to see anything more, sir?” said the concierge.“Yes, especially if you will show me the poor abbé’s room.”“Ah! No. 27.”“Yes; No. 27.” repeated the count, who seemed to hear the voice ofthe abbé answering him in those very words through the wall when asked hisname.“Come, sir.”“Wait,” said Monte Cristo, “I wish to take one final glancearound this room.”“This is fortunate,” said the guide; “I have forgotten theother key.”“Go and fetch it.”“I will leave you the torch, sir.”“No, take it away; I can see in the dark.”“Why, you are like No. 34. They said he was so accustomed to darknessthat he could see a pin in the darkest corner of his dungeon.”“He spent fourteen years to arrive at that,” muttered the count.The guide carried away the torch. The count had spoken correctly. Scarcely hada few seconds elapsed, ere he saw everything as distinctly as by daylight. Thenhe looked around him, and really recognized his dungeon.“Yes,” he said, “there is the stone upon which I used to sit;there is the impression made by my shoulders on the wall; there is the mark ofmy blood made when one day I dashed my head against the wall. Oh, thosefigures, how well I remember them! I made them one day to calculate the age ofmy father, that I might know whether I should find him still living, and thatof Mercédès, to know if I should find her still free. After finishing thatcalculation, I had a minute’s hope. I did not reckon upon hunger andinfidelity!” and a bitter laugh escaped the count.He saw in fancy the burial of his father, and the marriage of Mercédès. On theother side of the dungeon he perceived an inscription, the white letters ofwhich were still visible on the green wall:“‘Oh, God!’” he read, “‘preservemy memory!’”“Oh, yes,” he cried, “that was my only prayer at last; I nolonger begged for liberty, but memory; I dreaded to become mad and forgetful.Oh, God, thou hast preserved my memory; I thank thee, I thank thee!”At this moment the light of the torch was reflected on the wall; the guide wascoming; Monte Cristo went to meet him.“Follow me, sir;” and without ascending the stairs the guideconducted him by a subterraneous passage to another entrance. There, again,Monte Cristo was assailed by a multitude of thoughts. The first thing that methis eye was the meridian, drawn by the abbé on the wall, by which he calculatedthe time; then he saw the remains of the bed on which the poor prisoner haddied. The sight of this, instead of exciting the anguish experienced by thecount in the dungeon, filled his heart with a soft and grateful sentiment, andtears fell from his eyes.“This is where the mad abbé was kept, sir, and that is where the youngman entered;” and the guide pointed to the opening, which had remainedunclosed. “From the appearance of the stone,” he continued,“a learned gentleman discovered that the prisoners might havecommunicated together for ten years. Poor things! Those must have been tenweary years.”Dantès took some louis from his pocket, and gave them to the man who had twiceunconsciously pitied him. The guide took them, thinking them merely a fewpieces of little value; but the light of the torch revealed their true worth.“Sir,” he said, “you have made a mistake; you have given megold.”“I know it.”The concierge looked upon the count with surprise.“Sir,” he cried, scarcely able to believe his goodfortune—“sir, I cannot understand your generosity!”“Oh, it is very simple, my good fellow; I have been a sailor, and yourstory touched me more than it would others.”“Then, sir, since you are so liberal, I ought to offer yousomething.”“What have you to offer to me, my friend? Shells? Straw-work? Thankyou!”“No, sir, neither of those; something connected with this story.”“Really? What is it?”“Listen,” said the guide; “I said to myself, ‘Somethingis always left in a cell inhabited by one prisoner for fifteen years,’ soI began to sound the wall.”“Ah,” cried Monte Cristo, remembering the abbé’s twohiding-places.“After some search, I found that the floor gave a hollow sound near thehead of the bed, and at the hearth.”“Yes,” said the count, “yes.”“I raised the stones, and found——”“A rope-ladder and some tools?”“How do you know that?” asked the guide in astonishment.“I do not know—I only guess it, because that sort of thing isgenerally found in prisoners’ cells.”“Yes, sir, a rope-ladder and tools.”“And have you them yet?”“No, sir; I sold them to visitors, who considered them great curiosities;but I have still something left.”“What is it?” asked the count, impatiently.“A sort of book, written upon strips of cloth.”“Go and fetch it, my good fellow; and if it be what I hope, you will dowell.”“I will run for it, sir;” and the guide went out.Then the count knelt down by the side of the bed, which death had convertedinto an altar.“Oh, second father,” he exclaimed, “thou who hast given meliberty, knowledge, riches; thou who, like beings of a superior order toourselves, couldst understand the science of good and evil; if in the depths ofthe tomb there still remain something within us which can respond to the voiceof those who are left on earth; if after death the soul ever revisit the placeswhere we have lived and suffered,—then, noble heart, sublime soul, then Iconjure thee by the paternal love thou didst bear me, by the filial obedience Ivowed to thee, grant me some sign, some revelation! Remove from me the remainsof doubt, which, if it change not to conviction, must become remorse!”The count bowed his head, and clasped his hands together.“Here, sir,” said a voice behind him.Monte Cristo shuddered, and arose. The concierge held out the strips of clothupon which the Abbé Faria had spread the riches of his mind. The manuscript wasthe great work by the Abbé Faria upon the kingdoms of Italy. The count seizedit hastily, his eyes immediately fell upon the epigraph, and he read:“Thou shalt tear out the dragons’ teeth, and shall trample thelions under foot, saith the Lord.”“Ah,” he exclaimed, “here is my answer. Thanks, father,thanks.” And feeling in his pocket, he took thence a small pocket-book,which contained ten bank-notes, each of 1,000 francs.“Here,” he said, “take this pocket-book.”“Do you give it to me?”“Yes; but only on condition that you will not open it till I amgone;” and placing in his breast the treasure he had just found, whichwas more valuable to him than the richest jewel, he rushed out of the corridor,and reaching his boat, cried, “To Marseilles!”Then, as he departed, he fixed his eyes upon the gloomy prison.“Woe,” he cried, “to those who confined me in that wretchedprison; and woe to those who forgot that I was there!”As he repassed the Catalans, the count turned around and burying his head inhis cloak murmured the name of a woman. The victory was complete; twice he hadovercome his doubts. The name he pronounced, in a voice of tenderness,amounting almost to love, was that of Haydée.On landing, the count turned towards the cemetery, where he felt sure offinding Morrel. He, too, ten years ago, had piously sought out a tomb, andsought it vainly. He, who returned to France with millions, had been unable tofind the grave of his father, who had perished from hunger. Morrel had indeedplaced a cross over the spot, but it had fallen down and the grave-digger hadburnt it, as he did all the old wood in the churchyard.The worthy merchant had been more fortunate. Dying in the arms of his children,he had been by them laid by the side of his wife, who had preceded him ineternity by two years. Two large slabs of marble, on which were inscribed theirnames, were placed on either side of a little enclosure, railed in, and shadedby four cypress-trees. Morrel was leaning against one of these, mechanicallyfixing his eyes on the graves. His grief was so profound that he was nearlyunconscious.“Maximilian,” said the count, “you should not look on thegraves, but there;” and he pointed upwards.“The dead are everywhere,” said Morrel; “did you not yourselftell me so as we left Paris?”“Maximilian,” said the count, “you asked me during thejourney to allow you to remain some days at Marseilles. Do you still wish to doso?”“I have no wishes, count; only I fancy I could pass the time lesspainfully here than anywhere else.”“So much the better, for I must leave you; but I carry your word with me,do I not?”“Ah, count, I shall forget it.”“No, you will not forget it, because you are a man of honor, Morrel,because you have taken an oath, and are about to do so again.”“Oh, count, have pity upon me. I am so unhappy.”“I have known a man much more unfortunate than you, Morrel.”“Impossible!”“Alas,” said Monte Cristo, “it is the infirmity of our naturealways to believe ourselves much more unhappy than those who groan by oursides!”“What can be more wretched than the man who has lost all he loved anddesired in the world?”“Listen, Morrel, and pay attention to what I am about to tell you. I knewa man who like you had fixed all his hopes of happiness upon a woman. He wasyoung, he had an old father whom he loved, a betrothed bride whom he adored. Hewas about to marry her, when one of the caprices of fate,—which wouldalmost make us doubt the goodness of Providence, if that Providence did notafterwards reveal itself by proving that all is but a means of conducting to anend,—one of those caprices deprived him of his mistress, of the future ofwhich he had dreamed (for in his blindness he forgot he could only read thepresent), and cast him into a dungeon.”“Ah,” said Morrel, “one quits a dungeon in a week, a month,or a year.”“He remained there fourteen years, Morrel,” said the count, placinghis hand on the young man’s shoulder. Maximilian shuddered.“Fourteen years!” he muttered.“Fourteen years!” repeated the count. “During that time hehad many moments of despair. He also, Morrel, like you, considered himself theunhappiest of men.”“Well?” asked Morrel.“Well, at the height of his despair God assisted him through human means.At first, perhaps, he did not recognize the infinite mercy of the Lord, but atlast he took patience and waited. One day he miraculously left the prison,transformed, rich, powerful. His first cry was for his father; but that fatherwas dead.”“My father, too, is dead,” said Morrel.“Yes; but your father died in your arms, happy, respected, rich, and fullof years; his father died poor, despairing, almost doubtful of Providence; andwhen his son sought his grave ten years afterwards, his tomb had disappeared,and no one could say, ‘There sleeps the father you so wellloved.’”“Oh!” exclaimed Morrel.“He was, then, a more unhappy son than you, Morrel, for he could not evenfind his father’s grave.”“But then he had the woman he loved still remaining?”“You are deceived, Morrel, that woman——”“She was dead?”“Worse than that, she was faithless, and had married one of thepersecutors of her betrothed. You see, then, Morrel, that he was a more unhappylover than you.”“And has he found consolation?”“He has at least found peace.”“And does he ever expect to be happy?”“He hopes so, Maximilian.”The young man’s head fell on his breast.“You have my promise,” he said, after a minute’s pause,extending his hand to Monte Cristo. “Only remember——”“On the 5th of October, Morrel, I shall expect you at the Island of MonteCristo. On the 4th a yacht will wait for you in the port of Bastia, it will becalled the Eurus. You will give your name to the captain, who will bringyou to me. It is understood—is it not?”“But, count, do you remember that the 5th of October——”“Child,” replied the count, “not to know the value of aman’s word! I have told you twenty times that if you wish to die on thatday, I will assist you. Morrel, farewell!”“Do you leave me?”“Yes; I have business in Italy. I leave you alone in your struggle withmisfortune—alone with that strong-winged eagle which God sends to bearaloft the elect to his feet. The story of Ganymede, Maximilian, is not a fable,but an allegory.”“When do you leave?”“Immediately; the steamer waits, and in an hour I shall be far from you.Will you accompany me to the harbor, Maximilian?”“I am entirely yours, count.”Morrel accompanied the count to the harbor. The white steam was ascending likea plume of feathers from the black chimney. The steamer soon disappeared, andin an hour afterwards, as the count had said, was scarcely distinguishable inthe horizon amidst the fogs of the night. Chapter 114. PeppinoAt the same time thatthe steamer disappeared behind Cape Morgiou, a man travelling post on the roadfrom Florence to Rome had just passed the little town of Aquapendente. He wastravelling fast enough to cover a great deal of ground without excitingsuspicion. This man was dressed in a greatcoat, or rather a surtout, a littleworse for the journey, but which exhibited the ribbon of the Legion of Honorstill fresh and brilliant, a decoration which also ornamented the under coat.He might be recognized, not only by these signs, but also from the accent withwhich he spoke to the postilion, as a Frenchman.Another proof that he was a native of the universal country was apparent in thefact of his knowing no other Italian words than the terms used in music, andwhich like the “goddam” of Figaro, served all possible linguisticrequirements. “Allegro!” he called out to the postilions atevery ascent. “Moderato!” he cried as they descended. Andheaven knows there are hills enough between Rome and Florence by the way ofAquapendente! These two words greatly amused the men to whom they wereaddressed. On reaching La Storta, the point from whence Rome is first visible,the traveller evinced none of the enthusiastic curiosity which usually leadsstrangers to stand up and endeavor to catch sight of the dome of SaintPeter’s, which may be seen long before any other object isdistinguishable. No, he merely drew a pocketbook from his pocket, and took fromit a paper folded in four, and after having examined it in a manner almostreverential, he said:“Good! I have it still!”The carriage entered by the Porta del Popolo, turned to the left, and stoppedat the Hôtel d’Espagne. Old Pastrini, our former acquaintance, receivedthe traveller at the door, hat in hand. The traveller alighted, ordered a gooddinner, and inquired the address of the house of Thomson & French, whichwas immediately given to him, as it was one of the most celebrated in Rome. Itwas situated in the Via dei Banchi, near St. Peter’s.In Rome, as everywhere else, the arrival of a post-chaise is an event. Tenyoung descendants of Marius and the Gracchi, barefooted and out at elbows, withone hand resting on the hip and the other gracefully curved above the head,stared at the traveller, the post-chaise, and the horses; to these were addedabout fifty little vagabonds from the Papal States, who earned a pittance bydiving into the Tiber at high water from the bridge of St. Angelo. Now, asthese street Arabs of Rome, more fortunate than those of Paris, understandevery language, more especially the French, they heard the traveller order anapartment, a dinner, and finally inquire the way to the house of Thomson &French.The result was that when the new-comer left the hotel with the cicerone,a man detached himself from the rest of the idlers, and without having beenseen by the traveller, and appearing to excite no attention from the guide,followed the stranger with as much skill as a Parisian police agent would haveused.The Frenchman had been so impatient to reach the house of Thomson & Frenchthat he would not wait for the horses to be harnessed, but left word for thecarriage to overtake him on the road, or to wait for him at the bankers’door. He reached it before the carriage arrived. The Frenchman entered, leavingin the anteroom his guide, who immediately entered into conversation with twoor three of the industrious idlers who are always to be found in Rome at thedoors of banking-houses, churches, museums, or theatres. With the Frenchman,the man who had followed him entered too; the Frenchman knocked at the innerdoor, and entered the first room; his shadow did the same.“Messrs. Thomson & French?” inquired the stranger.An attendant arose at a sign from a confidential clerk at the first desk.“Whom shall I announce?” said the attendant.“Baron Danglars.”“Follow me,” said the man.A door opened, through which the attendant and the baron disappeared. The manwho had followed Danglars sat down on a bench. The clerk continued to write forthe next five minutes; the man preserved profound silence, and remainedperfectly motionless. Then the pen of the clerk ceased to move over the paper;he raised his head, and appearing to be perfectly sure of privacy:“Ah, ha,” he said, “here you are, Peppino!”“Yes,” was the laconic reply. “You have found out that thereis something worth having about this large gentleman?”“There is no great merit due to me, for we were informed of it.”“You know his business here, then.”“Pardieu, he has come to draw, but I don’t know howmuch!”“You will know presently, my friend.”“Very well, only do not give me false information as you did the otherday.”“What do you mean?—of whom do you speak? Was it the Englishman whocarried off 3,000 crowns from here the other day?”“No; he really had 3,000 crowns, and we found them. I mean the Russianprince, who you said had 30,000 livres, and we only found 22,000.”“You must have searched badly.”“Luigi Vampa himself searched.”“In that case he must either have paid his debts——”“A Russian do that?”“Or spent the money?”“Possibly, after all.”“Certainly. But you must let me make my observations, or the Frenchmanwill transact his business without my knowing the sum.”Peppino nodded, and taking a rosary from his pocket began to mutter a fewprayers while the clerk disappeared through the same door by which Danglars andthe attendant had gone out. At the expiration of ten minutes the clerk returnedwith a beaming countenance.“Well?” asked Peppino of his friend.“Joy, joy—the sum is large!”“Five or six millions, is it not?”“Yes, you know the amount.”“On the receipt of the Count of Monte Cristo?”“Why, how came you to be so well acquainted with all this?”“I told you we were informed beforehand.”“Then why do you apply to me?”“That I may be sure I have the right man.”“Yes, it is indeed he. Five millions—a pretty sum, eh,Peppino?”“Hush—here is our man!” The clerk seized his pen, and Peppinohis beads; one was writing and the other praying when the door opened. Danglarslooked radiant with joy; the banker accompanied him to the door. Peppinofollowed Danglars.According to the arrangements, the carriage was waiting at the door. The guideheld the door open. Guides are useful people, who will turn their hands toanything. Danglars leaped into the carriage like a young man of twenty. Thecicerone reclosed the door, and sprang up by the side of the coachman.Peppino mounted the seat behind.“Will your excellency visit Saint Peter’s?” asked thecicerone.“I did not come to Rome to see,” said Danglars aloud; then he addedsoftly, with an avaricious smile, “I came to touch!” and he rappedhis pocket-book, in which he had just placed a letter.“Then your excellency is going——”“To the hotel.”“Casa Pastrini!” said the cicerone to the coachman, and thecarriage drove rapidly on.Ten minutes afterwards the baron entered his apartment, and Peppino stationedhimself on the bench outside the door of the hotel, after having whisperedsomething in the ear of one of the descendants of Marius and the Gracchi whomwe noticed at the beginning of the chapter, who immediately ran down the roadleading to the Capitol at his fullest speed. Danglars was tired and sleepy; hetherefore went to bed, placing his pocketbook under his pillow. Peppino had alittle spare time, so he had a game of morra with the facchini, lostthree crowns, and then to console himself drank a bottle of Orvieto.The next morning Danglars awoke late, though he went to bed so early; he hadnot slept well for five or six nights, even if he had slept at all. Hebreakfasted heartily, and caring little, as he said, for the beauties of theEternal City, ordered post-horses at noon. But Danglars had not reckoned uponthe formalities of the police and the idleness of the posting-master. Thehorses only arrived at two o’clock, and the cicerone did not bringthe passport till three.All these preparations had collected a number of idlers round the door ofSignor Pastrini’s; the descendants of Marius and the Gracchi were alsonot wanting. The baron walked triumphantly through the crowd, who for the sakeof gain styled him “your excellency.” As Danglars had hithertocontented himself with being called a baron, he felt rather flattered at thetitle of excellency, and distributed a dozen silver coins among the beggars,who were ready, for twelve more, to call him “your highness.”“Which road?” asked the postilion in Italian.“The Ancona road,” replied the baron. Signor Pastrini interpretedthe question and answer, and the horses galloped off.Danglars intended travelling to Venice, where he would receive one part of hisfortune, and then proceeding to Vienna, where he would find the rest, he meantto take up his residence in the latter town, which he had been told was a cityof pleasure.He had scarcely advanced three leagues out of Rome when daylight began todisappear. Danglars had not intended starting so late, or he would haveremained; he put his head out and asked the postilion how long it would bebefore they reached the next town. “Non capisco” (do notunderstand), was the reply. Danglars bent his head, which he meant to imply,“Very well.” The carriage again moved on.“I will stop at the first posting-house,” said Danglars to himself.He still felt the same self-satisfaction which he had experienced the previousevening, and which had procured him so good a night’s rest. He wasluxuriously stretched in a good English calash, with double springs; he wasdrawn by four good horses, at full gallop; he knew the relay to be at adistance of seven leagues. What subject of meditation could present itself tothe banker, so fortunately become bankrupt?Danglars thought for ten minutes about his wife in Paris; another ten minutesabout his daughter travelling with Mademoiselle d’Armilly; the sameperiod was given to his creditors, and the manner in which he intended spendingtheir money; and then, having no subject left for contemplation, he shut hiseyes, and fell asleep. Now and then a jolt more violent than the rest causedhim to open his eyes; then he felt that he was still being carried with greatrapidity over the same country, thickly strewn with broken aqueducts, whichlooked like granite giants petrified while running a race. But the night wascold, dull, and rainy, and it was much more pleasant for a traveller to remainin the warm carriage than to put his head out of the window to make inquiriesof a postilion whose only answer was “Non capisco.”Danglars therefore continued to sleep, saying to himself that he would be sureto awake at the posting-house. The carriage stopped. Danglars fancied that theyhad reached the long-desired point; he opened his eyes and looked through thewindow, expecting to find himself in the midst of some town, or at leastvillage; but he saw nothing except what seemed like a ruin, where three or fourmen went and came like shadows.Danglars waited a moment, expecting the postilion to come and demand paymentwith the termination of his stage. He intended taking advantage of theopportunity to make fresh inquiries of the new conductor; but the horses wereunharnessed, and others put in their places, without anyone claiming money fromthe traveller. Danglars, astonished, opened the door; but a strong hand pushedhim back, and the carriage rolled on. The baron was completely roused.“Eh?” he said to the postilion, “eh, mio caro?”This was another little piece of Italian the baron had learned from hearing hisdaughter sing Italian duets with Cavalcanti. But mio caro did not reply.Danglars then opened the window.“Come, my friend,” he said, thrusting his hand through the opening,“where are we going?”“Dentro la testa!” answered a solemn and imperious voice,accompanied by a menacing gesture.Danglars thought dentro la testa meant, “Put in your head!”He was making rapid progress in Italian. He obeyed, not without someuneasiness, which, momentarily increasing, caused his mind, instead of being asunoccupied as it was when he began his journey, to fill with ideas which werevery likely to keep a traveller awake, more especially one in such a situationas Danglars. His eyes acquired that quality which in the first moment of strongemotion enables them to see distinctly, and which afterwards fails from beingtoo much taxed. Before we are alarmed, we see correctly; when we are alarmed,we see double; and when we have been alarmed, we see nothing but trouble.Danglars observed a man in a cloak galloping at the right hand of the carriage.“Some gendarme!” he exclaimed. “Can I have been interceptedby French telegrams to the pontifical authorities?”He resolved to end his anxiety. “Where are you taking me?” heasked.“Dentro la testa,” replied the same voice, with the samemenacing accent.Danglars turned to the left; another man on horseback was galloping on thatside.“Decidedly,” said Danglars, with the perspiration on his forehead,“I must be under arrest.” And he threw himself back in the calash,not this time to sleep, but to think.Directly afterwards the moon rose. He then saw the great aqueducts, those stonephantoms which he had before remarked, only then they were on the right hand,now they were on the left. He understood that they had described a circle, andwere bringing him back to Rome.“Oh, unfortunate!” he cried, “they must have obtained myarrest.”The carriage continued to roll on with frightful speed. An hour of terrorelapsed, for every spot they passed showed that they were on the road back. Atlength he saw a dark mass, against which it seemed as if the carriage was aboutto dash; but the vehicle turned to one side, leaving the barrier behind andDanglars saw that it was one of the ramparts encircling Rome.“Mon dieu!” cried Danglars, “we are not returning toRome; then it is not justice which is pursuing me! Gracious heavens; anotheridea presents itself—what if they should be——”His hair stood on end. He remembered those interesting stories, so littlebelieved in Paris, respecting Roman bandits; he remembered the adventures thatAlbert de Morcerf had related when it was intended that he should marryMademoiselle Eugénie. “They are robbers, perhaps,” he muttered.Just then the carriage rolled on something harder than gravel road. Danglarshazarded a look on both sides of the road, and perceived monuments of asingular form, and his mind now recalled all the details Morcerf had related,and comparing them with his own situation, he felt sure that he must be on theAppian Way. On the left, in a sort of valley, he perceived a circularexcavation. It was Caracalla’s circus. On a word from the man who rode atthe side of the carriage, it stopped. At the same time the door was opened.“Scendi!” exclaimed a commanding voice.Danglars instantly descended; although he did not yet speak Italian, heunderstood it very well. More dead than alive, he looked around him. Four mensurrounded him, besides the postilion.“Di quà,” said one of the men, descending a little pathleading out of the Appian Way. Danglars followed his guide without opposition,and had no occasion to turn around to see whether the three others werefollowing him. Still it appeared as though they were stationed at equaldistances from one another, like sentinels. After walking for about tenminutes, during which Danglars did not exchange a single word with his guide,he found himself between a hillock and a clump of high weeds; three men,standing silent, formed a triangle, of which he was the centre. He wished tospeak, but his tongue refused to move.“Avanti!” said the same sharp and imperative voice.This time Danglars had double reason to understand, for if the word and gesturehad not explained the speaker’s meaning, it was clearly expressed by theman walking behind him, who pushed him so rudely that he struck against theguide. This guide was our friend Peppino, who dashed into the thicket of highweeds, through a path which none but lizards or polecats could have imagined tobe an open road.Peppino stopped before a rock overhung by thick hedges; the rock, half open,afforded a passage to the young man, who disappeared like the evil spirits inthe fairy tales. The voice and gesture of the man who followed Danglars orderedhim to do the same. There was no longer any doubt, the bankrupt was in thehands of Roman banditti. Danglars acquitted himself like a man placed betweentwo dangerous positions, and who is rendered brave by fear. Notwithstanding hislarge stomach, certainly not intended to penetrate the fissures of theCampagna, he slid down like Peppino, and closing his eyes fell upon his feet.As he touched the ground, he opened his eyes.The path was wide, but dark. Peppino, who cared little for being recognized nowthat he was in his own territories, struck a light and lit a torch. Two othermen descended after Danglars forming the rearguard, and pushing Danglarswhenever he happened to stop, they came by a gentle declivity to theintersection of two corridors. The walls were hollowed out in sepulchres, oneabove the other, and which seemed in contrast with the white stones to opentheir large dark eyes, like those which we see on the faces of the dead. Asentinel struck the rings of his carbine against his left hand.“Who comes there?” he cried.“A friend, a friend!” said Peppino; “but where is thecaptain?”“There,” said the sentinel, pointing over his shoulder to aspacious crypt, hollowed out of the rock, the lights from which shone into thepassage through the large arched openings.“Fine spoil, captain, fine spoil!” said Peppino in Italian, andtaking Danglars by the collar of his coat he dragged him to an openingresembling a door, through which they entered the apartment which the captainappeared to have made his dwelling-place.“Is this the man?” asked the captain, who was attentively readingPlutarch’s Life of Alexander.“Himself, captain—himself.”“Very well, show him to me.”At this rather impertinent order, Peppino raised his torch to the face ofDanglars, who hastily withdrew that he might not have his eyelashes burnt. Hisagitated features presented the appearance of pale and hideous terror.“The man is tired,” said the captain, “conduct him to hisbed.”“Oh,” murmured Danglars, “that bed is probably one of thecoffins hollowed in the wall, and the sleep I shall enjoy will be death fromone of the poniards I see glistening in the darkness.”From their beds of dried leaves or wolf-skins at the back of the chamber nowarose the companions of the man who had been found by Albert de Morcerf readingCæsar’s Commentaries, and by Danglars studying the Life ofAlexander. The banker uttered a groan and followed his guide; he neithersupplicated nor exclaimed. He no longer possessed strength, will, power, orfeeling; he followed where they led him. At length he found himself at the footof a staircase, and he mechanically lifted his foot five or six times. Then alow door was opened before him, and bending his head to avoid striking hisforehead he entered a small room cut out of the rock. The cell was clean,though empty, and dry, though situated at an immeasurable distance under theearth. A bed of dried grass covered with goat-skins was placed in one corner.Danglars brightened up on beholding it, fancying that it gave some promise ofsafety.“Oh, God be praised,” he said; “it is a real bed!”This was the second time within the hour that he had invoked the name of God.He had not done so for ten years before.“Ecco!” said the guide, and pushing Danglars into the cell,he closed the door upon him.A bolt grated and Danglars was a prisoner. If there had been no bolt, it wouldhave been impossible for him to pass through the midst of the garrison who heldthe catacombs of St. Sebastian, encamped round a master whom our readers musthave recognized as the famous Luigi Vampa.Danglars, too, had recognized the bandit, whose existence he would not believewhen Albert de Morcerf mentioned him in Paris; and not only did he recognizehim, but the cell in which Albert had been confined, and which was probablykept for the accommodation of strangers. These recollections were dwelt uponwith some pleasure by Danglars, and restored him to some degree oftranquillity. Since the bandits had not despatched him at once, he felt thatthey would not kill him at all. They had arrested him for the purpose ofrobbery, and as he had only a few louis about him, he doubted not he would beransomed.He remembered that Morcerf had been taxed at 4,000 crowns, and as he consideredhimself of much greater importance than Morcerf he fixed his own price at 8,000crowns. Eight thousand crowns amounted to 48,000 livres; he would then haveabout 5,050,000 francs left. With this sum he could manage to keep out ofdifficulties. Therefore, tolerably secure in being able to extricate himselffrom his position, provided he were not rated at the unreasonable sum of5,050,000 francs, he stretched himself on his bed, and after turning over twoor three times, fell asleep with the tranquillity of the hero whose life LuigiVampa was studying. Chapter 115. LuigiVampa’s Bill of FareWe awake from everysleep except the one dreaded by Danglars. He awoke. To a Parisian accustomed tosilken curtains, walls hung with velvet drapery, and the soft perfume ofburning wood, the white smoke of which diffuses itself in graceful curvesaround the room, the appearance of the whitewashed cell which greeted his eyeson awakening seemed like the continuation of some disagreeable dream. But insuch a situation a single moment suffices to change the strongest doubt intocertainty.“Yes, yes,” he murmured, “I am in the hands of the brigandsof whom Albert de Morcerf spoke.” His first idea was to breathe, that hemight know whether he was wounded. He borrowed this from Don Quixote,the only book he had ever read, but which he still slightly remembered.“No,” he cried, “they have not wounded, but perhaps they haverobbed me!” and he thrust his hands into his pockets. They wereuntouched; the hundred louis he had reserved for his journey from Rome toVenice were in his trousers pocket, and in that of his greatcoat he found thelittle note-case containing his letter of credit for 5,050,000 francs.“Singular bandits!” he exclaimed; “they have left me my purseand pocket-book. As I was saying last night, they intend me to be ransomed.Hello, here is my watch! Let me see what time it is.”Danglars’ watch, one of Breguet’s repeaters, which he had carefullywound up on the previous night, struck half past five. Without this, Danglarswould have been quite ignorant of the time, for daylight did not reach hiscell. Should he demand an explanation from the bandits, or should he waitpatiently for them to propose it? The last alternative seemed the most prudent,so he waited until twelve o’clock. During all this time a sentinel, whohad been relieved at eight o’clock, had been watching his door.Danglars suddenly felt a strong inclination to see the person who kept watchover him. He had noticed that a few rays, not of daylight, but from a lamp,penetrated through the ill-joined planks of the door; he approached just as thebrigand was refreshing himself with a mouthful of brandy, which, owing to theleathern bottle containing it, sent forth an odor which was extremelyunpleasant to Danglars. “Faugh!” he exclaimed, retreating to thefarther corner of his cell.At twelve this man was replaced by another functionary, and Danglars, wishingto catch sight of his new guardian, approached the door again.He was an athletic, gigantic bandit, with large eyes, thick lips, and a flatnose; his red hair fell in dishevelled masses like snakes around his shoulders.“Ah, ha,” cried Danglars, “this fellow is more like an ogrethan anything else; however, I am rather too old and tough to be very goodeating!”We see that Danglars was collected enough to jest; at the same time, as thoughto disprove the ogreish propensities, the man took some black bread, cheese,and onions from his wallet, which he began devouring voraciously.“May I be hanged,” said Danglars, glancing at the bandit’sdinner through the crevices of the door,—“may I be hanged if I canunderstand how people can eat such filth!” and he withdrew to seathimself upon his goat-skin, which reminded him of the smell of the brandy.But the mysteries of nature are incomprehensible, and there are certaininvitations contained in even the coarsest food which appeal very irresistiblyto a fasting stomach. Danglars felt his own not to be very well supplied justthen, and gradually the man appeared less ugly, the bread less black, and thecheese more fresh, while those dreadful vulgar onions recalled to his mindcertain sauces and side-dishes, which his cook prepared in a very superiormanner whenever he said, “Monsieur Deniseau, let me have a nice littlefricassee today.” He got up and knocked on the door; the bandit raisedhis head. Danglars knew that he was heard, so he redoubled his blows.“Che cosa?” asked the bandit.“Come, come,” said Danglars, tapping his fingers against the door,“I think it is quite time to think of giving me something to eat!”But whether he did not understand him, or whether he had received no ordersrespecting the nourishment of Danglars, the giant, without answering, went onwith his dinner. Danglars’ feelings were hurt, and not wishing to puthimself under obligations to the brute, the banker threw himself down again onhis goat-skin and did not breathe another word.Four hours passed by and the giant was replaced by another bandit. Danglars,who really began to experience sundry gnawings at the stomach, arose softly,again applied his eye to the crack of the door, and recognized the intelligentcountenance of his guide. It was, indeed, Peppino who was preparing to mountguard as comfortably as possible by seating himself opposite to the door, andplacing between his legs an earthen pan, containing chick-peas stewed withbacon. Near the pan he also placed a pretty little basket of Villetri grapesand a flask of Orvieto. Peppino was decidedly an epicure. Danglars watchedthese preparations and his mouth watered.“Come,” he said to himself, “let me try if he will be moretractable than the other;” and he tapped gently at the door.“On y va,” (coming) exclaimed Peppino, who from frequentingthe house of Signor Pastrini understood French perfectly in all its idioms.Danglars immediately recognized him as the man who had called out in such afurious manner, “Put in your head!” But this was not the time forrecrimination, so he assumed his most agreeable manner and said with a gracioussmile:“Excuse me, sir, but are they not going to give me any dinner?”“Does your excellency happen to be hungry?”“Happen to be hungry,—that’s pretty good, when Ihaven’t eaten for twenty-four hours!” muttered Danglars. Then headded aloud, “Yes, sir, I am hungry—very hungry.”“And your excellency wants something to eat?”“At once, if possible”“Nothing easier,” said Peppino. “Here you can get anythingyou want; by paying for it, of course, as among honest folk.”“Of course!” cried Danglars. “Although, in justice, thepeople who arrest and imprison you, ought, at least, to feed you.”“That is not the custom, excellency,” said Peppino.“A bad reason,” replied Danglars, who reckoned on conciliating hiskeeper; “but I am content. Let me have some dinner!”“At once! What would your excellency like?”And Peppino placed his pan on the ground, so that the steam rose directly underthe nostrils of Danglars. “Give your orders.”“Have you kitchens here?”“Kitchens?—of course—complete ones.”“And cooks?”“Excellent!”“Well, a fowl, fish, game,—it signifies little, so that Ieat.”“As your excellency pleases. You mentioned a fowl, I think?”“Yes, a fowl.”Peppino, turning around, shouted, “A fowl for his excellency!” Hisvoice yet echoed in the archway when a handsome, graceful, and half-naked youngman appeared, bearing a fowl in a silver dish on his head, without theassistance of his hands.“I could almost believe myself at the Café de Paris,” murmuredDanglars.“Here, your excellency,” said Peppino, taking the fowl from theyoung bandit and placing it on the worm-eaten table, which with the stool andthe goat-skin bed formed the entire furniture of the cell. Danglars asked for aknife and fork.“Here, excellency,” said Peppino, offering him a little blunt knifeand a boxwood fork. Danglars took the knife in one hand and the fork in theother, and was about to cut up the fowl.“Pardon me, excellency,” said Peppino, placing his hand on thebanker’s shoulder; “people pay here before they eat. They might notbe satisfied, and——”“Ah, ha,” thought Danglars, “this is not so much like Paris,except that I shall probably be skinned! Never mind, I’ll fix that allright. I have always heard how cheap poultry is in Italy; I should think a fowlis worth about twelve sous at Rome.—There,” he said, throwing alouis down.Peppino picked up the louis, and Danglars again prepared to carve the fowl.“Stay a moment, your excellency,” said Peppino, rising; “youstill owe me something.”“I said they would skin me,” thought Danglars; but resolving toresist the extortion, he said, “Come, how much do I owe you for thisfowl?”“Your excellency has given me a louis on account.”“A louis on account for a fowl?”“Certainly; and your excellency now owes me 4,999 louis.”Danglars opened his enormous eyes on hearing this gigantic joke.“Very droll,” he muttered, “very droll indeed,” and heagain began to carve the fowl, when Peppino stopped the baron’s righthand with his left, and held out his other hand.“Come, now,” he said.“Is it not a joke?” said Danglars.“We never joke,” replied Peppino, solemn as a Quaker.“What! A hundred thousand francs for a fowl!”“Ah, excellency, you cannot imagine how hard it is to rear fowls in thesehorrible caves!”“Come, come, this is very droll—very amusing—I allow; but, asI am very hungry, pray allow me to eat. Stay, here is another louis foryou.”“Then that will make only 4,998 louis more,” said Peppino with thesame indifference. “I shall get them all in time.”“Oh, as for that,” said Danglars, angry at this prolongation of thejest,—“as for that you won’t get them at all. Go to thedevil! You do not know with whom you have to deal!”Peppino made a sign, and the youth hastily removed the fowl. Danglars threwhimself upon his goat-skin, and Peppino, reclosing the door, again began eatinghis peas and bacon. Though Danglars could not see Peppino, the noise of histeeth allowed no doubt as to his occupation. He was certainly eating, andnoisily too, like an ill-bred man. “Brute!” said Danglars. Peppinopretended not to hear him, and without even turning his head continued to eatslowly. Danglars’ stomach felt so empty, that it seemed as if it would beimpossible ever to fill it again; still he had patience for another half-hour,which appeared to him like a century. He again arose and went to the door.“Come, sir, do not keep me starving here any longer, but tell me whatthey want.”“Nay, your excellency, it is you who should tell us what you want. Giveyour orders, and we will execute them.”“Then open the door directly.” Peppino obeyed. “Now lookhere, I want something to eat! To eat—do you hear?”“Are you hungry?”“Come, you understand me.”“What would your excellency like to eat?”“A piece of dry bread, since the fowls are beyond all price in thisaccursed place.”“Bread? Very well. Holloa, there, some bread!” he called. The youthbrought a small loaf. “How much?” asked Danglars.“Four thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight louis,” said Peppino;“You have paid two louis in advance.”“What? One hundred thousand francs for a loaf?”“One hundred thousand francs,” repeated Peppino.“But you only asked 100,000 francs for a fowl!”“We have a fixed price for all our provisions. It signifies nothingwhether you eat much or little—whether you have ten dishes orone—it is always the same price.”“What, still keeping up this silly jest? My dear fellow, it is perfectlyridiculous—stupid! You had better tell me at once that you intendstarving me to death.”“Oh, dear, no, your excellency, unless you intend to commit suicide. Payand eat.”“And what am I to pay with, brute?” said Danglars, enraged.“Do you suppose I carry 100,000 francs in my pocket?”“Your excellency has 5,050,000 francs in your pocket; that will be fiftyfowls at 100,000 francs apiece, and half a fowl for the 50,000.”Danglars shuddered. The bandage fell from his eyes, and he understood the joke,which he did not think quite so stupid as he had done just before.“Come,” he said, “if I pay you the 100,000 francs, will yoube satisfied, and allow me to eat at my ease?”“Certainly,” said Peppino.“But how can I pay them?”“Oh, nothing easier; you have an account open with Messrs. Thomson &French, Via dei Banchi, Rome; give me a draft for 4,998 louis on thesegentlemen, and our banker shall take it.”Danglars thought it as well to comply with a good grace, so he took the pen,ink, and paper Peppino offered him, wrote the draft, and signed it.“Here,” he said, “here is a draft at sight.”“And here is your fowl.”Danglars sighed while he carved the fowl; it appeared very thin for the priceit had cost. As for Peppino, he examined the paper attentively, put it into hispocket, and continued eating his peas. Chapter 116. ThePardonThe next day Danglarswas again hungry; certainly the air of that dungeon was very provocative ofappetite. The prisoner expected that he would be at no expense that day, forlike an economical man he had concealed half of his fowl and a piece of thebread in the corner of his cell. But he had no sooner eaten than he feltthirsty; he had forgotten that. He struggled against his thirst till his tongueclave to the roof of his mouth; then, no longer able to resist, he called out.The sentinel opened the door; it was a new face. He thought it would be betterto transact business with his old acquaintance, so he sent for Peppino.“Here I am, your excellency,” said Peppino, with an eagerness whichDanglars thought favorable to him. “What do you want?”“Something to drink.”“Your excellency knows that wine is beyond all price near Rome.”“Then give me water,” cried Danglars, endeavoring to parry theblow.“Oh, water is even more scarce than wine, your excellency,—therehas been such a drought.”“Come,” thought Danglars, “it is the same old story.”And while he smiled as he attempted to regard the affair as a joke, he felt histemples get moist with perspiration.“Come, my friend,” said Danglars, seeing that he made no impressionon Peppino, “you will not refuse me a glass of wine?”“I have already told you that we do not sell at retail.”“Well, then, let me have a bottle of the least expensive.”“They are all the same price.”“And what is that?”“Twenty-five thousand francs a bottle.”“Tell me,” cried Danglars, in a tone whose bitterness Harpagon[30]alone has been capable of revealing—“tell me that you wish todespoil me of all; it will be sooner over than devouring me piecemeal.”“It is possible such may be the master’s intention.”“The master?—who is he?”“The person to whom you were conducted yesterday.”“Where is he?”“Here.”“Let me see him.”“Certainly.”And the next moment Luigi Vampa appeared before Danglars.“You sent for me?” he said to the prisoner.“Are you, sir, the chief of the people who brought me here?”“Yes, your excellency. What then?”“How much do you require for my ransom?”“Merely the 5,000,000 you have about you.” Danglars felt a dreadfulspasm dart through his heart.“But this is all I have left in the world,” he said, “out ofan immense fortune. If you deprive me of that, take away my life also.”“We are forbidden to shed your blood.”“And by whom are you forbidden?”“By him we obey.”“You do, then, obey someone?”“Yes, a chief.”“I thought you said you were the chief?”“So I am of these men; but there is another over me.”“And did your superior order you to treat me in this way?”“Yes.”“But my purse will be exhausted.”“Probably.”“Come,” said Danglars, “will you take a million?”“No.”“Two millions?—three?—four? Come, four? I will give them toyou on condition that you let me go.”“Why do you offer me 4,000,000 for what is worth 5,000,000? This is akind of usury, banker, that I do not understand.”“Take all, then—take all, I tell you, and kill me!”“Come, come, calm yourself. You will excite your blood, and that wouldproduce an appetite it would require a million a day to satisfy. Be moreeconomical.”“But when I have no more money left to pay you?” asked theinfuriated Danglars.“Then you must suffer hunger.”“Suffer hunger?” said Danglars, becoming pale.“Most likely,” replied Vampa coolly.“But you say you do not wish to kill me?”“No.”“And yet you will let me perish with hunger?”“Ah, that is a different thing.”“Well, then, wretches,” cried Danglars, “I will defy yourinfamous calculations—I would rather die at once! You may torture,torment, kill me, but you shall not have my signature again!”“As your excellency pleases,” said Vampa, as he left the cell.Danglars, raving, threw himself on the goat-skin. Who could these men be? Whowas the invisible chief? What could be his intentions towards him? And why,when everyone else was allowed to be ransomed, might he not also be? Oh, yes;certainly a speedy, violent death would be a fine means of deceiving theseremorseless enemies, who appeared to pursue him with such incomprehensiblevengeance. But to die? For the first time in his life, Danglars contemplateddeath with a mixture of dread and desire; the time had come when the implacablespectre, which exists in the mind of every human creature, arrested hisattention and called out with every pulsation of his heart, “Thou shaltdie!”Danglars resembled a timid animal excited in the chase; first it flies, thendespairs, and at last, by the very force of desperation, sometimes succeeds ineluding its pursuers. Danglars meditated an escape; but the walls were solidrock, a man was sitting reading at the only outlet to the cell, and behind thatman shapes armed with guns continually passed. His resolution not to signlasted two days, after which he offered a million for some food. They sent hima magnificent supper, and took his million.From this time the prisoner resolved to suffer no longer, but to haveeverything he wanted. At the end of twelve days, after having made a splendiddinner, he reckoned his accounts, and found that he had only 50,000 francsleft. Then a strange reaction took place; he who had just abandoned 5,000,000endeavored to save the 50,000 francs he had left, and sooner than give them uphe resolved to enter again upon a life of privation—he was deluded by thehopefulness that is a premonition of madness.He, who for so long a time had forgotten God, began to think that miracles werepossible—that the accursed cavern might be discovered by the officers ofthe Papal States, who would release him; that then he would have 50,000remaining, which would be sufficient to save him from starvation; and finallyhe prayed that this sum might be preserved to him, and as he prayed he wept.Three days passed thus, during which his prayers were frequent, if notheartfelt. Sometimes he was delirious, and fancied he saw an old man stretchedon a pallet; he, also, was dying of hunger.On the fourth, he was no longer a man, but a living corpse. He had picked upevery crumb that had been left from his former meals, and was beginning to eatthe matting which covered the floor of his cell. Then he entreated Peppino, ashe would a guardian angel, to give him food; he offered him 1,000 francs for amouthful of bread. But Peppino did not answer. On the fifth day he draggedhimself to the door of the cell.“Are you not a Christian?” he said, falling on his knees. “Doyou wish to assassinate a man who, in the eyes of Heaven, is a brother? Oh, myformer friends, my former friends!” he murmured, and fell with his faceto the ground. Then rising in despair, he exclaimed, “The chief, thechief!”“Here I am,” said Vampa, instantly appearing; “what do youwant?”“Take my last gold,” muttered Danglars, holding out hispocket-book, “and let me live here; I ask no more for liberty—Ionly ask to live!”“Then you suffer a great deal?”“Oh, yes, yes, cruelly!”“Still, there have been men who suffered more than you.”“I do not think so.”“Yes; those who have died of hunger.”Danglars thought of the old man whom, in his hours of delirium, he had seengroaning on his bed. He struck his forehead on the ground and groaned.“Yes,” he said, “there have been some who have suffered morethan I have, but then they must have been martyrs at least.”“Do you repent?” asked a deep, solemn voice, which causedDanglars’ hair to stand on end. His feeble eyes endeavored to distinguishobjects, and behind the bandit he saw a man enveloped in a cloak, half lost inthe shadow of a stone column.“Of what must I repent?” stammered Danglars.“Of the evil you have done,” said the voice.“Oh, yes; oh, yes, I do indeed repent.” And he struck his breastwith his emaciated fist.“Then I forgive you,” said the man, dropping his cloak, andadvancing to the light.“The Count of Monte Cristo!” said Danglars, more pale from terrorthan he had been just before from hunger and misery.“You are mistaken—I am not the Count of Monte Cristo.”“Then who are you?”“I am he whom you sold and dishonored—I am he whose betrothed youprostituted—I am he upon whom you trampled that you might raise yourselfto fortune—I am he whose father you condemned to die of hunger—I amhe whom you also condemned to starvation, and who yet forgives you, because hehopes to be forgiven—I am Edmond Dantès!”Danglars uttered a cry, and fell prostrate.“Rise,” said the count, “your life is safe; the same goodfortune has not happened to your accomplices—one is mad, the other dead.Keep the 50,000 francs you have left—I give them to you. The 5,000,000you stole from the hospitals has been restored to them by an unknown hand. Andnow eat and drink; I will entertain you tonight. Vampa, when this man issatisfied, let him be free.”Danglars remained prostrate while the count withdrew; when he raised his headhe saw disappearing down the passage nothing but a shadow, before which thebandits bowed.According to the count’s directions, Danglars was waited on by Vampa, whobrought him the best wine and fruits of Italy; then, having conducted him tothe road, and pointed to the post-chaise, left him leaning against a tree. Heremained there all night, not knowing where he was. When daylight dawned he sawthat he was near a stream; he was thirsty, and dragged himself towards it. Ashe stooped down to drink, he saw that his hair had become entirely white. Chapter 117. The Fifth ofOctoberIt was about sixo’clock in the evening; an opal-colored light, through which an autumnalsun shed its golden rays, descended on the blue ocean. The heat of the day hadgradually decreased, and a light breeze arose, seeming like the respiration ofnature on awakening from the burning siesta of the south. A delicious zephyrplayed along the coasts of the Mediterranean, and wafted from shore to shorethe sweet perfume of plants, mingled with the fresh smell of the sea.A light yacht, chaste and elegant in its form, was gliding amidst the firstdews of night over the immense lake, extending from Gibraltar to theDardanelles, and from Tunis to Venice. The vessel resembled a swan with itswings opened towards the wind, gliding on the water. It advanced swiftly andgracefully, leaving behind it a glittering stretch of foam. By degrees the sundisappeared behind the western horizon; but as though to prove the truth of thefanciful ideas in heathen mythology, its indiscreet rays reappeared on thesummit of every wave, as if the god of fire had just sunk upon the bosom ofAmphitrite, who in vain endeavored to hide her lover beneath her azure mantle.The yacht moved rapidly on, though there did not appear to be sufficient windto ruffle the curls on the head of a young girl. Standing on the prow was atall man, of a dark complexion, who saw with dilating eyes that they wereapproaching a dark mass of land in the shape of a cone, which rose from themidst of the waves like the hat of a Catalan.“Is that Monte Cristo?” asked the traveller, to whose orders theyacht was for the time submitted, in a melancholy voice.“Yes, your excellency,” said the captain, “we have reachedit.”“We have reached it!” repeated the traveller in an accent ofindescribable sadness.Then he added, in a low tone, “Yes; that is the haven.”And then he again plunged into a train of thought, the character of which wasbetter revealed by a sad smile, than it would have been by tears. A few minutesafterwards a flash of light, which was extinguished instantly, was seen on theland, and the sound of firearms reached the yacht.“Your excellency,” said the captain, “that was the landsignal, will you answer yourself?”“What signal?”The captain pointed towards the island, up the side of which ascended a volumeof smoke, increasing as it rose.“Ah, yes,” he said, as if awaking from a dream. “Give it tome.”The captain gave him a loaded carbine; the traveller slowly raised it, andfired in the air. Ten minutes afterwards, the sails were furled, and they castanchor about a hundred fathoms from the little harbor. The gig was alreadylowered, and in it were four oarsmen and a coxswain. The traveller descended,and instead of sitting down at the stern of the boat, which had been decoratedwith a blue carpet for his accommodation, stood up with his arms crossed. Therowers waited, their oars half lifted out of the water, like birds drying theirwings.“Give way,” said the traveller. The eight oars fell into the seasimultaneously without splashing a drop of water, and the boat, yielding to theimpulsion, glided forward. In an instant they found themselves in a littleharbor, formed in a natural creek; the boat grounded on the fine sand.“Will your excellency be so good as to mount the shoulders of two of ourmen, they will carry you ashore?” The young man answered this invitationwith a gesture of indifference, and stepped out of the boat; the seaimmediately rose to his waist.“Ah, your excellency,” murmured the pilot, “you should nothave done so; our master will scold us for it.”The young man continued to advance, following the sailors, who chose a firmfooting. Thirty strides brought them to dry land; the young man stamped on theground to shake off the wet, and looked around for someone to show him hisroad, for it was quite dark. Just as he turned, a hand rested on his shoulder,and a voice which made him shudder exclaimed:“Good-evening, Maximilian; you are punctual, thank you!”“Ah, is it you, count?” said the young man, in an almost joyfulaccent, pressing Monte Cristo’s hand with both his own.“Yes; you see I am as exact as you are. But you are dripping, my dearfellow; you must change your clothes, as Calypso said to Telemachus. Come, Ihave a habitation prepared for you in which you will soon forget fatigue andcold.”Monte Cristo perceived that the young man had turned around; indeed, Morrel sawwith surprise that the men who had brought him had left without being paid, oruttering a word. Already the sound of their oars might be heard as theyreturned to the yacht.“Oh, yes,” said the count, “you are looking for thesailors.”“Yes, I paid them nothing, and yet they are gone.”“Never mind that, Maximilian,” said Monte Cristo, smiling. “Ihave made an agreement with the navy, that the access to my island shall befree of all charge. I have made a bargain.”Morrel looked at the count with surprise. “Count,” he said,“you are not the same here as in Paris.”“How so?”“Here you laugh.” The count’s brow became clouded.“You are right to recall me to myself, Maximilian,” he said;“I was delighted to see you again, and forgot for the moment that allhappiness is fleeting.”“Oh, no, no, count,” cried Maximilian, seizing the count’shands, “pray laugh; be happy, and prove to me, by your indifference, thatlife is endurable to sufferers. Oh, how charitable, kind, and good you are; youaffect this gayety to inspire me with courage.”“You are wrong, Morrel; I was really happy.”“Then you forget me, so much the better.”“How so?”“Yes; for as the gladiator said to the emperor, when he entered thearena, ‘He who is about to die salutes you.’”“Then you are not consoled?” asked the count, surprised.“Oh,” exclaimed Morrel, with a glance full of bitter reproach,“do you think it possible that I could be?”“Listen,” said the count. “Do you understand the meaning ofmy words? You cannot take me for a commonplace man, a mere rattle, emitting avague and senseless noise. When I ask you if you are consoled, I speak to youas a man for whom the human heart has no secrets. Well, Morrel, let us bothexamine the depths of your heart. Do you still feel the same feverishimpatience of grief which made you start like a wounded lion? Have you stillthat devouring thirst which can only be appeased in the grave? Are you stillactuated by the regret which drags the living to the pursuit of death; or areyou only suffering from the prostration of fatigue and the weariness of hopedeferred? Has the loss of memory rendered it impossible for you to weep? Oh, mydear friend, if this be the case,—if you can no longer weep, if yourfrozen heart be dead, if you put all your trust in God, then, Maximilian, youare consoled—do not complain.”“Count,” said Morrel, in a firm and at the same time soft voice,“listen to me, as to a man whose thoughts are raised to heaven, though heremains on earth; I come to die in the arms of a friend. Certainly, there arepeople whom I love. I love my sister Julie,—I love her husband Emmanuel;but I require a strong mind to smile on my last moments. My sister would bebathed in tears and fainting; I could not bear to see her suffer. Emmanuelwould tear the weapon from my hand, and alarm the house with his cries. You,count, who are more than mortal, will, I am sure, lead me to death by apleasant path, will you not?”“My friend,” said the count, “I have still onedoubt,—are you weak enough to pride yourself upon your sufferings?”“No, indeed,—I am calm,” said Morrel, giving his hand to thecount; “my pulse does not beat slower or faster than usual. No, I feelthat I have reached the goal, and I will go no farther. You told me to wait andhope; do you know what you did, unfortunate adviser? I waited a month, orrather I suffered for a month! I did hope (man is a poor wretched creature), Idid hope. What I cannot tell,—something wonderful, an absurdity, amiracle,—of what nature he alone can tell who has mingled with our reasonthat folly we call hope. Yes, I did wait—yes, I did hope, count, andduring this quarter of an hour we have been talking together, you haveunconsciously wounded, tortured my heart, for every word you have utteredproved that there was no hope for me. Oh, count, I shall sleep calmly,deliciously in the arms of death.”Morrel uttered these words with an energy which made the count shudder.“My friend,” continued Morrel, “you named the fifth ofOctober as the end of the period of waiting,—today is the fifth ofOctober,” he took out his watch, “it is now nineo’clock,—I have yet three hours to live.”“Be it so,” said the count, “come.” Morrel mechanicallyfollowed the count, and they had entered the grotto before he perceived it. Hefelt a carpet under his feet, a door opened, perfumes surrounded him, and abrilliant light dazzled his eyes. Morrel hesitated to advance; he dreaded theenervating effect of all that he saw. Monte Cristo drew him in gently.“Why should we not spend the last three hours remaining to us of life,like those ancient Romans, who when condemned by Nero, their emperor and heir,sat down at a table covered with flowers, and gently glided into death, amidthe perfume of heliotropes and roses?”Morrel smiled. “As you please,” he said; “death is alwaysdeath,—that is forgetfulness, repose, exclusion from life, and thereforefrom grief.”He sat down, and Monte Cristo placed himself opposite to him. They were in themarvellous dining-room before described, where the statues had baskets on theirheads always filled with fruits and flowers. Morrel had looked carelesslyaround, and had probably noticed nothing.“Let us talk like men,” he said, looking at the count.“Go on!”“Count,” said Morrel, “you are the epitome of all humanknowledge, and you seem like a being descended from a wiser and more advancedworld than ours.”“There is something true in what you say,” said the count, withthat smile which made him so handsome; “I have descended from a planetcalled grief.”“I believe all you tell me without questioning its meaning; for instance,you told me to live, and I did live; you told me to hope, and I almost did so.I am almost inclined to ask you, as though you had experienced death, ‘isit painful to die?’”Monte Cristo looked upon Morrel with indescribable tenderness.“Yes,” he said, “yes, doubtless it is painful, if youviolently break the outer covering which obstinately begs for life. If youplunge a dagger into your flesh, if you insinuate a bullet into your brain,which the least shock disorders,—then certainly, you will suffer pain,and you will repent quitting a life for a repose you have bought at so dear aprice.”“Yes; I know that there is a secret of luxury and pain in death, as wellas in life; the only thing is to understand it.”“You have spoken truly, Maximilian; according to the care we bestow uponit, death is either a friend who rocks us gently as a nurse, or an enemy whoviolently drags the soul from the body. Some day, when the world is much older,and when mankind will be masters of all the destructive powers in nature, toserve for the general good of humanity; when mankind, as you were just saying,have discovered the secrets of death, then that death will become as sweet andvoluptuous as a slumber in the arms of your beloved.”“And if you wished to die, you would choose this death, count?”“Yes.”Morrel extended his hand. “Now I understand,” he said, “whyyou had me brought here to this desolate spot, in the midst of the ocean, tothis subterranean palace; it was because you loved me, was it not, count? Itwas because you loved me well enough to give me one of those sweet means ofdeath of which we were speaking; a death without agony, a death which allows meto fade away while pronouncing Valentine’s name and pressing yourhand.”“Yes, you have guessed rightly, Morrel,” said the count,“that is what I intended.”“Thanks; the idea that tomorrow I shall no longer suffer, is sweet to myheart.”“Do you then regret nothing?”“No,” replied Morrel.“Not even me?” asked the count with deep emotion. Morrel’sclear eye was for the moment clouded, then it shone with unusual lustre, and alarge tear rolled down his cheek.“What,” said the count, “do you still regret anything in theworld, and yet die?”“Oh, I entreat you,” exclaimed Morrel in a low voice, “do notspeak another word, count; do not prolong my punishment.”The count fancied that he was yielding, and this belief revived the horribledoubt that had overwhelmed him at the Château d’If.“I am endeavoring,” he thought, “to make this man happy; Ilook upon this restitution as a weight thrown into the scale to balance theevil I have wrought. Now, supposing I am deceived, supposing this man has notbeen unhappy enough to merit happiness. Alas, what would become of me who canonly atone for evil by doing good?”Then he said aloud: “Listen, Morrel, I see your grief is great, but stillyou do not like to risk your soul.” Morrel smiled sadly.“Count,” he said, “I swear to you my soul is no longer myown.”“Maximilian, you know I have no relation in the world. I have accustomedmyself to regard you as my son: well, then, to save my son, I will sacrifice mylife, nay, even my fortune.”“What do you mean?”“I mean, that you wish to quit life because you do not understand all theenjoyments which are the fruits of a large fortune. Morrel, I possess nearly ahundred millions and I give them to you; with such a fortune you can attainevery wish. Are you ambitious? Every career is open to you. Overturn the world,change its character, yield to mad ideas, be even criminal—butlive.”“Count, I have your word,” said Morrel coldly; then taking out hiswatch, he added, “It is half-past eleven.”“Morrel, can you intend it in my house, under my very eyes?”“Then let me go,” said Maximilian, “or I shall think you didnot love me for my own sake, but for yours;” and he arose.“It is well,” said Monte Cristo whose countenance brightened atthese words; “you wish it—you are inflexible. Yes, as you said, youare indeed wretched and a miracle alone can cure you. Sit down, Morrel, andwait.”Morrel obeyed; the count arose, and unlocking a closet with a key suspendedfrom his gold chain, took from it a little silver casket, beautifully carvedand chased, the corners of which represented four bending figures, similar tothe Caryatides, the forms of women, symbols of the angels aspiring to heaven.He placed the casket on the table; then opening it took out a little goldenbox, the top of which flew open when touched by a secret spring. This boxcontained an unctuous substance partly solid, of which it was impossible todiscover the color, owing to the reflection of the polished gold, sapphires,rubies, emeralds, which ornamented the box. It was a mixed mass of blue, red,and gold.The count took out a small quantity of this with a gilt spoon, and offered itto Morrel, fixing a long steadfast glance upon him. It was then observable thatthe substance was greenish.“This is what you asked for,” he said, “and what I promisedto give you.”“I thank you from the depths of my heart,” said the young man,taking the spoon from the hands of Monte Cristo. The count took another spoon,and again dipped it into the golden box. “What are you going to do, myfriend?” asked Morrel, arresting his hand.“Well, the fact is, Morrel, I was thinking that I too am weary of life,and since an opportunity presents itself——”“Stay!” said the young man. “You who love, and are beloved;you, who have faith and hope,—oh, do not follow my example. In your caseit would be a crime. Adieu, my noble and generous friend, adieu; I will go andtell Valentine what you have done for me.”And slowly, though without any hesitation, only waiting to press thecount’s hand fervently, he swallowed the mysterious substance offered byMonte Cristo. Then they were both silent. Ali, mute and attentive, brought thepipes and coffee, and disappeared. By degrees, the light of the lamps graduallyfaded in the hands of the marble statues which held them, and the perfumesappeared less powerful to Morrel. Seated opposite to him, Monte Cristo watchedhim in the shadow, and Morrel saw nothing but the bright eyes of the count. Anoverpowering sadness took possession of the young man, his hands relaxed theirhold, the objects in the room gradually lost their form and color, and hisdisturbed vision seemed to perceive doors and curtains open in the wall.“Friend,” he cried, “I feel that I am dying; thanks!”He made a last effort to extend his hand, but it fell powerless beside him.Then it appeared to him that Monte Cristo smiled, not with the strange andfearful expression which had sometimes revealed to him the secrets of hisheart, but with the benevolent kindness of a father for a child. At the sametime the count appeared to increase in stature, his form, nearly double itsusual height, stood out in relief against the red tapestry, his black hair wasthrown back, and he stood in the attitude of an avenging angel. Morrel,overpowered, turned around in the armchair; a delicious torpor permeated everyvein. A change of ideas presented themselves to his brain, like a new design onthe kaleidoscope. Enervated, prostrate, and breathless, he became unconsciousof outward objects; he seemed to be entering that vague delirium precedingdeath. He wished once again to press the count’s hand, but his own wasimmovable. He wished to articulate a last farewell, but his tongue laymotionless and heavy in his throat, like a stone at the mouth of a sepulchre.Involuntarily his languid eyes closed, and still through his eyelashes awell-known form seemed to move amid the obscurity with which he thought himselfenveloped.The count had just opened a door. Immediately a brilliant light from the nextroom, or rather from the palace adjoining, shone upon the room in which he wasgently gliding into his last sleep. Then he saw a woman of marvellous beautyappear on the threshold of the door separating the two rooms. Pale, and sweetlysmiling, she looked like an angel of mercy conjuring the angel of vengeance.“Is it heaven that opens before me?” thought the dying man;“that angel resembles the one I have lost.”Monte Cristo pointed out Morrel to the young woman, who advanced towards himwith clasped hands and a smile upon her lips.“Valentine, Valentine!” he mentally ejaculated; but his lipsuttered no sound, and as though all his strength were centred in that internalemotion, he sighed and closed his eyes. Valentine rushed towards him; his lipsagain moved.“He is calling you,” said the count; “he to whom you haveconfided your destiny—he from whom death would have separated you, callsyou to him. Happily, I vanquished death. Henceforth, Valentine, you will neveragain be separated on earth, since he has rushed into death to find you.Without me, you would both have died. May God accept my atonement in thepreservation of these two existences!”Valentine seized the count’s hand, and in her irresistible impulse of joycarried it to her lips.“Oh, thank me again!” said the count; “tell me till you areweary, that I have restored you to happiness; you do not know how much Irequire this assurance.”“Oh, yes, yes, I thank you with all my heart,” said Valentine;“and if you doubt the sincerity of my gratitude, oh, then, ask Haydée!ask my beloved sister Haydée, who ever since our departure from France, hascaused me to wait patiently for this happy day, while talking to me ofyou.”“You then love Haydée?” asked Monte Cristo with an emotion he invain endeavored to dissimulate.“Oh, yes, with all my soul.”“Well, then, listen, Valentine,” said the count; “I have afavor to ask of you.”“Of me? Oh, am I happy enough for that?”“Yes; you have called Haydée your sister,—let her become so indeed,Valentine; render her all the gratitude you fancy that you owe to me; protecther, for” (the count’s voice was thick with emotion)“henceforth she will be alone in the world.”“Alone in the world!” repeated a voice behind the count, “andwhy?”Monte Cristo turned around; Haydée was standing pale, motionless, looking atthe count with an expression of fearful amazement.“Because tomorrow, Haydée, you will be free; you will then assume yourproper position in society, for I will not allow my destiny to overshadowyours. Daughter of a prince, I restore to you the riches and name of yourfather.”Haydée became pale, and lifting her transparent hands to heaven, exclaimed in avoice stifled with tears, “Then you leave me, my lord?”“Haydée, Haydée, you are young and beautiful; forget even my name, and behappy.”“It is well,” said Haydée; “your order shall be executed, mylord; I will forget even your name, and be happy.” And she stepped backto retire.“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Valentine, who was supporting the head ofMorrel on her shoulder, “do you not see how pale she is? Do you not seehow she suffers?”Haydée answered with a heartrending expression,“Why should he understand this, my sister? He is my master, and I am hisslave; he has the right to notice nothing.”The count shuddered at the tones of a voice which penetrated the inmostrecesses of his heart; his eyes met those of the young girl and he could notbear their brilliancy.“Oh, heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, “can my suspicions becorrect? Haydée, would it please you not to leave me?”“I am young,” gently replied Haydée; “I love the life youhave made so sweet to me, and I should be sorry to die.”“You mean, then, that if I leave you, Haydée——”“I should die; yes, my lord.”“Do you then love me?”“Oh, Valentine, he asks if I love him. Valentine, tell him if you loveMaximilian.”The count felt his heart dilate and throb; he opened his arms, and Haydée,uttering a cry, sprang into them.“Oh, yes,” she cried, “I do love you! I love you as one lovesa father, brother, husband! I love you as my life, for you are the best, thenoblest of created beings!”“Let it be, then, as you wish, sweet angel; God has sustained me in mystruggle with my enemies, and has given me this reward; he will not let me endmy triumph in suffering; I wished to punish myself, but he has pardoned me.Love me then, Haydée! Who knows? perhaps your love will make me forget all thatI do not wish to remember.”“What do you mean, my lord?”“I mean that one word from you has enlightened me more than twenty yearsof slow experience; I have but you in the world, Haydée; through you I againtake hold on life, through you I shall suffer, through you rejoice.”“Do you hear him, Valentine?” exclaimed Haydée; “he says thatthrough me he will suffer—through me, who would yield my life forhis.”The count withdrew for a moment. “Have I discovered the truth?” hesaid; “but whether it be for recompense or punishment, I accept my fate.Come, Haydée, come!” and throwing his arm around the young girl’swaist, he pressed the hand of Valentine, and disappeared.An hour had nearly passed, during which Valentine, breathless and motionless,watched steadfastly over Morrel. At length she felt his heart beat, a faintbreath played upon his lips, a slight shudder, announcing the return of life,passed through the young man’s frame. At length his eyes opened, but theywere at first fixed and expressionless; then sight returned, and with itfeeling and grief.“Oh,” he cried, in an accent of despair, “the count hasdeceived me; I am yet living;” and extending his hand towards the table,he seized a knife.“Dearest,” exclaimed Valentine, with her adorable smile,“awake, and look at me!” Morrel uttered a loud exclamation, andfrantic, doubtful, dazzled, as though by a celestial vision, he fell upon hisknees.The next morning at daybreak, Valentine and Morrel were walking arm-in-arm onthe seashore, Valentine relating how Monte Cristo had appeared in her room,explained everything, revealed the crime, and, finally, how he had saved herlife by enabling her to simulate death.They had found the door of the grotto opened, and gone forth; on the azure domeof heaven still glittered a few remaining stars.Morrel soon perceived a man standing among the rocks, apparently awaiting asign from them to advance, and pointed him out to Valentine.“Ah, it is Jacopo,” she said, “the captain of theyacht;” and she beckoned him towards them.“Do you wish to speak to us?” asked Morrel.“I have a letter to give you from the count.”“From the count!” murmured the two young people.“Yes; read it.”Morrel opened the letter, and read:“My Dear Maximilian,“There is a felucca for you at anchor. Jacopo will carry you to Leghorn,where Monsieur Noirtier awaits his granddaughter, whom he wishes to blessbefore you lead her to the altar. All that is in this grotto, my friend, myhouse in the Champs-Élysées, and my château at Tréport, are the marriage giftsbestowed by Edmond Dantès upon the son of his old master, Morrel. Mademoisellede Villefort will share them with you; for I entreat her to give to the poorthe immense fortune reverting to her from her father, now a madman, and herbrother who died last September with his mother. Tell the angel who will watchover your future destiny, Morrel, to pray sometimes for a man, who, like Satan,thought himself for an instant equal to God, but who now acknowledges withChristian humility that God alone possesses supreme power and infinite wisdom.Perhaps those prayers may soften the remorse he feels in his heart. As for you,Morrel, this is the secret of my conduct towards you. There is neitherhappiness nor misery in the world; there is only the comparison of one statewith another, nothing more. He who has felt the deepest grief is best able toexperience supreme happiness. We must have felt what it is to die, Morrel, thatwe may appreciate the enjoyments of living.“Live, then, and be happy, beloved children of my heart, and never forgetthat until the day when God shall deign to reveal the future to man, all humanwisdom is summed up in these two words,—‘Wait andhope.’—Your friend,“Edmond Dantès, Count of Monte Cristo.”During the perusal of this letter, which informed Valentine for the first timeof the madness of her father and the death of her brother, she became pale, aheavy sigh escaped from her bosom, and tears, not the less painful because theywere silent, ran down her cheeks; her happiness cost her very dear.Morrel looked around uneasily.“But,” he said, “the count’s generosity is toooverwhelming; Valentine will be satisfied with my humble fortune. Where is thecount, friend? Lead me to him.”Jacopo pointed towards the horizon.“What do you mean?” asked Valentine. “Where is thecount?—where is Haydée?”“Look!” said Jacopo.The eyes of both were fixed upon the spot indicated by the sailor, and on theblue line separating the sky from the Mediterranean Sea, they perceived a largewhite sail.“Gone,” said Morrel; “gone!—adieu, myfriend—adieu, my father!”“Gone,” murmured Valentine; “adieu, my sweetHaydée—adieu, my sister!”“Who can say whether we shall ever see them again?” said Morrelwith tearful eyes.“Darling,” replied Valentine, “has not the count just told usthat all human wisdom is summed up in two words:“‘Wait and hope (Fac et spera)!’”FOOTNOTES: [1]“The wicked are great drinkers of water; As the flood proved once for all.” [2]$2,600,000 in 1894. [3]Knocked on the head. [4]Beheaded. [5]Scott, of course: “The son of an ill-fated sire, and the father of a yetmore unfortunate family, bore in his looks that cast of inauspicious melancholyby which the physiognomists of that time pretended to distinguish those whowere predestined to a violent and unhappy death.”—The Abbot, ch.xxii. [6]Guillotine. [7]Dr. Guillotin got the idea of his famous machine from witnessing an executionin Italy. [8]Brucea ferruginea. [9]‘Money and sanctity, Each in a moiety.’ [10]Elisabeth de Rossan, Marquise de Ganges, was one of the famous women of thecourt of Louis XIV. where she was known as “La Belle Provençale.”She was the widow of the Marquis de Castellane when she married de Ganges, andhaving the misfortune to excite the enmity of her new brothers-in-law, wasforced by them to take poison; and they finished her off with pistol anddagger.—Ed. [11]Magistrate and orator of great eloquence—chancellor of France underLouis XV. [12]Jacques-Louis David, a famous French painter (1748-1825). [13]Ali Pasha, “The Lion,” was born at Tepelini, an Albanian village atthe foot of the Klissoura Mountains, in 1741. By diplomacy and success in armshe became almost supreme ruler of Albania, Epirus, and adjacent territory.Having aroused the enmity of the Sultan, he was proscribed and put to death bytreachery in 1822, at the age of eighty.—Ed. [14]Greek militiamen in the war for independence.—Ed. [15]A Turkish pasha in command of the troops of a province.—Ed. [16]The god of fruitfulness in Grecian mythology. In Crete he was supposed to beslain in winter with the decay of vegetation and to revive in the spring.Haydée’s learned reference is to the behavior of an actor in theDionysian festivals.—Ed. [17]The Genoese conspirator. [18]Lake Maggiore. [19]In the old Greek legend the Atreidae, or children of Atreus, were doomed topunishment because of the abominable crime of their father. TheAgamemnon of Aeschylus is based on this legend. [20]The performance of the civil marriage. [21]In Molière’s comedy, Le Misanthrope. [22]Literally, “the basket,” because wedding gifts were originallybrought in such a receptacle. [23]Germain Pillon was a famous French sculptor (1535-1598). His best known work is“The Three Graces,” now in the Louvre. [24]Frédérick Lemaître—French actor (1800-1876). Robert Macaire is the heroof two favorite melodramas—“Chien de Montargis” and“Chien d’Aubry”—and the name is applied to boldcriminals as a term of derision. [25]The Spahis are French cavalry reserved for service in Africa. [26]Savate: an old shoe. [27]Guilbert de Pixérécourt, French dramatist (1773-1844). [28]Gaspard Puget, the sculptor-architect, was born at Marseilles in 1615. [29]The Carolina—not Virginia—jessamine, gelsemium sempervirens(properly speaking not a jessamine at all) has yellow blossoms. The referenceis no doubt to the Wistaria frutescens.—Ed. [30]The miser in Molière’s comedy of L’Avare.—Ed.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.