START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMMA ***Emmaby Jane AustenContents VOLUME I. CHAPTER I. CHAPTER II. CHAPTER III. CHAPTER IV. CHAPTER V. CHAPTER VI. CHAPTER VII. CHAPTER VIII. CHAPTER IX. CHAPTER X. CHAPTER XI. CHAPTER XII. CHAPTER XIII. CHAPTER XIV. CHAPTER XV. CHAPTER XVI. CHAPTER XVII. CHAPTER XVIII. VOLUME II. CHAPTER I. CHAPTER II. CHAPTER III. CHAPTER IV. CHAPTER V. CHAPTER VI. CHAPTER VII. CHAPTER VIII. CHAPTER IX. CHAPTER X. CHAPTER XI. CHAPTER XII. CHAPTER XIII. CHAPTER XIV. CHAPTER XV. CHAPTER XVI. CHAPTER XVII. CHAPTER XVIII. VOLUME III. CHAPTER I. CHAPTER II. CHAPTER III. CHAPTER IV. CHAPTER V. CHAPTER VI. CHAPTER VII. CHAPTER VIII. CHAPTER IX. CHAPTER X. CHAPTER XI. CHAPTER XII. CHAPTER XIII. CHAPTER XIV. CHAPTER XV. CHAPTER XVI. CHAPTER XVII. CHAPTER XVIII. CHAPTER XIX.VOLUME ICHAPTER IEmma Woodhouse, handsome, clever, and rich, with a comfortable home and happydisposition, seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence; and hadlived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vexher.She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate, indulgentfather; and had, in consequence of her sister’s marriage, been mistressof his house from a very early period. Her mother had died too long ago for herto have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses; and her place hadbeen supplied by an excellent woman as governess, who had fallen little shortof a mother in affection.Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse’s family, less as agoverness than a friend, very fond of both daughters, but particularly of Emma.Between them it was more the intimacy of sisters. Even before MissTaylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess, the mildness of hertemper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint; and the shadow ofauthority being now long passed away, they had been living together as friendand friend very mutually attached, and Emma doing just what she liked; highlyesteeming Miss Taylor’s judgment, but directed chiefly by her own.The real evils, indeed, of Emma’s situation were the power of havingrather too much her own way, and a disposition to think a little too well ofherself; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her manyenjoyments. The danger, however, was at present so unperceived, that they didnot by any means rank as misfortunes with her.Sorrow came—a gentle sorrow—but not at all in the shape of anydisagreeable consciousness.—Miss Taylor married. It was MissTaylor’s loss which first brought grief. It was on the wedding-day ofthis beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance.The wedding over, and the bride-people gone, her father and herself were leftto dine together, with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening. Herfather composed himself to sleep after dinner, as usual, and she had then onlyto sit and think of what she had lost.The event had every promise of happiness for her friend. Mr. Weston was a manof unexceptionable character, easy fortune, suitable age, and pleasant manners;and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self-denying, generousfriendship she had always wished and promoted the match; but it was a blackmorning’s work for her. The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hourof every day. She recalled her past kindness—the kindness, the affectionof sixteen years—how she had taught and how she had played with her fromfive years old—how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse herin health—and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood.A large debt of gratitude was owing here; but the intercourse of the last sevenyears, the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followedIsabella’s marriage, on their being left to each other, was yet a dearer,tenderer recollection. She had been a friend and companion such as fewpossessed: intelligent, well-informed, useful, gentle, knowing all the ways ofthe family, interested in all its concerns, and peculiarly interested inherself, in every pleasure, every scheme of hers—one to whom she couldspeak every thought as it arose, and who had such an affection for her as couldnever find fault.How was she to bear the change?—It was true that her friend was goingonly half a mile from them; but Emma was aware that great must be thedifference between a Mrs. Weston, only half a mile from them, and a Miss Taylorin the house; and with all her advantages, natural and domestic, she was now ingreat danger of suffering from intellectual solitude. She dearly loved herfather, but he was no companion for her. He could not meet her in conversation,rational or playful.The evil of the actual disparity in their ages (and Mr. Woodhouse had notmarried early) was much increased by his constitution and habits; for havingbeen a valetudinarian all his life, without activity of mind or body, he was amuch older man in ways than in years; and though everywhere beloved for thefriendliness of his heart and his amiable temper, his talents could not haverecommended him at any time.Her sister, though comparatively but little removed by matrimony, being settledin London, only sixteen miles off, was much beyond her daily reach; and many along October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield,before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband, andtheir little children, to fill the house, and give her pleasant society again.Highbury, the large and populous village, almost amounting to a town, to whichHartfield, in spite of its separate lawn, and shrubberies, and name, did reallybelong, afforded her no equals. The Woodhouses were first in consequence there.All looked up to them. She had many acquaintance in the place, for her fatherwas universally civil, but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu ofMiss Taylor for even half a day. It was a melancholy change; and Emma could notbut sigh over it, and wish for impossible things, till her father awoke, andmade it necessary to be cheerful. His spirits required support. He was anervous man, easily depressed; fond of every body that he was used to, andhating to part with them; hating change of every kind. Matrimony, as the originof change, was always disagreeable; and he was by no means yet reconciled tohis own daughter’s marrying, nor could ever speak of her but withcompassion, though it had been entirely a match of affection, when he was nowobliged to part with Miss Taylor too; and from his habits of gentleselfishness, and of being never able to suppose that other people could feeldifferently from himself, he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor haddone as sad a thing for herself as for them, and would have been a great dealhappier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield. Emma smiled andchatted as cheerfully as she could, to keep him from such thoughts; but whentea came, it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said atdinner,“Poor Miss Taylor!—I wish she were here again. What a pity it isthat Mr. Weston ever thought of her!”“I cannot agree with you, papa; you know I cannot. Mr. Weston is such agood-humoured, pleasant, excellent man, that he thoroughly deserves a goodwife;—and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever, andbear all my odd humours, when she might have a house of her own?”“A house of her own!—But where is the advantage of a house of herown? This is three times as large.—And you have never any odd humours, mydear.”“How often we shall be going to see them, and they coming to seeus!—We shall be always meeting! We must begin; we must go and paywedding visit very soon.”“My dear, how am I to get so far? Randalls is such a distance. I couldnot walk half so far.”“No, papa, nobody thought of your walking. We must go in the carriage, tobe sure.”“The carriage! But James will not like to put the horses to for such alittle way;—and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying ourvisit?”“They are to be put into Mr. Weston’s stable, papa. You know wehave settled all that already. We talked it all over with Mr. Weston lastnight. And as for James, you may be very sure he will always like going toRandalls, because of his daughter’s being housemaid there. I only doubtwhether he will ever take us anywhere else. That was your doing, papa. You gotHannah that good place. Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentionedher—James is so obliged to you!”“I am very glad I did think of her. It was very lucky, for I would nothave had poor James think himself slighted upon any account; and I am sure shewill make a very good servant: she is a civil, pretty-spoken girl; I have agreat opinion of her. Whenever I see her, she always curtseys and asks me how Ido, in a very pretty manner; and when you have had her here to do needlework, Iobserve she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it.I am sure she will be an excellent servant; and it will be a great comfort topoor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see. WheneverJames goes over to see his daughter, you know, she will be hearing of us. Hewill be able to tell her how we all are.”Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas, and hoped, bythe help of backgammon, to get her father tolerably through the evening, and beattacked by no regrets but her own. The backgammon-table was placed; but avisitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary.Mr. Knightley, a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty, was not only avery old and intimate friend of the family, but particularly connected with it,as the elder brother of Isabella’s husband. He lived about a mile fromHighbury, was a frequent visitor, and always welcome, and at this time morewelcome than usual, as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London.He had returned to a late dinner, after some days’ absence, and nowwalked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square. It was ahappy circumstance, and animated Mr. Woodhouse for some time. Mr. Knightley hada cheerful manner, which always did him good; and his many inquiries after“poor Isabella” and her children were answered most satisfactorily.When this was over, Mr. Woodhouse gratefully observed, “It is very kindof you, Mr. Knightley, to come out at this late hour to call upon us. I amafraid you must have had a shocking walk.”“Not at all, sir. It is a beautiful moonlight night; and so mild that Imust draw back from your great fire.”“But you must have found it very damp and dirty. I wish you may not catchcold.”“Dirty, sir! Look at my shoes. Not a speck on them.”“Well! that is quite surprising, for we have had a vast deal of rainhere. It rained dreadfully hard for half an hour while we were at breakfast. Iwanted them to put off the wedding.”“By the bye—I have not wished you joy. Being pretty well aware ofwhat sort of joy you must both be feeling, I have been in no hurry with mycongratulations; but I hope it all went off tolerably well. How did you allbehave? Who cried most?”“Ah! poor Miss Taylor! ’Tis a sad business.”“Poor Mr. and Miss Woodhouse, if you please; but I cannot possibly say‘poor Miss Taylor.’ I have a great regard for you and Emma; butwhen it comes to the question of dependence or independence!—At any rate,it must be better to have only one to please than two.”“Especially when one of those two is such a fanciful, troublesomecreature!” said Emma playfully. “That is what you have in yourhead, I know—and what you would certainly say if my father were notby.”“I believe it is very true, my dear, indeed,” said Mr. Woodhouse,with a sigh. “I am afraid I am sometimes very fanciful andtroublesome.”“My dearest papa! You do not think I could mean you, or supposeMr. Knightley to mean you. What a horrible idea! Oh no! I meant onlymyself. Mr. Knightley loves to find fault with me, you know—in ajoke—it is all a joke. We always say what we like to one another.”Mr. Knightley, in fact, was one of the few people who could see faults in EmmaWoodhouse, and the only one who ever told her of them: and though this was notparticularly agreeable to Emma herself, she knew it would be so much less so toher father, that she would not have him really suspect such a circumstance asher not being thought perfect by every body.“Emma knows I never flatter her,” said Mr. Knightley, “but Imeant no reflection on any body. Miss Taylor has been used to have two personsto please; she will now have but one. The chances are that she must be againer.”“Well,” said Emma, willing to let it pass—“you want tohear about the wedding; and I shall be happy to tell you, for we all behavedcharmingly. Every body was punctual, every body in their best looks: not atear, and hardly a long face to be seen. Oh no; we all felt that we were goingto be only half a mile apart, and were sure of meeting every day.”“Dear Emma bears every thing so well,” said her father. “But,Mr. Knightley, she is really very sorry to lose poor Miss Taylor, and I am sureshe will miss her more than she thinks for.”Emma turned away her head, divided between tears and smiles. “It isimpossible that Emma should not miss such a companion,” said Mr.Knightley. “We should not like her so well as we do, sir, if we couldsuppose it; but she knows how much the marriage is to Miss Taylor’sadvantage; she knows how very acceptable it must be, at Miss Taylor’stime of life, to be settled in a home of her own, and how important to her tobe secure of a comfortable provision, and therefore cannot allow herself tofeel so much pain as pleasure. Every friend of Miss Taylor must be glad to haveher so happily married.”“And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me,” said Emma,“and a very considerable one—that I made the match myself. I madethe match, you know, four years ago; and to have it take place, and be provedin the right, when so many people said Mr. Weston would never marry again, maycomfort me for any thing.”Mr. Knightley shook his head at her. Her father fondly replied, “Ah! mydear, I wish you would not make matches and foretell things, for whatever yousay always comes to pass. Pray do not make any more matches.”“I promise you to make none for myself, papa; but I must, indeed, forother people. It is the greatest amusement in the world! And after suchsuccess, you know!—Every body said that Mr. Weston would never marryagain. Oh dear, no! Mr. Weston, who had been a widower so long, and who seemedso perfectly comfortable without a wife, so constantly occupied either in hisbusiness in town or among his friends here, always acceptable wherever he went,always cheerful—Mr. Weston need not spend a single evening in the yearalone if he did not like it. Oh no! Mr. Weston certainly would never marryagain. Some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed, andothers of the son and the uncle not letting him. All manner of solemn nonsensewas talked on the subject, but I believed none of it.“Ever since the day—about four years ago—that Miss Taylor andI met with him in Broadway Lane, when, because it began to drizzle, he dartedaway with so much gallantry, and borrowed two umbrellas for us from FarmerMitchell’s, I made up my mind on the subject. I planned the match fromthat hour; and when such success has blessed me in this instance, dear papa,you cannot think that I shall leave off match-making.”“I do not understand what you mean by ‘success,’” saidMr. Knightley. “Success supposes endeavour. Your time has been properlyand delicately spent, if you have been endeavouring for the last four years tobring about this marriage. A worthy employment for a young lady’s mind!But if, which I rather imagine, your making the match, as you call it, meansonly your planning it, your saying to yourself one idle day, ‘I think itwould be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr. Weston were to marryher,’ and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards, whydo you talk of success? Where is your merit? What are you proud of? You made alucky guess; and that is all that can be said.”“And have you never known the pleasure and triumph of a luckyguess?—I pity you.—I thought you cleverer—for, depend upon ita lucky guess is never merely luck. There is always some talent in it. And asto my poor word ‘success,’ which you quarrel with, I do not knowthat I am so entirely without any claim to it. You have drawn two prettypictures; but I think there may be a third—a something between thedo-nothing and the do-all. If I had not promoted Mr. Weston’s visitshere, and given many little encouragements, and smoothed many little matters,it might not have come to any thing after all. I think you must know Hartfieldenough to comprehend that.”“A straightforward, open-hearted man like Weston, and a rational,unaffected woman like Miss Taylor, may be safely left to manage their ownconcerns. You are more likely to have done harm to yourself, than good to them,by interference.”“Emma never thinks of herself, if she can do good to others,”rejoined Mr. Woodhouse, understanding but in part. “But, my dear, pray donot make any more matches; they are silly things, and break up one’sfamily circle grievously.”“Only one more, papa; only for Mr. Elton. Poor Mr. Elton! You like Mr.Elton, papa,—I must look about for a wife for him. There is nobody inHighbury who deserves him—and he has been here a whole year, and hasfitted up his house so comfortably, that it would be a shame to have him singleany longer—and I thought when he was joining their hands to-day, helooked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done forhim! I think very well of Mr. Elton, and this is the only way I have of doinghim a service.”“Mr. Elton is a very pretty young man, to be sure, and a very good youngman, and I have a great regard for him. But if you want to shew him anyattention, my dear, ask him to come and dine with us some day. That will be amuch better thing. I dare say Mr. Knightley will be so kind as to meethim.”“With a great deal of pleasure, sir, at any time,” said Mr.Knightley, laughing, “and I agree with you entirely, that it will be amuch better thing. Invite him to dinner, Emma, and help him to the best of thefish and the chicken, but leave him to chuse his own wife. Depend upon it, aman of six or seven-and-twenty can take care of himself.”CHAPTER IIMr. Weston was a native of Highbury, and born of a respectable family, whichfor the last two or three generations had been rising into gentility andproperty. He had received a good education, but, on succeeding early in life toa small independence, had become indisposed for any of the more homely pursuitsin which his brothers were engaged, and had satisfied an active, cheerful mindand social temper by entering into the militia of his county, then embodied.Captain Weston was a general favourite; and when the chances of his militarylife had introduced him to Miss Churchill, of a great Yorkshire family, andMiss Churchill fell in love with him, nobody was surprized, except her brotherand his wife, who had never seen him, and who were full of pride andimportance, which the connexion would offend.Miss Churchill, however, being of age, and with the full command of herfortune—though her fortune bore no proportion to thefamily-estate—was not to be dissuaded from the marriage, and it tookplace, to the infinite mortification of Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, who threw heroff with due decorum. It was an unsuitable connexion, and did not produce muchhappiness. Mrs. Weston ought to have found more in it, for she had a husbandwhose warm heart and sweet temper made him think every thing due to her inreturn for the great goodness of being in love with him; but though she had onesort of spirit, she had not the best. She had resolution enough to pursue herown will in spite of her brother, but not enough to refrain from unreasonableregrets at that brother’s unreasonable anger, nor from missing theluxuries of her former home. They lived beyond their income, but still it wasnothing in comparison of Enscombe: she did not cease to love her husband, butshe wanted at once to be the wife of Captain Weston, and Miss Churchill ofEnscombe.Captain Weston, who had been considered, especially by the Churchills, asmaking such an amazing match, was proved to have much the worst of the bargain;for when his wife died, after a three years’ marriage, he was rather apoorer man than at first, and with a child to maintain. From the expense of thechild, however, he was soon relieved. The boy had, with the additionalsoftening claim of a lingering illness of his mother’s, been the means ofa sort of reconciliation; and Mr. and Mrs. Churchill, having no children oftheir own, nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for, offeredto take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease. Somescruples and some reluctance the widower-father may be supposed to have felt;but as they were overcome by other considerations, the child was given up tothe care and the wealth of the Churchills, and he had only his own comfort toseek, and his own situation to improve as he could.A complete change of life became desirable. He quitted the militia and engagedin trade, having brothers already established in a good way in London, whichafforded him a favourable opening. It was a concern which brought justemployment enough. He had still a small house in Highbury, where most of hisleisure days were spent; and between useful occupation and the pleasures ofsociety, the next eighteen or twenty years of his life passed cheerfully away.He had, by that time, realised an easy competence—enough to secure thepurchase of a little estate adjoining Highbury, which he had always longedfor—enough to marry a woman as portionless even as Miss Taylor, and tolive according to the wishes of his own friendly and social disposition.It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his schemes; butas it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth, it had not shaken hisdetermination of never settling till he could purchase Randalls, and the saleof Randalls was long looked forward to; but he had gone steadily on, with theseobjects in view, till they were accomplished. He had made his fortune, boughthis house, and obtained his wife; and was beginning a new period of existence,with every probability of greater happiness than in any yet passed through. Hehad never been an unhappy man; his own temper had secured him from that, evenin his first marriage; but his second must shew him how delightful awell-judging and truly amiable woman could be, and must give him thepleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen,to excite gratitude than to feel it.He had only himself to please in his choice: his fortune was his own; for as toFrank, it was more than being tacitly brought up as his uncle’s heir, ithad become so avowed an adoption as to have him assume the name of Churchill oncoming of age. It was most unlikely, therefore, that he should ever want hisfather’s assistance. His father had no apprehension of it. The aunt was acapricious woman, and governed her husband entirely; but it was not in Mr.Weston’s nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough toaffect one so dear, and, as he believed, so deservedly dear. He saw his sonevery year in London, and was proud of him; and his fond report of him as avery fine young man had made Highbury feel a sort of pride in him too. He waslooked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits andprospects a kind of common concern.Mr. Frank Churchill was one of the boasts of Highbury, and a lively curiosityto see him prevailed, though the compliment was so little returned that he hadnever been there in his life. His coming to visit his father had been oftentalked of but never achieved.Now, upon his father’s marriage, it was very generally proposed, as amost proper attention, that the visit should take place. There was not adissentient voice on the subject, either when Mrs. Perry drank tea with Mrs.and Miss Bates, or when Mrs. and Miss Bates returned the visit. Now was thetime for Mr. Frank Churchill to come among them; and the hope strengthened whenit was understood that he had written to his new mother on the occasion. For afew days, every morning visit in Highbury included some mention of the handsomeletter Mrs. Weston had received. “I suppose you have heard of thehandsome letter Mr. Frank Churchill has written to Mrs. Weston? I understand itwas a very handsome letter, indeed. Mr. Woodhouse told me of it. Mr. Woodhousesaw the letter, and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in hislife.”It was, indeed, a highly prized letter. Mrs. Weston had, of course, formed avery favourable idea of the young man; and such a pleasing attention was anirresistible proof of his great good sense, and a most welcome addition toevery source and every expression of congratulation which her marriage hadalready secured. She felt herself a most fortunate woman; and she had livedlong enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought, where the onlyregret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her hadnever cooled, and who could ill bear to part with her.She knew that at times she must be missed; and could not think, without pain,of Emma’s losing a single pleasure, or suffering an hour’s ennui,from the want of her companionableness: but dear Emma was of no feeblecharacter; she was more equal to her situation than most girls would have been,and had sense, and energy, and spirits that might be hoped would bear her welland happily through its little difficulties and privations. And then there wassuch comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield, soconvenient for even solitary female walking, and in Mr. Weston’sdisposition and circumstances, which would make the approaching season nohindrance to their spending half the evenings in the week together.Her situation was altogether the subject of hours of gratitude to Mrs. Weston,and of moments only of regret; and her satisfaction—her more thansatisfaction—her cheerful enjoyment, was so just and so apparent, thatEmma, well as she knew her father, was sometimes taken by surprize at his beingstill able to pity ‘poor Miss Taylor,’ when they left her atRandalls in the centre of every domestic comfort, or saw her go away in theevening attended by her pleasant husband to a carriage of her own. But neverdid she go without Mr. Woodhouse’s giving a gentle sigh, and saying,“Ah, poor Miss Taylor! She would be very glad to stay.”There was no recovering Miss Taylor—nor much likelihood of ceasing topity her; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr. Woodhouse. Thecompliments of his neighbours were over; he was no longer teased by beingwished joy of so sorrowful an event; and the wedding-cake, which had been agreat distress to him, was all eat up. His own stomach could bear nothing rich,and he could never believe other people to be different from himself. What wasunwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body; and he had, therefore,earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding-cake at all, and whenthat proved vain, as earnestly tried to prevent any body’s eating it. Hehad been at the pains of consulting Mr. Perry, the apothecary, on the subject.Mr. Perry was an intelligent, gentlemanlike man, whose frequent visits were oneof the comforts of Mr. Woodhouse’s life; and upon being applied to, hecould not but acknowledge (though it seemed rather against the bias ofinclination) that wedding-cake might certainly disagree with many—perhapswith most people, unless taken moderately. With such an opinion, inconfirmation of his own, Mr. Woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of thenewly married pair; but still the cake was eaten; and there was no rest for hisbenevolent nerves till it was all gone.There was a strange rumour in Highbury of all the little Perrys being seen witha slice of Mrs. Weston’s wedding-cake in their hands: but Mr. Woodhousewould never believe it.CHAPTER IIIMr. Woodhouse was fond of society in his own way. He liked very much to havehis friends come and see him; and from various united causes, from his longresidence at Hartfield, and his good nature, from his fortune, his house, andhis daughter, he could command the visits of his own little circle, in a greatmeasure, as he liked. He had not much intercourse with any families beyond thatcircle; his horror of late hours, and large dinner-parties, made him unfit forany acquaintance but such as would visit him on his own terms. Fortunately forhim, Highbury, including Randalls in the same parish, and Donwell Abbey in theparish adjoining, the seat of Mr. Knightley, comprehended many such. Notunfrequently, through Emma’s persuasion, he had some of the chosen andthe best to dine with him: but evening parties were what he preferred; and,unless he fancied himself at any time unequal to company, there was scarcely anevening in the week in which Emma could not make up a card-table for him.Real, long-standing regard brought the Westons and Mr. Knightley; and by Mr.Elton, a young man living alone without liking it, the privilege of exchangingany vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the elegancies and society ofMr. Woodhouse’s drawing-room, and the smiles of his lovely daughter, wasin no danger of being thrown away.After these came a second set; among the most come-at-able of whom were Mrs.and Miss Bates, and Mrs. Goddard, three ladies almost always at the service ofan invitation from Hartfield, and who were fetched and carried home so often,that Mr. Woodhouse thought it no hardship for either James or the horses. Hadit taken place only once a year, it would have been a grievance.Mrs. Bates, the widow of a former vicar of Highbury, was a very old lady,almost past every thing but tea and quadrille. She lived with her singledaughter in a very small way, and was considered with all the regard andrespect which a harmless old lady, under such untoward circumstances, canexcite. Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a womanneither young, handsome, rich, nor married. Miss Bates stood in the very worstpredicament in the world for having much of the public favour; and she had nointellectual superiority to make atonement to herself, or frighten those whomight hate her into outward respect. She had never boasted either beauty orcleverness. Her youth had passed without distinction, and her middle of lifewas devoted to the care of a failing mother, and the endeavour to make a smallincome go as far as possible. And yet she was a happy woman, and a woman whomno one named without good-will. It was her own universal good-will andcontented temper which worked such wonders. She loved every body, wasinterested in every body’s happiness, quicksighted to every body’smerits; thought herself a most fortunate creature, and surrounded withblessings in such an excellent mother, and so many good neighbours and friends,and a home that wanted for nothing. The simplicity and cheerfulness of hernature, her contented and grateful spirit, were a recommendation to every body,and a mine of felicity to herself. She was a great talker upon little matters,which exactly suited Mr. Woodhouse, full of trivial communications and harmlessgossip.Mrs. Goddard was the mistress of a School—not of a seminary, or anestablishment, or any thing which professed, in long sentences of refinednonsense, to combine liberal acquirements with elegant morality, upon newprinciples and new systems—and where young ladies for enormous pay mightbe screwed out of health and into vanity—but a real, honest,old-fashioned Boarding-school, where a reasonable quantity of accomplishmentswere sold at a reasonable price, and where girls might be sent to be out of theway, and scramble themselves into a little education, without any danger ofcoming back prodigies. Mrs. Goddard’s school was in high repute—andvery deservedly; for Highbury was reckoned a particularly healthy spot: she hadan ample house and garden, gave the children plenty of wholesome food, let themrun about a great deal in the summer, and in winter dressed their chilblainswith her own hands. It was no wonder that a train of twenty young couple nowwalked after her to church. She was a plain, motherly kind of woman, who hadworked hard in her youth, and now thought herself entitled to the occasionalholiday of a tea-visit; and having formerly owed much to Mr. Woodhouse’skindness, felt his particular claim on her to leave her neat parlour, hunground with fancy-work, whenever she could, and win or lose a few sixpences byhis fireside.These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able to collect;and happy was she, for her father’s sake, in the power; though, as far asshe was herself concerned, it was no remedy for the absence of Mrs. Weston. Shewas delighted to see her father look comfortable, and very much pleased withherself for contriving things so well; but the quiet prosings of three suchwomen made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the longevenings she had fearfully anticipated.As she sat one morning, looking forward to exactly such a close of the presentday, a note was brought from Mrs. Goddard, requesting, in most respectfulterms, to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her; a most welcome request: forMiss Smith was a girl of seventeen, whom Emma knew very well by sight, and hadlong felt an interest in, on account of her beauty. A very gracious invitationwas returned, and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of themansion.Harriet Smith was the natural daughter of somebody. Somebody had placed her,several years back, at Mrs. Goddard’s school, and somebody had latelyraised her from the condition of scholar to that of parlour-boarder. This wasall that was generally known of her history. She had no visible friends butwhat had been acquired at Highbury, and was now just returned from a long visitin the country to some young ladies who had been at school there with her.She was a very pretty girl, and her beauty happened to be of a sort which Emmaparticularly admired. She was short, plump, and fair, with a fine bloom, blueeyes, light hair, regular features, and a look of great sweetness, and, beforethe end of the evening, Emma was as much pleased with her manners as herperson, and quite determined to continue the acquaintance.She was not struck by any thing remarkably clever in Miss Smith’sconversation, but she found her altogether very engaging—notinconveniently shy, not unwilling to talk—and yet so far from pushing,shewing so proper and becoming a deference, seeming so pleasantly grateful forbeing admitted to Hartfield, and so artlessly impressed by the appearance ofevery thing in so superior a style to what she had been used to, that she musthave good sense, and deserve encouragement. Encouragement should be given.Those soft blue eyes, and all those natural graces, should not be wasted on theinferior society of Highbury and its connexions. The acquaintance she hadalready formed were unworthy of her. The friends from whom she had just parted,though very good sort of people, must be doing her harm. They were a family ofthe name of Martin, whom Emma well knew by character, as renting a large farmof Mr. Knightley, and residing in the parish of Donwell—very creditably,she believed—she knew Mr. Knightley thought highly of them—but theymust be coarse and unpolished, and very unfit to be the intimates of a girl whowanted only a little more knowledge and elegance to be quite perfect.She would notice her; she would improve her; she would detach her fromher bad acquaintance, and introduce her into good society; she would form heropinions and her manners. It would be an interesting, and certainly a very kindundertaking; highly becoming her own situation in life, her leisure, andpowers.She was so busy in admiring those soft blue eyes, in talking and listening, andforming all these schemes in the in-betweens, that the evening flew away at avery unusual rate; and the supper-table, which always closed such parties, andfor which she had been used to sit and watch the due time, was all set out andready, and moved forwards to the fire, before she was aware. With an alacritybeyond the common impulse of a spirit which yet was never indifferent to thecredit of doing every thing well and attentively, with the real good-will of amind delighted with its own ideas, did she then do all the honours of the meal,and help and recommend the minced chicken and scalloped oysters, with anurgency which she knew would be acceptable to the early hours and civilscruples of their guests.Upon such occasions poor Mr. Woodhouse’s feelings were in sad warfare. Heloved to have the cloth laid, because it had been the fashion of his youth, buthis conviction of suppers being very unwholesome made him rather sorry to seeany thing put on it; and while his hospitality would have welcomed his visitorsto every thing, his care for their health made him grieve that they would eat.Such another small basin of thin gruel as his own was all that he could, withthorough self-approbation, recommend; though he might constrain himself, whilethe ladies were comfortably clearing the nicer things, to say:“Mrs. Bates, let me propose your venturing on one of these eggs. An eggboiled very soft is not unwholesome. Serle understands boiling an egg betterthan any body. I would not recommend an egg boiled by any body else; but youneed not be afraid, they are very small, you see—one of our small eggswill not hurt you. Miss Bates, let Emma help you to a little bit oftart—a very little bit. Ours are all apple-tarts. You need not beafraid of unwholesome preserves here. I do not advise the custard. Mrs.Goddard, what say you to half a glass of wine? A smallhalf-glass, put into a tumbler of water? I do not think it could disagree withyou.”Emma allowed her father to talk—but supplied her visitors in a much moresatisfactory style, and on the present evening had particular pleasure insending them away happy. The happiness of Miss Smith was quite equal to herintentions. Miss Woodhouse was so great a personage in Highbury, that theprospect of the introduction had given as much panic as pleasure; but thehumble, grateful little girl went off with highly gratified feelings, delightedwith the affability with which Miss Woodhouse had treated her all the evening,and actually shaken hands with her at last!CHAPTER IVHarriet Smith’s intimacy at Hartfield was soon a settled thing. Quick anddecided in her ways, Emma lost no time in inviting, encouraging, and tellingher to come very often; and as their acquaintance increased, so did theirsatisfaction in each other. As a walking companion, Emma had very earlyforeseen how useful she might find her. In that respect Mrs. Weston’sloss had been important. Her father never went beyond the shrubbery, where twodivisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk, or his short, as theyear varied; and since Mrs. Weston’s marriage her exercise had been toomuch confined. She had ventured once alone to Randalls, but it was notpleasant; and a Harriet Smith, therefore, one whom she could summon at any timeto a walk, would be a valuable addition to her privileges. But in everyrespect, as she saw more of her, she approved her, and was confirmed in all herkind designs.Harriet certainly was not clever, but she had a sweet, docile, gratefuldisposition, was totally free from conceit, and only desiring to be guided byany one she looked up to. Her early attachment to herself was very amiable; andher inclination for good company, and power of appreciating what was elegantand clever, shewed that there was no want of taste, though strength ofunderstanding must not be expected. Altogether she was quite convinced ofHarriet Smith’s being exactly the young friend she wanted—exactlythe something which her home required. Such a friend as Mrs. Weston was out ofthe question. Two such could never be granted. Two such she did not want. Itwas quite a different sort of thing, a sentiment distinct and independent. Mrs.Weston was the object of a regard which had its basis in gratitude and esteem.Harriet would be loved as one to whom she could be useful. For Mrs. Westonthere was nothing to be done; for Harriet every thing.Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were theparents, but Harriet could not tell. She was ready to tell every thing in herpower, but on this subject questions were vain. Emma was obliged to fancy whatshe liked—but she could never believe that in the same situationshe should not have discovered the truth. Harriet had no penetration.She had been satisfied to hear and believe just what Mrs. Goddard chose to tellher; and looked no farther.Mrs. Goddard, and the teachers, and the girls and the affairs of the school ingeneral, formed naturally a great part of the conversation—and but forher acquaintance with the Martins of Abbey-Mill Farm, it must have been thewhole. But the Martins occupied her thoughts a good deal; she had spent twovery happy months with them, and now loved to talk of the pleasures of hervisit, and describe the many comforts and wonders of the place. Emma encouragedher talkativeness—amused by such a picture of another set of beings, andenjoying the youthful simplicity which could speak with so much exultation ofMrs. Martin’s having “two parlours, two very good parlours,indeed; one of them quite as large as Mrs. Goddard’s drawing-room; and ofher having an upper maid who had lived five-and-twenty years with her; and oftheir having eight cows, two of them Alderneys, and one a little Welch cow, avery pretty little Welch cow indeed; and of Mrs. Martin’s saying as shewas so fond of it, it should be called her cow; and of their having avery handsome summer-house in their garden, where some day next year they wereall to drink tea:—a very handsome summer-house, large enough to hold adozen people.”For some time she was amused, without thinking beyond the immediate cause; butas she came to understand the family better, other feelings arose. She hadtaken up a wrong idea, fancying it was a mother and daughter, a son andson’s wife, who all lived together; but when it appeared that the Mr.Martin, who bore a part in the narrative, and was always mentioned withapprobation for his great good-nature in doing something or other, was a singleman; that there was no young Mrs. Martin, no wife in the case; she did suspectdanger to her poor little friend from all this hospitality and kindness, andthat, if she were not taken care of, she might be required to sink herselfforever.With this inspiriting notion, her questions increased in number and meaning;and she particularly led Harriet to talk more of Mr. Martin, and there wasevidently no dislike to it. Harriet was very ready to speak of the share he hadhad in their moonlight walks and merry evening games; and dwelt a good dealupon his being so very good-humoured and obliging. He had gone three milesround one day in order to bring her some walnuts, because she had said how fondshe was of them, and in every thing else he was so very obliging. He had hisshepherd’s son into the parlour one night on purpose to sing to her. Shewas very fond of singing. He could sing a little himself. She believed he wasvery clever, and understood every thing. He had a very fine flock, and, whileshe was with them, he had been bid more for his wool than any body in thecountry. She believed every body spoke well of him. His mother and sisters werevery fond of him. Mrs. Martin had told her one day (and there was a blush asshe said it,) that it was impossible for any body to be a better son, andtherefore she was sure, whenever he married, he would make a good husband. Notthat she wanted him to marry. She was in no hurry at all.“Well done, Mrs. Martin!” thought Emma. “You know what youare about.”“And when she had come away, Mrs. Martin was so very kind as to send Mrs.Goddard a beautiful goose—the finest goose Mrs. Goddard had ever seen.Mrs. Goddard had dressed it on a Sunday, and asked all the three teachers, MissNash, and Miss Prince, and Miss Richardson, to sup with her.”“Mr. Martin, I suppose, is not a man of information beyond the line ofhis own business? He does not read?”“Oh yes!—that is, no—I do not know—but I believe he hasread a good deal—but not what you would think any thing of. He reads theAgricultural Reports, and some other books that lay in one of the windowseats—but he reads all them to himself. But sometimes of anevening, before we went to cards, he would read something aloud out of theElegant Extracts, very entertaining. And I know he has read the Vicar ofWakefield. He never read the Romance of the Forest, nor The Children of theAbbey. He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them, but he isdetermined to get them now as soon as ever he can.”The next question was—“What sort of looking man is Mr. Martin?”“Oh! not handsome—not at all handsome. I thought him very plain atfirst, but I do not think him so plain now. One does not, you know, after atime. But did you never see him? He is in Highbury every now and then, and heis sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston. He has passed youvery often.”“That may be, and I may have seen him fifty times, but without having anyidea of his name. A young farmer, whether on horseback or on foot, is the verylast sort of person to raise my curiosity. The yeomanry are precisely the orderof people with whom I feel I can have nothing to do. A degree or two lower, anda creditable appearance might interest me; I might hope to be useful to theirfamilies in some way or other. But a farmer can need none of my help, and is,therefore, in one sense, as much above my notice as in every other he is belowit.”“To be sure. Oh yes! It is not likely you should ever have observed him;but he knows you very well indeed—I mean by sight.”“I have no doubt of his being a very respectable young man. I know,indeed, that he is so, and, as such, wish him well. What do you imagine his ageto be?”“He was four-and-twenty the 8th of last June, and my birthday is the 23rdjust a fortnight and a day’s difference—which is very odd.”“Only four-and-twenty. That is too young to settle. His mother isperfectly right not to be in a hurry. They seem very comfortable as they are,and if she were to take any pains to marry him, she would probably repent it.Six years hence, if he could meet with a good sort of young woman in the samerank as his own, with a little money, it might be very desirable.”“Six years hence! Dear Miss Woodhouse, he would be thirty yearsold!”“Well, and that is as early as most men can afford to marry, who are notborn to an independence. Mr. Martin, I imagine, has his fortune entirely tomake—cannot be at all beforehand with the world. Whatever money he mightcome into when his father died, whatever his share of the family property, itis, I dare say, all afloat, all employed in his stock, and so forth; andthough, with diligence and good luck, he may be rich in time, it is next toimpossible that he should have realised any thing yet.”“To be sure, so it is. But they live very comfortably. They have noindoors man, else they do not want for any thing; and Mrs. Martin talks oftaking a boy another year.”“I wish you may not get into a scrape, Harriet, whenever he doesmarry;—I mean, as to being acquainted with his wife—for though hissisters, from a superior education, are not to be altogether objected to, itdoes not follow that he might marry any body at all fit for you to notice. Themisfortune of your birth ought to make you particularly careful as to yourassociates. There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman’s daughter,and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your ownpower, or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degradingyou.”“Yes, to be sure, I suppose there are. But while I visit at Hartfield,and you are so kind to me, Miss Woodhouse, I am not afraid of what any body cando.”“You understand the force of influence pretty well, Harriet; but I wouldhave you so firmly established in good society, as to be independent even ofHartfield and Miss Woodhouse. I want to see you permanently well connected, andto that end it will be advisable to have as few odd acquaintance as may be;and, therefore, I say that if you should still be in this country when Mr.Martin marries, I wish you may not be drawn in by your intimacy with thesisters, to be acquainted with the wife, who will probably be some merefarmer’s daughter, without education.”“To be sure. Yes. Not that I think Mr. Martin would ever marry any bodybut what had had some education—and been very well brought up. However, Ido not mean to set up my opinion against yours—and I am sure I shall notwish for the acquaintance of his wife. I shall always have a great regard forthe Miss Martins, especially Elizabeth, and should be very sorry to give themup, for they are quite as well educated as me. But if he marries a veryignorant, vulgar woman, certainly I had better not visit her, if I can helpit.”Emma watched her through the fluctuations of this speech, and saw no alarmingsymptoms of love. The young man had been the first admirer, but she trustedthere was no other hold, and that there would be no serious difficulty, onHarriet’s side, to oppose any friendly arrangement of her own.They met Mr. Martin the very next day, as they were walking on the Donwellroad. He was on foot, and after looking very respectfully at her, looked withmost unfeigned satisfaction at her companion. Emma was not sorry to have suchan opportunity of survey; and walking a few yards forward, while they talkedtogether, soon made her quick eye sufficiently acquainted with Mr. RobertMartin. His appearance was very neat, and he looked like a sensible young man,but his person had no other advantage; and when he came to be contrasted withgentlemen, she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained inHarriet’s inclination. Harriet was not insensible of manner; she hadvoluntarily noticed her father’s gentleness with admiration as well aswonder. Mr. Martin looked as if he did not know what manner was.They remained but a few minutes together, as Miss Woodhouse must not be keptwaiting; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face, and in aflutter of spirits, which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose.“Only think of our happening to meet him!—How very odd! It wasquite a chance, he said, that he had not gone round by Randalls. He did notthink we ever walked this road. He thought we walked towards Randalls mostdays. He has not been able to get the Romance of the Forest yet. He was so busythe last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it, but he goes againto-morrow. So very odd we should happen to meet! Well, Miss Woodhouse, is helike what you expected? What do you think of him? Do you think him so veryplain?”“He is very plain, undoubtedly—remarkably plain:—but that isnothing compared with his entire want of gentility. I had no right to expectmuch, and I did not expect much; but I had no idea that he could be so veryclownish, so totally without air. I had imagined him, I confess, a degree ortwo nearer gentility.”“To be sure,” said Harriet, in a mortified voice, “he is notso genteel as real gentlemen.”“I think, Harriet, since your acquaintance with us, you have beenrepeatedly in the company of some such very real gentlemen, that you mustyourself be struck with the difference in Mr. Martin. At Hartfield, you havehad very good specimens of well educated, well bred men. I should be surprizedif, after seeing them, you could be in company with Mr. Martin again withoutperceiving him to be a very inferior creature—and rather wondering atyourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before. Do not you beginto feel that now? Were not you struck? I am sure you must have been struck byhis awkward look and abrupt manner, and the uncouthness of a voice which Iheard to be wholly unmodulated as I stood here.”“Certainly, he is not like Mr. Knightley. He has not such a fine air andway of walking as Mr. Knightley. I see the difference plain enough. But Mr.Knightley is so very fine a man!”“Mr. Knightley’s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair tocompare Mr. Martin with him. You might not see one in a hundred withgentleman so plainly written as in Mr. Knightley. But he is not the onlygentleman you have been lately used to. What say you to Mr. Weston and Mr.Elton? Compare Mr. Martin with either of them. Compare their manner ofcarrying themselves; of walking; of speaking; of being silent. You must see thedifference.”“Oh yes!—there is a great difference. But Mr. Weston is almost anold man. Mr. Weston must be between forty and fifty.”“Which makes his good manners the more valuable. The older a persongrows, Harriet, the more important it is that their manners should not be bad;the more glaring and disgusting any loudness, or coarseness, or awkwardnessbecomes. What is passable in youth is detestable in later age. Mr. Martin isnow awkward and abrupt; what will he be at Mr. Weston’s time oflife?”“There is no saying, indeed,” replied Harriet rather solemnly.“But there may be pretty good guessing. He will be a completely gross,vulgar farmer, totally inattentive to appearances, and thinking of nothing butprofit and loss.”“Will he, indeed? That will be very bad.”“How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from thecircumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended. He wasa great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else—which isjust as it should be, for a thriving man. What has he to do with books? And Ihave no doubt that he will thrive, and be a very rich man intime—and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturbus.”“I wonder he did not remember the book”—was allHarriet’s answer, and spoken with a degree of grave displeasure whichEmma thought might be safely left to itself. She, therefore, said no more forsome time. Her next beginning was,“In one respect, perhaps, Mr. Elton’s manners are superior to Mr.Knightley’s or Mr. Weston’s. They have more gentleness. They mightbe more safely held up as a pattern. There is an openness, a quickness, almosta bluntness in Mr. Weston, which every body likes in him, because thereis so much good-humour with it—but that would not do to be copied.Neither would Mr. Knightley’s downright, decided, commanding sort ofmanner, though it suits him very well; his figure, and look, andsituation in life seem to allow it; but if any young man were to set aboutcopying him, he would not be sufferable. On the contrary, I think a young manmight be very safely recommended to take Mr. Elton as a model. Mr. Elton isgood-humoured, cheerful, obliging, and gentle. He seems to me to be grownparticularly gentle of late. I do not know whether he has any design ofingratiating himself with either of us, Harriet, by additional softness, but itstrikes me that his manners are softer than they used to be. If he means anything, it must be to please you. Did not I tell you what he said of you theother day?”She then repeated some warm personal praise which she had drawn from Mr. Elton,and now did full justice to; and Harriet blushed and smiled, and said she hadalways thought Mr. Elton very agreeable.Mr. Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer outof Harriet’s head. She thought it would be an excellent match; and onlytoo palpably desirable, natural, and probable, for her to have much merit inplanning it. She feared it was what every body else must think of and predict.It was not likely, however, that any body should have equalled her in the dateof the plan, as it had entered her brain during the very first evening ofHarriet’s coming to Hartfield. The longer she considered it, the greaterwas her sense of its expediency. Mr. Elton’s situation was most suitable,quite the gentleman himself, and without low connexions; at the same time, notof any family that could fairly object to the doubtful birth of Harriet. He hada comfortable home for her, and Emma imagined a very sufficient income; forthough the vicarage of Highbury was not large, he was known to have someindependent property; and she thought very highly of him as a good-humoured,well-meaning, respectable young man, without any deficiency of usefulunderstanding or knowledge of the world.She had already satisfied herself that he thought Harriet a beautiful girl,which she trusted, with such frequent meetings at Hartfield, was foundationenough on his side; and on Harriet’s there could be little doubt that theidea of being preferred by him would have all the usual weight and efficacy.And he was really a very pleasing young man, a young man whom any woman notfastidious might like. He was reckoned very handsome; his person much admiredin general, though not by her, there being a want of elegance of feature whichshe could not dispense with:—but the girl who could be gratified by aRobert Martin’s riding about the country to get walnuts for her mightvery well be conquered by Mr. Elton’s admiration.CHAPTER V“I do not know what your opinion may be, Mrs. Weston,” said Mr.Knightley, “of this great intimacy between Emma and Harriet Smith, but Ithink it a bad thing.”“A bad thing! Do you really think it a bad thing?—why so?”“I think they will neither of them do the other any good.”“You surprize me! Emma must do Harriet good: and by supplying her with anew object of interest, Harriet may be said to do Emma good. I have been seeingtheir intimacy with the greatest pleasure. How very differently wefeel!—Not think they will do each other any good! This will certainly bethe beginning of one of our quarrels about Emma, Mr. Knightley.”“Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you, knowingWeston to be out, and that you must still fight your own battle.”“Mr. Weston would undoubtedly support me, if he were here, for he thinksexactly as I do on the subject. We were speaking of it only yesterday, andagreeing how fortunate it was for Emma, that there should be such a girl inHighbury for her to associate with. Mr. Knightley, I shall not allow you to bea fair judge in this case. You are so much used to live alone, that you do notknow the value of a companion; and, perhaps no man can be a good judge of thecomfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex, after being used toit all her life. I can imagine your objection to Harriet Smith. She is not thesuperior young woman which Emma’s friend ought to be. But on the otherhand, as Emma wants to see her better informed, it will be an inducement to herto read more herself. They will read together. She means it, I know.”“Emma has been meaning to read more ever since she was twelve years old.I have seen a great many lists of her drawing-up at various times of books thatshe meant to read regularly through—and very good lists theywere—very well chosen, and very neatly arranged—sometimesalphabetically, and sometimes by some other rule. The list she drew up whenonly fourteen—I remember thinking it did her judgment so much credit,that I preserved it some time; and I dare say she may have made out a very goodlist now. But I have done with expecting any course of steady reading fromEmma. She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience, and asubjection of the fancy to the understanding. Where Miss Taylor failed tostimulate, I may safely affirm that Harriet Smith will do nothing.—Younever could persuade her to read half so much as you wished.—You know youcould not.”“I dare say,” replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, “that I thoughtso then;—but since we have parted, I can never rememberEmma’s omitting to do any thing I wished.”“There is hardly any desiring to refresh such a memory asthat,”—said Mr. Knightley, feelingly; and for a moment ortwo he had done. “But I,” he soon added, “who have had nosuch charm thrown over my senses, must still see, hear, and remember. Emma isspoiled by being the cleverest of her family. At ten years old, she had themisfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister atseventeen. She was always quick and assured: Isabella slow and diffident. Andever since she was twelve, Emma has been mistress of the house and of you all.In her mother she lost the only person able to cope with her. She inherits hermother’s talents, and must have been under subjection to her.”“I should have been sorry, Mr. Knightley, to be dependent on yourrecommendation, had I quitted Mr. Woodhouse’s family and wanted anothersituation; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to any body.I am sure you always thought me unfit for the office I held.”“Yes,” said he, smiling. “You are better placed here;very fit for a wife, but not at all for a governess. But you were preparingyourself to be an excellent wife all the time you were at Hartfield. You mightnot give Emma such a complete education as your powers would seem to promise;but you were receiving a very good education from her, on the verymaterial matrimonial point of submitting your own will, and doing as you werebid; and if Weston had asked me to recommend him a wife, I should certainlyhave named Miss Taylor.”“Thank you. There will be very little merit in making a good wife to sucha man as Mr. Weston.”“Why, to own the truth, I am afraid you are rather thrown away, and thatwith every disposition to bear, there will be nothing to be borne. We will notdespair, however. Weston may grow cross from the wantonness of comfort, or hisson may plague him.”“I hope not that.—It is not likely. No, Mr. Knightley, donot foretell vexation from that quarter.”“Not I, indeed. I only name possibilities. I do not pretend toEmma’s genius for foretelling and guessing. I hope, with all my heart,the young man may be a Weston in merit, and a Churchill in fortune.—ButHarriet Smith—I have not half done about Harriet Smith. I think her thevery worst sort of companion that Emma could possibly have. She knows nothingherself, and looks upon Emma as knowing every thing. She is a flatterer in allher ways; and so much the worse, because undesigned. Her ignorance is hourlyflattery. How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself, whileHarriet is presenting such a delightful inferiority? And as for Harriet, I willventure to say that she cannot gain by the acquaintance. Hartfield willonly put her out of conceit with all the other places she belongs to. She willgrow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth andcircumstances have placed her home. I am much mistaken if Emma’sdoctrines give any strength of mind, or tend at all to make a girl adaptherself rationally to the varieties of her situation in life.—They onlygive a little polish.”“I either depend more upon Emma’s good sense than you do, or ammore anxious for her present comfort; for I cannot lament the acquaintance. Howwell she looked last night!”“Oh! you would rather talk of her person than her mind, would you? Verywell; I shall not attempt to deny Emma’s being pretty.”“Pretty! say beautiful rather. Can you imagine any thing nearer perfectbeauty than Emma altogether—face and figure?”“I do not know what I could imagine, but I confess that I have seldomseen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers. But I am a partial oldfriend.”“Such an eye!—the true hazle eye—and so brilliant! regularfeatures, open countenance, with a complexion! oh! what a bloom of full health,and such a pretty height and size; such a firm and upright figure! There ishealth, not merely in her bloom, but in her air, her head, her glance. Onehears sometimes of a child being ‘the picture of health;’ now, Emmaalways gives me the idea of being the complete picture of grown-up health. Sheis loveliness itself. Mr. Knightley, is not she?”“I have not a fault to find with her person,” he replied. “Ithink her all you describe. I love to look at her; and I will add this praise,that I do not think her personally vain. Considering how very handsome she is,she appears to be little occupied with it; her vanity lies another way. Mrs.Weston, I am not to be talked out of my dislike of Harriet Smith, or my dreadof its doing them both harm.”“And I, Mr. Knightley, am equally stout in my confidence of its not doingthem any harm. With all dear Emma’s little faults, she is an excellentcreature. Where shall we see a better daughter, or a kinder sister, or a truerfriend? No, no; she has qualities which may be trusted; she will never lead anyone really wrong; she will make no lasting blunder; where Emma errs once, sheis in the right a hundred times.”“Very well; I will not plague you any more. Emma shall be an angel, and Iwill keep my spleen to myself till Christmas brings John and Isabella. Johnloves Emma with a reasonable and therefore not a blind affection, and Isabellaalways thinks as he does; except when he is not quite frightened enough aboutthe children. I am sure of having their opinions with me.”“I know that you all love her really too well to be unjust or unkind; butexcuse me, Mr. Knightley, if I take the liberty (I consider myself, you know,as having somewhat of the privilege of speech that Emma’s mother mighthave had) the liberty of hinting that I do not think any possible good canarise from Harriet Smith’s intimacy being made a matter of muchdiscussion among you. Pray excuse me; but supposing any little inconveniencemay be apprehended from the intimacy, it cannot be expected that Emma,accountable to nobody but her father, who perfectly approves the acquaintance,should put an end to it, so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself. Ithas been so many years my province to give advice, that you cannot besurprized, Mr. Knightley, at this little remains of office.”“Not at all,” cried he; “I am much obliged to you for it. Itis very good advice, and it shall have a better fate than your advice has oftenfound; for it shall be attended to.”“Mrs. John Knightley is easily alarmed, and might be made unhappy abouther sister.”“Be satisfied,” said he, “I will not raise any outcry. I willkeep my ill-humour to myself. I have a very sincere interest in Emma. Isabelladoes not seem more my sister; has never excited a greater interest; perhapshardly so great. There is an anxiety, a curiosity in what one feels for Emma. Iwonder what will become of her!”“So do I,” said Mrs. Weston gently, “very much.”“She always declares she will never marry, which, of course, means justnothing at all. But I have no idea that she has yet ever seen a man she caredfor. It would not be a bad thing for her to be very much in love with a properobject. I should like to see Emma in love, and in some doubt of a return; itwould do her good. But there is nobody hereabouts to attach her; and she goesso seldom from home.”“There does, indeed, seem as little to tempt her to break her resolutionat present,” said Mrs. Weston, “as can well be; and while she is sohappy at Hartfield, I cannot wish her to be forming any attachment which wouldbe creating such difficulties on poor Mr. Woodhouse’s account. I do notrecommend matrimony at present to Emma, though I mean no slight to the state, Iassure you.”Part of her meaning was to conceal some favourite thoughts of her own and Mr.Weston’s on the subject, as much as possible. There were wishes atRandalls respecting Emma’s destiny, but it was not desirable to have themsuspected; and the quiet transition which Mr. Knightley soon afterwards made to“What does Weston think of the weather; shall we have rain?”convinced her that he had nothing more to say or surmise about Hartfield.CHAPTER VIEmma could not feel a doubt of having given Harriet’s fancy a properdirection and raised the gratitude of her young vanity to a very good purpose,for she found her decidedly more sensible than before of Mr. Elton’sbeing a remarkably handsome man, with most agreeable manners; and as she had nohesitation in following up the assurance of his admiration by agreeable hints,she was soon pretty confident of creating as much liking on Harriet’sside, as there could be any occasion for. She was quite convinced of Mr.Elton’s being in the fairest way of falling in love, if not in lovealready. She had no scruple with regard to him. He talked of Harriet, andpraised her so warmly, that she could not suppose any thing wanting which alittle time would not add. His perception of the striking improvement ofHarriet’s manner, since her introduction at Hartfield, was not one of theleast agreeable proofs of his growing attachment.“You have given Miss Smith all that she required,” said he;“you have made her graceful and easy. She was a beautiful creature whenshe came to you, but, in my opinion, the attractions you have added areinfinitely superior to what she received from nature.”“I am glad you think I have been useful to her; but Harriet only wanteddrawing out, and receiving a few, very few hints. She had all the natural graceof sweetness of temper and artlessness in herself. I have done verylittle.”“If it were admissible to contradict a lady,” said the gallant Mr.Elton—“I have perhaps given her a little more decision of character, havetaught her to think on points which had not fallen in her way before.”“Exactly so; that is what principally strikes me. So much superaddeddecision of character! Skilful has been the hand!”“Great has been the pleasure, I am sure. I never met with a dispositionmore truly amiable.”“I have no doubt of it.” And it was spoken with a sort of sighinganimation, which had a vast deal of the lover. She was not less pleased anotherday with the manner in which he seconded a sudden wish of hers, to haveHarriet’s picture.“Did you ever have your likeness taken, Harriet?” said she:“did you ever sit for your picture?”Harriet was on the point of leaving the room, and only stopt to say, with avery interesting naïveté,“Oh! dear, no, never.”No sooner was she out of sight, than Emma exclaimed,“What an exquisite possession a good picture of her would be! I wouldgive any money for it. I almost long to attempt her likeness myself. You do notknow it I dare say, but two or three years ago I had a great passion for takinglikenesses, and attempted several of my friends, and was thought to have atolerable eye in general. But from one cause or another, I gave it up indisgust. But really, I could almost venture, if Harriet would sit to me. Itwould be such a delight to have her picture!”“Let me entreat you,” cried Mr. Elton; “it would indeed be adelight! Let me entreat you, Miss Woodhouse, to exercise so charming a talentin favour of your friend. I know what your drawings are. How could you supposeme ignorant? Is not this room rich in specimens of your landscapes and flowers;and has not Mrs. Weston some inimitable figure-pieces in her drawing-room, atRandalls?”Yes, good man!—thought Emma—but what has all that to do with takinglikenesses? You know nothing of drawing. Don’t pretend to be in rapturesabout mine. Keep your raptures for Harriet’s face. “Well, if yougive me such kind encouragement, Mr. Elton, I believe I shall try what I cando. Harriet’s features are very delicate, which makes a likenessdifficult; and yet there is a peculiarity in the shape of the eye and the linesabout the mouth which one ought to catch.”“Exactly so—The shape of the eye and the lines about themouth—I have not a doubt of your success. Pray, pray attempt it. As youwill do it, it will indeed, to use your own words, be an exquisitepossession.”“But I am afraid, Mr. Elton, Harriet will not like to sit. She thinks solittle of her own beauty. Did not you observe her manner of answering me? Howcompletely it meant, ‘why should my picture be drawn?’”“Oh! yes, I observed it, I assure you. It was not lost on me. But still Icannot imagine she would not be persuaded.”Harriet was soon back again, and the proposal almost immediately made; and shehad no scruples which could stand many minutes against the earnest pressing ofboth the others. Emma wished to go to work directly, and therefore produced theportfolio containing her various attempts at portraits, for not one of them hadever been finished, that they might decide together on the best size forHarriet. Her many beginnings were displayed. Miniatures, half-lengths,whole-lengths, pencil, crayon, and water-colours had been all tried in turn.She had always wanted to do every thing, and had made more progress both indrawing and music than many might have done with so little labour as she wouldever submit to. She played and sang;—and drew in almost every style; butsteadiness had always been wanting; and in nothing had she approached thedegree of excellence which she would have been glad to command, and ought notto have failed of. She was not much deceived as to her own skill either as anartist or a musician, but she was not unwilling to have others deceived, orsorry to know her reputation for accomplishment often higher than it deserved.There was merit in every drawing—in the least finished, perhaps the most;her style was spirited; but had there been much less, or had there been tentimes more, the delight and admiration of her two companions would have beenthe same. They were both in ecstasies. A likeness pleases every body; and MissWoodhouse’s performances must be capital.“No great variety of faces for you,” said Emma. “I had onlymy own family to study from. There is my father—another of myfather—but the idea of sitting for his picture made him so nervous, thatI could only take him by stealth; neither of them very like therefore. Mrs.Weston again, and again, and again, you see. Dear Mrs. Weston! always mykindest friend on every occasion. She would sit whenever I asked her. There ismy sister; and really quite her own little elegant figure!—and the facenot unlike. I should have made a good likeness of her, if she would have satlonger, but she was in such a hurry to have me draw her four children that shewould not be quiet. Then, here come all my attempts at three of those fourchildren;—there they are, Henry and John and Bella, from one end of thesheet to the other, and any one of them might do for any one of the rest. Shewas so eager to have them drawn that I could not refuse; but there is no makingchildren of three or four years old stand still you know; nor can it be veryeasy to take any likeness of them, beyond the air and complexion, unless theyare coarser featured than any of mama’s children ever were. Here is mysketch of the fourth, who was a baby. I took him as he was sleeping on thesofa, and it is as strong a likeness of his cockade as you would wish to see.He had nestled down his head most conveniently. That’s very like. I amrather proud of little George. The corner of the sofa is very good. Then hereis my last,”—unclosing a pretty sketch of a gentleman in smallsize, whole-length—“my last and my best—my brother, Mr. JohnKnightley.—This did not want much of being finished, when I put it awayin a pet, and vowed I would never take another likeness. I could not help beingprovoked; for after all my pains, and when I had really made a very goodlikeness of it—(Mrs. Weston and I were quite agreed in thinking itvery like)—only too handsome—too flattering—but thatwas a fault on the right side”—after all this, came poor dearIsabella’s cold approbation of—“Yes, it was a littlelike—but to be sure it did not do him justice. We had had a great deal oftrouble in persuading him to sit at all. It was made a great favour of; andaltogether it was more than I could bear; and so I never would finish it, tohave it apologised over as an unfavourable likeness, to every morning visitorin Brunswick Square;—and, as I said, I did then forswear ever drawing anybody again. But for Harriet’s sake, or rather for my own, and as thereare no husbands and wives in the case at present, I will break myresolution now.”Mr. Elton seemed very properly struck and delighted by the idea, and wasrepeating, “No husbands and wives in the case at present indeed, as youobserve. Exactly so. No husbands and wives,” with so interesting aconsciousness, that Emma began to consider whether she had not better leavethem together at once. But as she wanted to be drawing, the declaration mustwait a little longer.She had soon fixed on the size and sort of portrait. It was to be awhole-length in water-colours, like Mr. John Knightley’s, and wasdestined, if she could please herself, to hold a very honourable station overthe mantelpiece.The sitting began; and Harriet, smiling and blushing, and afraid of not keepingher attitude and countenance, presented a very sweet mixture of youthfulexpression to the steady eyes of the artist. But there was no doing any thing,with Mr. Elton fidgeting behind her and watching every touch. She gave himcredit for stationing himself where he might gaze and gaze again withoutoffence; but was really obliged to put an end to it, and request him to placehimself elsewhere. It then occurred to her to employ him in reading.“If he would be so good as to read to them, it would be a kindnessindeed! It would amuse away the difficulties of her part, and lessen theirksomeness of Miss Smith’s.”Mr. Elton was only too happy. Harriet listened, and Emma drew in peace. Shemust allow him to be still frequently coming to look; any thing less wouldcertainly have been too little in a lover; and he was ready at the smallestintermission of the pencil, to jump up and see the progress, and becharmed.—There was no being displeased with such an encourager, for hisadmiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible. She couldnot respect his eye, but his love and his complaisance were unexceptionable.The sitting was altogether very satisfactory; she was quite enough pleased withthe first day’s sketch to wish to go on. There was no want of likeness,she had been fortunate in the attitude, and as she meant to throw in a littleimprovement to the figure, to give a little more height, and considerably moreelegance, she had great confidence of its being in every way a pretty drawingat last, and of its filling its destined place with credit to them both—astanding memorial of the beauty of one, the skill of the other, and thefriendship of both; with as many other agreeable associations as Mr.Elton’s very promising attachment was likely to add.Harriet was to sit again the next day; and Mr. Elton, just as he ought,entreated for the permission of attending and reading to them again.“By all means. We shall be most happy to consider you as one of theparty.”The same civilities and courtesies, the same success and satisfaction, tookplace on the morrow, and accompanied the whole progress of the picture, whichwas rapid and happy. Every body who saw it was pleased, but Mr. Elton was incontinual raptures, and defended it through every criticism.“Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty shewanted,”—observed Mrs. Weston to him—not in the leastsuspecting that she was addressing a lover.—“The expression of theeye is most correct, but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes. It isthe fault of her face that she has them not.”“Do you think so?” replied he. “I cannot agree with you. Itappears to me a most perfect resemblance in every feature. I never saw such alikeness in my life. We must allow for the effect of shade, you know.”“You have made her too tall, Emma,” said Mr. Knightley.Emma knew that she had, but would not own it; and Mr. Elton warmly added,“Oh no! certainly not too tall; not in the least too tall. Consider, sheis sitting down—which naturally presents a different—which in shortgives exactly the idea—and the proportions must be preserved, you know.Proportions, fore-shortening.—Oh no! it gives one exactly the idea ofsuch a height as Miss Smith’s. Exactly so indeed!”“It is very pretty,” said Mr. Woodhouse. “So prettily done!Just as your drawings always are, my dear. I do not know any body who draws sowell as you do. The only thing I do not thoroughly like is, that she seems tobe sitting out of doors, with only a little shawl over her shoulders—andit makes one think she must catch cold.”“But, my dear papa, it is supposed to be summer; a warm day in summer.Look at the tree.”“But it is never safe to sit out of doors, my dear.”“You, sir, may say any thing,” cried Mr. Elton, “but I mustconfess that I regard it as a most happy thought, the placing of Miss Smith outof doors; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit! Any othersituation would have been much less in character. The naïveté of MissSmith’s manners—and altogether—Oh, it is most admirable! Icannot keep my eyes from it. I never saw such a likeness.”The next thing wanted was to get the picture framed; and here were a fewdifficulties. It must be done directly; it must be done in London; the ordermust go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could bedepended on; and Isabella, the usual doer of all commissions, must not beapplied to, because it was December, and Mr. Woodhouse could not bear the ideaof her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December. But no sooner was thedistress known to Mr. Elton, than it was removed. His gallantry was always onthe alert. “Might he be trusted with the commission, what infinitepleasure should he have in executing it! he could ride to London at any time.It was impossible to say how much he should be gratified by being employed onsuch an errand.”“He was too good!—she could not endure the thought!—she wouldnot give him such a troublesome office for the world,”—brought onthe desired repetition of entreaties and assurances,—and a very fewminutes settled the business.Mr. Elton was to take the drawing to London, chuse the frame, and give thedirections; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safetywithout much incommoding him, while he seemed mostly fearful of not beingincommoded enough.“What a precious deposit!” said he with a tender sigh, as hereceived it.“This man is almost too gallant to be in love,” thought Emma.“I should say so, but that I suppose there may be a hundred differentways of being in love. He is an excellent young man, and will suit Harrietexactly; it will be an ‘Exactly so,’ as he says himself; but hedoes sigh and languish, and study for compliments rather more than I couldendure as a principal. I come in for a pretty good share as a second. But it ishis gratitude on Harriet’s account.”CHAPTER VIIThe very day of Mr. Elton’s going to London produced a fresh occasion forEmma’s services towards her friend. Harriet had been at Hartfield, asusual, soon after breakfast; and, after a time, had gone home to return againto dinner: she returned, and sooner than had been talked of, and with anagitated, hurried look, announcing something extraordinary to have happenedwhich she was longing to tell. Half a minute brought it all out. She had heard,as soon as she got back to Mrs. Goddard’s, that Mr. Martin had been therean hour before, and finding she was not at home, nor particularly expected, hadleft a little parcel for her from one of his sisters, and gone away; and onopening this parcel, she had actually found, besides the two songs which shehad lent Elizabeth to copy, a letter to herself; and this letter was from him,from Mr. Martin, and contained a direct proposal of marriage. “Who couldhave thought it? She was so surprized she did not know what to do. Yes, quite aproposal of marriage; and a very good letter, at least she thought so. And hewrote as if he really loved her very much—but she did not know—andso, she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she shoulddo.—” Emma was half-ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleasedand so doubtful.“Upon my word,” she cried, “the young man is determined notto lose any thing for want of asking. He will connect himself well if hecan.”“Will you read the letter?” cried Harriet. “Pray do.II’d rather you would.”Emma was not sorry to be pressed. She read, and was surprized. The style of theletter was much above her expectation. There were not merely no grammaticalerrors, but as a composition it would not have disgraced a gentleman; thelanguage, though plain, was strong and unaffected, and the sentiments itconveyed very much to the credit of the writer. It was short, but expressedgood sense, warm attachment, liberality, propriety, even delicacy of feeling.She paused over it, while Harriet stood anxiously watching for her opinion,with a “Well, well,” and was at last forced to add, “Is it agood letter? or is it too short?”“Yes, indeed, a very good letter,” replied Emma ratherslowly—“so good a letter, Harriet, that every thing considered, Ithink one of his sisters must have helped him. I can hardly imagine the youngman whom I saw talking with you the other day could express himself so well, ifleft quite to his own powers, and yet it is not the style of a woman; no,certainly, it is too strong and concise; not diffuse enough for a woman. Nodoubt he is a sensible man, and I suppose may have a natural talentfor—thinks strongly and clearly—and when he takes a pen in hand,his thoughts naturally find proper words. It is so with some men. Yes, Iunderstand the sort of mind. Vigorous, decided, with sentiments to a certainpoint, not coarse. A better written letter, Harriet (returning it,) than I hadexpected.”“Well,” said the still waitingHarriet;—“well—and—and what shall I do?”“What shall you do! In what respect? Do you mean with regard to thisletter?”“Yes.”“But what are you in doubt of? You must answer it of course—andspeedily.”“Yes. But what shall I say? Dear Miss Woodhouse, do advise me.”“Oh no, no! the letter had much better be all your own. You will expressyourself very properly, I am sure. There is no danger of your not beingintelligible, which is the first thing. Your meaning must be unequivocal; nodoubts or demurs: and such expressions of gratitude and concern for the painyou are inflicting as propriety requires, will present themselves unbidden toyour mind, I am persuaded. You need not be prompted to write with theappearance of sorrow for his disappointment.”“You think I ought to refuse him then,” said Harriet, looking down.“Ought to refuse him! My dear Harriet, what do you mean? Are you in anydoubt as to that? I thought—but I beg your pardon, perhaps I have beenunder a mistake. I certainly have been misunderstanding you, if you feel indoubt as to the purport of your answer. I had imagined you wereconsulting me only as to the wording of it.”Harriet was silent. With a little reserve of manner, Emma continued:“You mean to return a favourable answer, I collect.”“No, I do not; that is, I do not mean—What shall I do? What wouldyou advise me to do? Pray, dear Miss Woodhouse, tell me what I ought todo.”“I shall not give you any advice, Harriet. I will have nothing to do withit. This is a point which you must settle with your feelings.”“I had no notion that he liked me so very much,” said Harriet,contemplating the letter. For a little while Emma persevered in her silence;but beginning to apprehend the bewitching flattery of that letter might be toopowerful, she thought it best to say,“I lay it down as a general rule, Harriet, that if a woman doubtsas to whether she should accept a man or not, she certainly ought to refusehim. If she can hesitate as to ‘Yes,’ she ought to say‘No’ directly. It is not a state to be safely entered into withdoubtful feelings, with half a heart. I thought it my duty as a friend, andolder than yourself, to say thus much to you. But do not imagine that I want toinfluence you.”“Oh! no, I am sure you are a great deal too kind to—but if youwould just advise me what I had best do—No, no, I do not meanthat—As you say, one’s mind ought to be quite made up—Oneshould not be hesitating—It is a very serious thing.—It will besafer to say ‘No,’ perhaps.—Do you think I had better say‘No?’”“Not for the world,” said Emma, smiling graciously, “would Iadvise you either way. You must be the best judge of your own happiness. If youprefer Mr. Martin to every other person; if you think him the most agreeableman you have ever been in company with, why should you hesitate? You blush,Harriet.—Does any body else occur to you at this moment under such adefinition? Harriet, Harriet, do not deceive yourself; do not be run away withby gratitude and compassion. At this moment whom are you thinking of?”The symptoms were favourable.—Instead of answering, Harriet turned awayconfused, and stood thoughtfully by the fire; and though the letter was stillin her hand, it was now mechanically twisted about without regard. Emma waitedthe result with impatience, but not without strong hopes. At last, with somehesitation, Harriet said—“Miss Woodhouse, as you will not give me your opinion, I must do as wellas I can by myself; and I have now quite determined, and really almost made upmy mind—to refuse Mr. Martin. Do you think I am right?”“Perfectly, perfectly right, my dearest Harriet; you are doing just whatyou ought. While you were at all in suspense I kept my feelings to myself, butnow that you are so completely decided I have no hesitation in approving. DearHarriet, I give myself joy of this. It would have grieved me to lose youracquaintance, which must have been the consequence of your marrying Mr. Martin.While you were in the smallest degree wavering, I said nothing about it,because I would not influence; but it would have been the loss of a friend tome. I could not have visited Mrs. Robert Martin, of Abbey-Mill Farm. Now I amsecure of you for ever.”Harriet had not surmised her own danger, but the idea of it struck herforcibly.“You could not have visited me!” she cried, looking aghast.“No, to be sure you could not; but I never thought of that before. Thatwould have been too dreadful!—What an escape!—Dear Miss Woodhouse,I would not give up the pleasure and honour of being intimate with you for anything in the world.”“Indeed, Harriet, it would have been a severe pang to lose you; but itmust have been. You would have thrown yourself out of all good society. I musthave given you up.”“Dear me!—How should I ever have borne it! It would have killed menever to come to Hartfield any more!”“Dear affectionate creature!—You banished to Abbey-MillFarm!—You confined to the society of the illiterate and vulgar allyour life! I wonder how the young man could have the assurance to ask it. Hemust have a pretty good opinion of himself.”“I do not think he is conceited either, in general,” said Harriet,her conscience opposing such censure; “at least, he is very good natured,and I shall always feel much obliged to him, and have a great regardfor—but that is quite a different thing from—and you know, thoughhe may like me, it does not follow that I should—and certainly I mustconfess that since my visiting here I have seen people—and if one comesto compare them, person and manners, there is no comparison at all, oneis so very handsome and agreeable. However, I do really think Mr. Martin a veryamiable young man, and have a great opinion of him; and his being so muchattached to me—and his writing such a letter—but as to leaving you,it is what I would not do upon any consideration.”“Thank you, thank you, my own sweet little friend. We will not be parted.A woman is not to marry a man merely because she is asked, or because he isattached to her, and can write a tolerable letter.”“Oh no;—and it is but a short letter too.”Emma felt the bad taste of her friend, but let it pass with a “very true;and it would be a small consolation to her, for the clownish manner which mightbe offending her every hour of the day, to know that her husband could write agood letter.”“Oh! yes, very. Nobody cares for a letter; the thing is, to be alwayshappy with pleasant companions. I am quite determined to refuse him. But howshall I do? What shall I say?”Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer, and advised itsbeing written directly, which was agreed to, in the hope of her assistance; andthough Emma continued to protest against any assistance being wanted, it was infact given in the formation of every sentence. The looking over his letteragain, in replying to it, had such a softening tendency, that it wasparticularly necessary to brace her up with a few decisive expressions; and shewas so very much concerned at the idea of making him unhappy, and thought somuch of what his mother and sisters would think and say, and was so anxiousthat they should not fancy her ungrateful, that Emma believed if the young manhad come in her way at that moment, he would have been accepted after all.This letter, however, was written, and sealed, and sent. The business wasfinished, and Harriet safe. She was rather low all the evening, but Emma couldallow for her amiable regrets, and sometimes relieved them by speaking of herown affection, sometimes by bringing forward the idea of Mr. Elton.“I shall never be invited to Abbey-Mill again,” was said in rathera sorrowful tone.“Nor, if you were, could I ever bear to part with you, my Harriet. Youare a great deal too necessary at Hartfield to be spared to Abbey-Mill.”“And I am sure I should never want to go there; for I am never happy butat Hartfield.”Some time afterwards it was, “I think Mrs. Goddard would be very muchsurprized if she knew what had happened. I am sure Miss Nash would—forMiss Nash thinks her own sister very well married, and it is only alinen-draper.”“One should be sorry to see greater pride or refinement in the teacher ofa school, Harriet. I dare say Miss Nash would envy you such an opportunity asthis of being married. Even this conquest would appear valuable in her eyes. Asto any thing superior for you, I suppose she is quite in the dark. Theattentions of a certain person can hardly be among the tittle-tattle ofHighbury yet. Hitherto I fancy you and I are the only people to whom his looksand manners have explained themselves.”Harriet blushed and smiled, and said something about wondering that peopleshould like her so much. The idea of Mr. Elton was certainly cheering; butstill, after a time, she was tender-hearted again towards the rejected Mr.Martin.“Now he has got my letter,” said she softly. “I wonder whatthey are all doing—whether his sisters know—if he is unhappy, theywill be unhappy too. I hope he will not mind it so very much.”“Let us think of those among our absent friends who are more cheerfullyemployed,” cried Emma. “At this moment, perhaps, Mr. Elton isshewing your picture to his mother and sisters, telling how much more beautifulis the original, and after being asked for it five or six times, allowing themto hear your name, your own dear name.”“My picture!—But he has left my picture in Bond-street.”“Has he so!—Then I know nothing of Mr. Elton. No, my dear littlemodest Harriet, depend upon it the picture will not be in Bond-street till justbefore he mounts his horse to-morrow. It is his companion all this evening, hissolace, his delight. It opens his designs to his family, it introduces youamong them, it diffuses through the party those pleasantest feelings of ournature, eager curiosity and warm prepossession. How cheerful, how animated, howsuspicious, how busy their imaginations all are!”Harriet smiled again, and her smiles grew stronger.CHAPTER VIIIHarriet slept at Hartfield that night. For some weeks past she had beenspending more than half her time there, and gradually getting to have abed-room appropriated to herself; and Emma judged it best in every respect,safest and kindest, to keep her with them as much as possible just at present.She was obliged to go the next morning for an hour or two to Mrs.Goddard’s, but it was then to be settled that she should return toHartfield, to make a regular visit of some days.While she was gone, Mr. Knightley called, and sat some time with Mr. Woodhouseand Emma, till Mr. Woodhouse, who had previously made up his mind to walk out,was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it, and was induced by theentreaties of both, though against the scruples of his own civility, to leaveMr. Knightley for that purpose. Mr. Knightley, who had nothing of ceremonyabout him, was offering by his short, decided answers, an amusing contrast tothe protracted apologies and civil hesitations of the other.“Well, I believe, if you will excuse me, Mr. Knightley, if you will notconsider me as doing a very rude thing, I shall take Emma’s advice and goout for a quarter of an hour. As the sun is out, I believe I had better take mythree turns while I can. I treat you without ceremony, Mr. Knightley. Weinvalids think we are privileged people.”“My dear sir, do not make a stranger of me.”“I leave an excellent substitute in my daughter. Emma will be happy toentertain you. And therefore I think I will beg your excuse and take my threeturns—my winter walk.”“You cannot do better, sir.”“I would ask for the pleasure of your company, Mr. Knightley, but I am avery slow walker, and my pace would be tedious to you; and, besides, you haveanother long walk before you, to Donwell Abbey.”“Thank you, sir, thank you; I am going this moment myself; and I thinkthe sooner you go the better. I will fetch your greatcoat and open thegarden door for you.”Mr. Woodhouse at last was off; but Mr. Knightley, instead of being immediatelyoff likewise, sat down again, seemingly inclined for more chat. He beganspeaking of Harriet, and speaking of her with more voluntary praise than Emmahad ever heard before.“I cannot rate her beauty as you do,” said he; “but she is apretty little creature, and I am inclined to think very well of herdisposition. Her character depends upon those she is with; but in good handsshe will turn out a valuable woman.”“I am glad you think so; and the good hands, I hope, may not bewanting.”“Come,” said he, “you are anxious for a compliment, so I willtell you that you have improved her. You have cured her of herschool-girl’s giggle; she really does you credit.”“Thank you. I should be mortified indeed if I did not believe I had beenof some use; but it is not every body who will bestow praise where they may.You do not often overpower me with it.”“You are expecting her again, you say, this morning?”“Almost every moment. She has been gone longer already than sheintended.”“Something has happened to delay her; some visitors perhaps.”“Highbury gossips!—Tiresome wretches!”“Harriet may not consider every body tiresome that you would.”Emma knew this was too true for contradiction, and therefore said nothing. Hepresently added, with a smile,“I do not pretend to fix on times or places, but I must tell you that Ihave good reason to believe your little friend will soon hear of something toher advantage.”“Indeed! how so? of what sort?”“A very serious sort, I assure you;” still smiling.“Very serious! I can think of but one thing—Who is in love withher? Who makes you their confidant?”Emma was more than half in hopes of Mr. Elton’s having dropt a hint. Mr.Knightley was a sort of general friend and adviser, and she knew Mr. Eltonlooked up to him.“I have reason to think,” he replied, “that Harriet Smithwill soon have an offer of marriage, and from a most unexceptionablequarter:—Robert Martin is the man. Her visit to Abbey-Mill, this summer,seems to have done his business. He is desperately in love and means to marryher.”“He is very obliging,” said Emma; “but is he sure thatHarriet means to marry him?”“Well, well, means to make her an offer then. Will that do? He came tothe Abbey two evenings ago, on purpose to consult me about it. He knows I havea thorough regard for him and all his family, and, I believe, considers me asone of his best friends. He came to ask me whether I thought it would beimprudent in him to settle so early; whether I thought her too young: in short,whether I approved his choice altogether; having some apprehension perhaps ofher being considered (especially since your making so much of her) as ina line of society above him. I was very much pleased with all that he said. Inever hear better sense from any one than Robert Martin. He always speaks tothe purpose; open, straightforward, and very well judging. He told me everything; his circumstances and plans, and what they all proposed doing in theevent of his marriage. He is an excellent young man, both as son and brother. Ihad no hesitation in advising him to marry. He proved to me that he couldafford it; and that being the case, I was convinced he could not do better. Ipraised the fair lady too, and altogether sent him away very happy. If he hadnever esteemed my opinion before, he would have thought highly of me then; and,I dare say, left the house thinking me the best friend and counsellor man everhad. This happened the night before last. Now, as we may fairly suppose, hewould not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady, and as he doesnot appear to have spoken yesterday, it is not unlikely that he should be atMrs. Goddard’s to-day; and she may be detained by a visitor, withoutthinking him at all a tiresome wretch.”“Pray, Mr. Knightley,” said Emma, who had been smiling to herselfthrough a great part of this speech, “how do you know that Mr. Martin didnot speak yesterday?”“Certainly,” replied he, surprized, “I do not absolutely knowit; but it may be inferred. Was not she the whole day with you?”“Come,” said she, “I will tell you something, in return forwhat you have told me. He did speak yesterday—that is, he wrote, and wasrefused.”This was obliged to be repeated before it could be believed; and Mr. Knightleyactually looked red with surprize and displeasure, as he stood up, in tallindignation, and said,“Then she is a greater simpleton than I ever believed her. What is thefoolish girl about?”“Oh! to be sure,” cried Emma, “it is always incomprehensibleto a man that a woman should ever refuse an offer of marriage. A man alwaysimagines a woman to be ready for any body who asks her.”“Nonsense! a man does not imagine any such thing. But what is the meaningof this? Harriet Smith refuse Robert Martin? madness, if it is so; but I hopeyou are mistaken.”“I saw her answer!—nothing could be clearer.”“You saw her answer!—you wrote her answer too. Emma, this is yourdoing. You persuaded her to refuse him.”“And if I did, (which, however, I am far from allowing) I should not feelthat I had done wrong. Mr. Martin is a very respectable young man, but I cannotadmit him to be Harriet’s equal; and am rather surprized indeed that heshould have ventured to address her. By your account, he does seem to have hadsome scruples. It is a pity that they were ever got over.”“Not Harriet’s equal!” exclaimed Mr. Knightley loudly andwarmly; and with calmer asperity, added, a few moments afterwards, “No,he is not her equal indeed, for he is as much her superior in sense as insituation. Emma, your infatuation about that girl blinds you. What are HarrietSmith’s claims, either of birth, nature or education, to any connexionhigher than Robert Martin? She is the natural daughter of nobody knows whom,with probably no settled provision at all, and certainly no respectablerelations. She is known only as parlour-boarder at a common school. She is nota sensible girl, nor a girl of any information. She has been taught nothinguseful, and is too young and too simple to have acquired any thing herself. Ather age she can have no experience, and with her little wit, is not very likelyever to have any that can avail her. She is pretty, and she is good tempered,and that is all. My only scruple in advising the match was on his account, asbeing beneath his deserts, and a bad connexion for him. I felt that, as tofortune, in all probability he might do much better; and that as to a rationalcompanion or useful helpmate, he could not do worse. But I could not reason soto a man in love, and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her, toher having that sort of disposition, which, in good hands, like his, might beeasily led aright and turn out very well. The advantage of the match I felt tobe all on her side; and had not the smallest doubt (nor have I now) that therewould be a general cry-out upon her extreme good luck. Even yoursatisfaction I made sure of. It crossed my mind immediately that you would notregret your friend’s leaving Highbury, for the sake of her being settledso well. I remember saying to myself, ‘Even Emma, with all her partialityfor Harriet, will think this a good match.’”“I cannot help wondering at your knowing so little of Emma as to say anysuch thing. What! think a farmer, (and with all his sense and all his merit Mr.Martin is nothing more,) a good match for my intimate friend! Not regret herleaving Highbury for the sake of marrying a man whom I could never admit as anacquaintance of my own! I wonder you should think it possible for me to havesuch feelings. I assure you mine are very different. I must think yourstatement by no means fair. You are not just to Harriet’s claims. Theywould be estimated very differently by others as well as myself; Mr. Martin maybe the richest of the two, but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank insociety.—The sphere in which she moves is much above his.—It wouldbe a degradation.”“A degradation to illegitimacy and ignorance, to be married to arespectable, intelligent gentleman-farmer!”“As to the circumstances of her birth, though in a legal sense she may becalled Nobody, it will not hold in common sense. She is not to pay for theoffence of others, by being held below the level of those with whom she isbrought up.—There can scarcely be a doubt that her father is agentleman—and a gentleman of fortune.—Her allowance is veryliberal; nothing has ever been grudged for her improvement orcomfort.—That she is a gentleman’s daughter, is indubitable to me;that she associates with gentlemen’s daughters, no one, I apprehend, willdeny.—She is superior to Mr. Robert Martin.”“Whoever might be her parents,” said Mr. Knightley, “whoevermay have had the charge of her, it does not appear to have been any part oftheir plan to introduce her into what you would call good society. Afterreceiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs. Goddard’shands to shift as she can;—to move, in short, in Mrs. Goddard’sline, to have Mrs. Goddard’s acquaintance. Her friends evidently thoughtthis good enough for her; and it was good enough. She desired nothingbetter herself. Till you chose to turn her into a friend, her mind had nodistaste for her own set, nor any ambition beyond it. She was as happy aspossible with the Martins in the summer. She had no sense of superiority then.If she has it now, you have given it. You have been no friend to Harriet Smith,Emma. Robert Martin would never have proceeded so far, if he had not feltpersuaded of her not being disinclined to him. I know him well. He has too muchreal feeling to address any woman on the haphazard of selfish passion. And asto conceit, he is the farthest from it of any man I know. Depend upon it he hadencouragement.”It was most convenient to Emma not to make a direct reply to this assertion;she chose rather to take up her own line of the subject again.“You are a very warm friend to Mr. Martin; but, as I said before, areunjust to Harriet. Harriet’s claims to marry well are not so contemptibleas you represent them. She is not a clever girl, but she has better sense thanyou are aware of, and does not deserve to have her understanding spoken of soslightingly. Waiving that point, however, and supposing her to be, as youdescribe her, only pretty and good-natured, let me tell you, that in the degreeshe possesses them, they are not trivial recommendations to the world ingeneral, for she is, in fact, a beautiful girl, and must be thought so byninety-nine people out of an hundred; and till it appears that men are muchmore philosophic on the subject of beauty than they are generally supposed;till they do fall in love with well-informed minds instead of handsome faces, agirl, with such loveliness as Harriet, has a certainty of being admired andsought after, of having the power of chusing from among many, consequently aclaim to be nice. Her good-nature, too, is not so very slight a claim,comprehending, as it does, real, thorough sweetness of temper and manner, avery humble opinion of herself, and a great readiness to be pleased with otherpeople. I am very much mistaken if your sex in general would not think suchbeauty, and such temper, the highest claims a woman could possess.”“Upon my word, Emma, to hear you abusing the reason you have, is almostenough to make me think so too. Better be without sense, than misapply it asyou do.”“To be sure!” cried she playfully. “I know that is thefeeling of you all. I know that such a girl as Harriet is exactly what everyman delights in—what at once bewitches his senses and satisfies hisjudgment. Oh! Harriet may pick and chuse. Were you, yourself, ever to marry,she is the very woman for you. And is she, at seventeen, just entering intolife, just beginning to be known, to be wondered at because she does not acceptthe first offer she receives? No—pray let her have time to look abouther.”“I have always thought it a very foolish intimacy,” said Mr.Knightley presently, “though I have kept my thoughts to myself; but I nowperceive that it will be a very unfortunate one for Harriet. You will puff herup with such ideas of her own beauty, and of what she has a claim to, that, ina little while, nobody within her reach will be good enough for her. Vanityworking on a weak head, produces every sort of mischief. Nothing so easy as fora young lady to raise her expectations too high. Miss Harriet Smith may notfind offers of marriage flow in so fast, though she is a very pretty girl. Menof sense, whatever you may chuse to say, do not want silly wives. Men of familywould not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of suchobscurity—and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience anddisgrace they might be involved in, when the mystery of her parentage came tobe revealed. Let her marry Robert Martin, and she is safe, respectable, andhappy for ever; but if you encourage her to expect to marry greatly, and teachher to be satisfied with nothing less than a man of consequence and largefortune, she may be a parlour-boarder at Mrs. Goddard’s all the rest ofher life—or, at least, (for Harriet Smith is a girl who will marrysomebody or other,) till she grow desperate, and is glad to catch at the oldwriting-master’s son.”“We think so very differently on this point, Mr. Knightley, that therecan be no use in canvassing it. We shall only be making each other more angry.But as to my letting her marry Robert Martin, it is impossible; she hasrefused him, and so decidedly, I think, as must prevent any second application.She must abide by the evil of having refused him, whatever it may be; and as tothe refusal itself, I will not pretend to say that I might not influence her alittle; but I assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do.His appearance is so much against him, and his manner so bad, that if she everwere disposed to favour him, she is not now. I can imagine, that before she hadseen any body superior, she might tolerate him. He was the brother of herfriends, and he took pains to please her; and altogether, having seen nobodybetter (that must have been his great assistant) she might not, while she wasat Abbey-Mill, find him disagreeable. But the case is altered now. She knowsnow what gentlemen are; and nothing but a gentleman in education and manner hasany chance with Harriet.”“Nonsense, errant nonsense, as ever was talked!” cried Mr.Knightley.—“Robert Martin’s manners have sense, sincerity,and good-humour to recommend them; and his mind has more true gentility thanHarriet Smith could understand.”Emma made no answer, and tried to look cheerfully unconcerned, but was reallyfeeling uncomfortable and wanting him very much to be gone. She did not repentwhat she had done; she still thought herself a better judge of such a point offemale right and refinement than he could be; but yet she had a sort ofhabitual respect for his judgment in general, which made her dislike having itso loudly against her; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angrystate, was very disagreeable. Some minutes passed in this unpleasant silence,with only one attempt on Emma’s side to talk of the weather, but he madeno answer. He was thinking. The result of his thoughts appeared at last inthese words.“Robert Martin has no great loss—if he can but think so; and I hopeit will not be long before he does. Your views for Harriet are best known toyourself; but as you make no secret of your love of match-making, it is fair tosuppose that views, and plans, and projects you have;—and as a friend Ishall just hint to you that if Elton is the man, I think it will be all labourin vain.”Emma laughed and disclaimed. He continued,“Depend upon it, Elton will not do. Elton is a very good sort of man, anda very respectable vicar of Highbury, but not at all likely to make animprudent match. He knows the value of a good income as well as any body. Eltonmay talk sentimentally, but he will act rationally. He is as well acquaintedwith his own claims, as you can be with Harriet’s. He knows that he is avery handsome young man, and a great favourite wherever he goes; and from hisgeneral way of talking in unreserved moments, when there are only men present,I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away. I have heard himspeak with great animation of a large family of young ladies that his sistersare intimate with, who have all twenty thousand pounds apiece.”“I am very much obliged to you,” said Emma, laughing again.“If I had set my heart on Mr. Elton’s marrying Harriet, it wouldhave been very kind to open my eyes; but at present I only want to keep Harrietto myself. I have done with match-making indeed. I could never hope to equal myown doings at Randalls. I shall leave off while I am well.”“Good morning to you,”—said he, rising and walking offabruptly. He was very much vexed. He felt the disappointment of the young man,and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it, by the sanction hehad given; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair,was provoking him exceedingly.Emma remained in a state of vexation too; but there was more indistinctness inthe causes of her’s, than in his. She did not always feel so absolutelysatisfied with herself, so entirely convinced that her opinions were right andher adversary’s wrong, as Mr. Knightley. He walked off in more completeself-approbation than he left for her. She was not so materially cast down,however, but that a little time and the return of Harriet were very adequaterestoratives. Harriet’s staying away so long was beginning to make heruneasy. The possibility of the young man’s coming to Mrs. Goddard’sthat morning, and meeting with Harriet and pleading his own cause, gavealarming ideas. The dread of such a failure after all became the prominentuneasiness; and when Harriet appeared, and in very good spirits, and withouthaving any such reason to give for her long absence, she felt a satisfactionwhich settled her with her own mind, and convinced her, that let Mr. Knightleythink or say what he would, she had done nothing which woman’s friendshipand woman’s feelings would not justify.He had frightened her a little about Mr. Elton; but when she considered thatMr. Knightley could not have observed him as she had done, neither with theinterest, nor (she must be allowed to tell herself, in spite of Mr.Knightley’s pretensions) with the skill of such an observer on such aquestion as herself, that he had spoken it hastily and in anger, she was ableto believe, that he had rather said what he wished resentfully to be true, thanwhat he knew any thing about. He certainly might have heard Mr. Elton speakwith more unreserve than she had ever done, and Mr. Elton might not be of animprudent, inconsiderate disposition as to money matters; he might naturally berather attentive than otherwise to them; but then, Mr. Knightley did not makedue allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all interestedmotives. Mr. Knightley saw no such passion, and of course thought nothing ofits effects; but she saw too much of it to feel a doubt of its overcoming anyhesitations that a reasonable prudence might originally suggest; and more thana reasonable, becoming degree of prudence, she was very sure did not belong toMr. Elton.Harriet’s cheerful look and manner established hers: she came back, notto think of Mr. Martin, but to talk of Mr. Elton. Miss Nash had been tellingher something, which she repeated immediately with great delight. Mr. Perry hadbeen to Mrs. Goddard’s to attend a sick child, and Miss Nash had seenhim, and he had told Miss Nash, that as he was coming back yesterday fromClayton Park, he had met Mr. Elton, and found to his great surprize, that Mr.Elton was actually on his road to London, and not meaning to return till themorrow, though it was the whist-club night, which he had been never known tomiss before; and Mr. Perry had remonstrated with him about it, and told him howshabby it was in him, their best player, to absent himself, and tried very muchto persuade him to put off his journey only one day; but it would not do; Mr.Elton had been determined to go on, and had said in a veryparticular way indeed, that he was going on business which he would notput off for any inducement in the world; and something about a very enviablecommission, and being the bearer of something exceedingly precious. Mr. Perrycould not quite understand him, but he was very sure there must be alady in the case, and he told him so; and Mr. Elton only looked veryconscious and smiling, and rode off in great spirits. Miss Nash had told herall this, and had talked a great deal more about Mr. Elton; and said, lookingso very significantly at her, “that she did not pretend to understandwhat his business might be, but she only knew that any woman whom Mr. Eltoncould prefer, she should think the luckiest woman in the world; for, beyond adoubt, Mr. Elton had not his equal for beauty or agreeableness.”CHAPTER IXMr. Knightley might quarrel with her, but Emma could not quarrel with herself.He was so much displeased, that it was longer than usual before he came toHartfield again; and when they did meet, his grave looks shewed that she wasnot forgiven. She was sorry, but could not repent. On the contrary, her plansand proceedings were more and more justified and endeared to her by the generalappearances of the next few days.The Picture, elegantly framed, came safely to hand soon after Mr. Elton’sreturn, and being hung over the mantelpiece of the common sitting-room, he gotup to look at it, and sighed out his half sentences of admiration just as heought; and as for Harriet’s feelings, they were visibly formingthemselves into as strong and steady an attachment as her youth and sort ofmind admitted. Emma was soon perfectly satisfied of Mr. Martin’s being nootherwise remembered, than as he furnished a contrast with Mr. Elton, of theutmost advantage to the latter.Her views of improving her little friend’s mind, by a great deal ofuseful reading and conversation, had never yet led to more than a few firstchapters, and the intention of going on to-morrow. It was much easier to chatthan to study; much pleasanter to let her imagination range and work atHarriet’s fortune, than to be labouring to enlarge her comprehension orexercise it on sober facts; and the only literary pursuit which engaged Harrietat present, the only mental provision she was making for the evening of life,was the collecting and transcribing all the riddles of every sort that shecould meet with, into a thin quarto of hot-pressed paper, made up by herfriend, and ornamented with ciphers and trophies.In this age of literature, such collections on a very grand scale are notuncommon. Miss Nash, head-teacher at Mrs. Goddard’s, had written out atleast three hundred; and Harriet, who had taken the first hint of it from her,hoped, with Miss Woodhouse’s help, to get a great many more. Emmaassisted with her invention, memory and taste; and as Harriet wrote a verypretty hand, it was likely to be an arrangement of the first order, in form aswell as quantity.Mr. Woodhouse was almost as much interested in the business as the girls, andtried very often to recollect something worth their putting in. “So manyclever riddles as there used to be when he was young—he wondered he couldnot remember them! but he hoped he should in time.” And it always endedin “Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.”His good friend Perry, too, whom he had spoken to on the subject, did not atpresent recollect any thing of the riddle kind; but he had desired Perry to beupon the watch, and as he went about so much, something, he thought, might comefrom that quarter.It was by no means his daughter’s wish that the intellects of Highbury ingeneral should be put under requisition. Mr. Elton was the only one whoseassistance she asked. He was invited to contribute any really good enigmas,charades, or conundrums that he might recollect; and she had the pleasure ofseeing him most intently at work with his recollections; and at the same time,as she could perceive, most earnestly careful that nothing ungallant, nothingthat did not breathe a compliment to the sex should pass his lips. They owed tohim their two or three politest puzzles; and the joy and exultation with whichat last he recalled, and rather sentimentally recited, that well-known charade,My first doth affliction denote,    Which my second is destin’d to feelAnd my whole is the best antidote    That affliction to soften and heal.—made her quite sorry to acknowledge that they had transcribed it some pages agoalready.“Why will not you write one yourself for us, Mr. Elton?” said she;“that is the only security for its freshness; and nothing could be easierto you.”“Oh no! he had never written, hardly ever, any thing of the kind in hislife. The stupidest fellow! He was afraid not even MissWoodhouse”—he stopt a moment—“or Miss Smith couldinspire him.”The very next day however produced some proof of inspiration. He called for afew moments, just to leave a piece of paper on the table containing, as hesaid, a charade, which a friend of his had addressed to a young lady, theobject of his admiration, but which, from his manner, Emma was immediatelyconvinced must be his own.“I do not offer it for Miss Smith’s collection,” said he.“Being my friend’s, I have no right to expose it in any degree tothe public eye, but perhaps you may not dislike looking at it.”The speech was more to Emma than to Harriet, which Emma could understand. Therewas deep consciousness about him, and he found it easier to meet her eye thanher friend’s. He was gone the next moment:—after anothermoment’s pause,“Take it,” said Emma, smiling, and pushing the paper towardsHarriet—“it is for you. Take your own.”But Harriet was in a tremor, and could not touch it; and Emma, never loth to befirst, was obliged to examine it herself.To Miss——CHARADE.My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,    Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease.Another view of man, my second brings,    Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!But ah! united, what reverse we have!    Man’s boasted power and freedom, all are flown;Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,    And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.    Thy ready wit the word will soon supply,    May its approval beam in that soft eye!She cast her eye over it, pondered, caught the meaning, read it through againto be quite certain, and quite mistress of the lines, and then passing it toHarriet, sat happily smiling, and saying to herself, while Harriet was puzzlingover the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness, “Very well, Mr.Elton, very well indeed. I have read worse charades. Courtship—avery good hint. I give you credit for it. This is feeling your way. This issaying very plainly—‘Pray, Miss Smith, give me leave to pay myaddresses to you. Approve my charade and my intentions in the sameglance.’May its approval beam in that soft eye!Harriet exactly. Soft is the very word for her eye—of all epithets, thejustest that could be given.Thy ready wit the word will soon supply.Humph—Harriet’s ready wit! All the better. A man must be very muchin love, indeed, to describe her so. Ah! Mr. Knightley, I wish you had thebenefit of this; I think this would convince you. For once in your life youwould be obliged to own yourself mistaken. An excellent charade indeed! andvery much to the purpose. Things must come to a crisis soon now.”She was obliged to break off from these very pleasant observations, which wereotherwise of a sort to run into great length, by the eagerness ofHarriet’s wondering questions.“What can it be, Miss Woodhouse?—what can it be? I have not anidea—I cannot guess it in the least. What can it possibly be? Do try tofind it out, Miss Woodhouse. Do help me. I never saw any thing so hard. Is itkingdom? I wonder who the friend was—and who could be the young lady. Doyou think it is a good one? Can it be woman?And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.Can it be Neptune?Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!Or a trident? or a mermaid? or a shark? Oh, no! shark is only one syllable. Itmust be very clever, or he would not have brought it. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, doyou think we shall ever find it out?”“Mermaids and sharks! Nonsense! My dear Harriet, what are you thinkingof? Where would be the use of his bringing us a charade made by a friend upon amermaid or a shark? Give me the paper and listen.For Miss ———, read Miss Smith.My first displays the wealth and pomp of kings,    Lords of the earth! their luxury and ease.That is court.Another view of man, my second brings;    Behold him there, the monarch of the seas!That is ship;—plain as it can be.—Now for the cream.But ah! united, (courtship, you know,) what reverse we have!    Man’s boasted power and freedom, all are flown.Lord of the earth and sea, he bends a slave,    And woman, lovely woman, reigns alone.A very proper compliment!—and then follows the application, which Ithink, my dear Harriet, you cannot find much difficulty in comprehending. Readit in comfort to yourself. There can be no doubt of its being written for youand to you.”Harriet could not long resist so delightful a persuasion. She read theconcluding lines, and was all flutter and happiness. She could not speak. Butshe was not wanted to speak. It was enough for her to feel. Emma spoke for her.“There is so pointed, and so particular a meaning in thiscompliment,” said she, “that I cannot have a doubt as to Mr.Elton’s intentions. You are his object—and you will soon receivethe completest proof of it. I thought it must be so. I thought I could not beso deceived; but now, it is clear; the state of his mind is as clear anddecided, as my wishes on the subject have been ever since I knew you. Yes,Harriet, just so long have I been wanting the very circumstance to happen thathas happened. I could never tell whether an attachment between you and Mr.Elton were most desirable or most natural. Its probability and its eligibilityhave really so equalled each other! I am very happy. I congratulate you, mydear Harriet, with all my heart. This is an attachment which a woman may wellfeel pride in creating. This is a connexion which offers nothing but good. Itwill give you every thing that you want—consideration, independence, aproper home—it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends, closeto Hartfield and to me, and confirm our intimacy for ever. This, Harriet, is analliance which can never raise a blush in either of us.”“Dear Miss Woodhouse!”—and “Dear Miss Woodhouse,”was all that Harriet, with many tender embraces could articulate at first; butwhen they did arrive at something more like conversation, it was sufficientlyclear to her friend that she saw, felt, anticipated, and remembered just as sheought. Mr. Elton’s superiority had very ample acknowledgment.“Whatever you say is always right,” cried Harriet, “andtherefore I suppose, and believe, and hope it must be so; but otherwise I couldnot have imagined it. It is so much beyond any thing I deserve. Mr. Elton, whomight marry any body! There cannot be two opinions about him. He is sovery superior. Only think of those sweet verses—‘To Miss———.’ Dear me, how clever!—Could it really bemeant for me?”“I cannot make a question, or listen to a question about that. It is acertainty. Receive it on my judgment. It is a sort of prologue to the play, amotto to the chapter; and will be soon followed by matter-of-fact prose.”“It is a sort of thing which nobody could have expected. I am sure, amonth ago, I had no more idea myself!—The strangest things do takeplace!”“When Miss Smiths and Mr. Eltons get acquainted—they doindeed—and really it is strange; it is out of the common course that whatis so evidently, so palpably desirable—what courts the pre-arrangement ofother people, should so immediately shape itself into the proper form. You andMr. Elton are by situation called together; you belong to one another by everycircumstance of your respective homes. Your marrying will be equal to the matchat Randalls. There does seem to be a something in the air of Hartfield whichgives love exactly the right direction, and sends it into the very channelwhere it ought to flow.The course of true love never did run smooth—A Hartfield edition of Shakespeare would have a long note on thatpassage.”“That Mr. Elton should really be in love with me,—me, of allpeople, who did not know him, to speak to him, at Michaelmas! And he, the veryhandsomest man that ever was, and a man that every body looks up to, quite likeMr. Knightley! His company so sought after, that every body says he need noteat a single meal by himself if he does not chuse it; that he has moreinvitations than there are days in the week. And so excellent in the Church!Miss Nash has put down all the texts he has ever preached from since he came toHighbury. Dear me! When I look back to the first time I saw him! How little didI think!—The two Abbots and I ran into the front room and peeped throughthe blind when we heard he was going by, and Miss Nash came and scolded usaway, and staid to look through herself; however, she called me back presently,and let me look too, which was very good-natured. And how beautiful we thoughthe looked! He was arm-in-arm with Mr. Cole.”“This is an alliance which, whoever—whatever your friends may be,must be agreeable to them, provided at least they have common sense; and we arenot to be addressing our conduct to fools. If they are anxious to see youhappily married, here is a man whose amiable character gives everyassurance of it;—if they wish to have you settled in the same country andcircle which they have chosen to place you in, here it will be accomplished;and if their only object is that you should, in the common phrase, bewell married, here is the comfortable fortune, the respectableestablishment, the rise in the world which must satisfy them.”“Yes, very true. How nicely you talk; I love to hear you. You understandevery thing. You and Mr. Elton are one as clever as the other. Thischarade!—If I had studied a twelvemonth, I could never have made anything like it.”“I thought he meant to try his skill, by his manner of declining ityesterday.”“I do think it is, without exception, the best charade I everread.”“I never read one more to the purpose, certainly.”“It is as long again as almost all we have had before.”“I do not consider its length as particularly in its favour. Such thingsin general cannot be too short.”Harriet was too intent on the lines to hear. The most satisfactory comparisonswere rising in her mind.“It is one thing,” said she, presently—her cheeks in aglow—“to have very good sense in a common way, like every bodyelse, and if there is any thing to say, to sit down and write a letter, and sayjust what you must, in a short way; and another, to write verses and charadeslike this.”Emma could not have desired a more spirited rejection of Mr. Martin’sprose.“Such sweet lines!” continued Harriet—“these twolast!—But how shall I ever be able to return the paper, or say I havefound it out?—Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what can we do about that?”“Leave it to me. You do nothing. He will be here this evening, I daresay, and then I will give it him back, and some nonsense or other will passbetween us, and you shall not be committed.—Your soft eyes shall chusetheir own time for beaming. Trust to me.”“Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what a pity that I must not write this beautifulcharade into my book! I am sure I have not got one half so good.”“Leave out the two last lines, and there is no reason why you should notwrite it into your book.”“Oh! but those two lines are”——“The best of all. Granted;—for private enjoyment; and forprivate enjoyment keep them. They are not at all the less written you know,because you divide them. The couplet does not cease to be, nor does its meaningchange. But take it away, and all appropriation ceases, and a verypretty gallant charade remains, fit for any collection. Depend upon it, hewould not like to have his charade slighted, much better than his passion. Apoet in love must be encouraged in both capacities, or neither. Give me thebook, I will write it down, and then there can be no possible reflection onyou.”Harriet submitted, though her mind could hardly separate the parts, so as tofeel quite sure that her friend were not writing down a declaration of love. Itseemed too precious an offering for any degree of publicity.“I shall never let that book go out of my own hands,” said she.“Very well,” replied Emma; “a most natural feeling; and thelonger it lasts, the better I shall be pleased. But here is my father coming:you will not object to my reading the charade to him. It will be giving him somuch pleasure! He loves any thing of the sort, and especially any thing thatpays woman a compliment. He has the tenderest spirit of gallantry towards usall!—You must let me read it to him.”Harriet looked grave.“My dear Harriet, you must not refine too much upon thischarade.—You will betray your feelings improperly, if you are tooconscious and too quick, and appear to affix more meaning, or even quite allthe meaning which may be affixed to it. Do not be overpowered by such a littletribute of admiration. If he had been anxious for secrecy, he would not haveleft the paper while I was by; but he rather pushed it towards me than towardsyou. Do not let us be too solemn on the business. He has encouragement enoughto proceed, without our sighing out our souls over this charade.”“Oh! no—I hope I shall not be ridiculous about it. Do as youplease.”Mr. Woodhouse came in, and very soon led to the subject again, by therecurrence of his very frequent inquiry of “Well, my dears, how does yourbook go on?—Have you got any thing fresh?”“Yes, papa; we have something to read you, something quite fresh. A pieceof paper was found on the table this morning—(dropt, we suppose, by afairy)—containing a very pretty charade, and we have just copied itin.”She read it to him, just as he liked to have any thing read, slowly anddistinctly, and two or three times over, with explanations of every part as sheproceeded—and he was very much pleased, and, as she had foreseen,especially struck with the complimentary conclusion.“Aye, that’s very just, indeed, that’s very properly said.Very true. ‘Woman, lovely woman.’ It is such a pretty charade, mydear, that I can easily guess what fairy brought it.—Nobody could havewritten so prettily, but you, Emma.”Emma only nodded, and smiled.—After a little thinking, and a very tendersigh, he added,“Ah! it is no difficulty to see who you take after! Your dear mother wasso clever at all those things! If I had but her memory! But I can remembernothing;—not even that particular riddle which you have heard me mention;I can only recollect the first stanza; and there are several.Kitty, a fair but frozen maid,    Kindled a flame I yet deplore,The hood-wink’d boy I called to aid,Though of his near approach afraid,    So fatal to my suit before.And that is all that I can recollect of it—but it is very clever all theway through. But I think, my dear, you said you had got it.”“Yes, papa, it is written out in our second page. We copied it from theElegant Extracts. It was Garrick’s, you know.”“Aye, very true.—I wish I could recollect more of it.Kitty, a fair but frozen maid.The name makes me think of poor Isabella; for she was very near beingchristened Catherine after her grandmama. I hope we shall have her here nextweek. Have you thought, my dear, where you shall put her—and what roomthere will be for the children?”“Oh! yes—she will have her own room, of course; the room she alwayshas;—and there is the nursery for the children,—just as usual, youknow. Why should there be any change?”“I do not know, my dear—but it is so long since she washere!—not since last Easter, and then only for a few days.—Mr. JohnKnightley’s being a lawyer is very inconvenient.—PoorIsabella!—she is sadly taken away from us all!—and how sorry shewill be when she comes, not to see Miss Taylor here!”“She will not be surprized, papa, at least.”“I do not know, my dear. I am sure I was very much surprized when I firstheard she was going to be married.”“We must ask Mr. and Mrs. Weston to dine with us, while Isabella ishere.”“Yes, my dear, if there is time.—But—(in a very depressedtone)—she is coming for only one week. There will not be time for anything.”“It is unfortunate that they cannot stay longer—but it seems a caseof necessity. Mr. John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th, and weought to be thankful, papa, that we are to have the whole of the time they cangive to the country, that two or three days are not to be taken out for theAbbey. Mr. Knightley promises to give up his claim this Christmas—thoughyou know it is longer since they were with him, than with us.”“It would be very hard, indeed, my dear, if poor Isabella were to beanywhere but at Hartfield.”Mr. Woodhouse could never allow for Mr. Knightley’s claims on hisbrother, or any body’s claims on Isabella, except his own. He sat musinga little while, and then said,“But I do not see why poor Isabella should be obliged to go back so soon,though he does. I think, Emma, I shall try and persuade her to stay longer withus. She and the children might stay very well.”“Ah! papa—that is what you never have been able to accomplish, andI do not think you ever will. Isabella cannot bear to stay behind herhusband.”This was too true for contradiction. Unwelcome as it was, Mr. Woodhouse couldonly give a submissive sigh; and as Emma saw his spirits affected by the ideaof his daughter’s attachment to her husband, she immediately led to sucha branch of the subject as must raise them.“Harriet must give us as much of her company as she can while my brotherand sister are here. I am sure she will be pleased with the children. We arevery proud of the children, are not we, papa? I wonder which she will think thehandsomest, Henry or John?”“Aye, I wonder which she will. Poor little dears, how glad they will beto come. They are very fond of being at Hartfield, Harriet.”“I dare say they are, sir. I am sure I do not know who is not.”“Henry is a fine boy, but John is very like his mama. Henry is theeldest, he was named after me, not after his father. John, the second, is namedafter his father. Some people are surprized, I believe, that the eldest wasnot, but Isabella would have him called Henry, which I thought very pretty ofher. And he is a very clever boy, indeed. They are all remarkably clever; andthey have so many pretty ways. They will come and stand by my chair, and say,‘Grandpapa, can you give me a bit of string?’ and once Henry askedme for a knife, but I told him knives were only made for grandpapas. I thinktheir father is too rough with them very often.”“He appears rough to you,” said Emma, “because you are sovery gentle yourself; but if you could compare him with other papas, you wouldnot think him rough. He wishes his boys to be active and hardy; and if theymisbehave, can give them a sharp word now and then; but he is an affectionatefather—certainly Mr. John Knightley is an affectionate father. Thechildren are all fond of him.”“And then their uncle comes in, and tosses them up to the ceiling in avery frightful way!”“But they like it, papa; there is nothing they like so much. It is suchenjoyment to them, that if their uncle did not lay down the rule of theirtaking turns, whichever began would never give way to the other.”“Well, I cannot understand it.”“That is the case with us all, papa. One half of the world cannotunderstand the pleasures of the other.”Later in the morning, and just as the girls were going to separate inpreparation for the regular four o’clock dinner, the hero of thisinimitable charade walked in again. Harriet turned away; but Emma could receivehim with the usual smile, and her quick eye soon discerned in his theconsciousness of having made a push—of having thrown a die; and sheimagined he was come to see how it might turn up. His ostensible reason,however, was to ask whether Mr. Woodhouse’s party could be made up in theevening without him, or whether he should be in the smallest degree necessaryat Hartfield. If he were, every thing else must give way; but otherwise hisfriend Cole had been saying so much about his dining with him—had madesuch a point of it, that he had promised him conditionally to come.Emma thanked him, but could not allow of his disappointing his friend on theiraccount; her father was sure of his rubber. He re-urged—she re-declined;and he seemed then about to make his bow, when taking the paper from the table,she returned it—“Oh! here is the charade you were so obliging as to leave with us; thankyou for the sight of it. We admired it so much, that I have ventured to writeit into Miss Smith’s collection. Your friend will not take it amiss Ihope. Of course I have not transcribed beyond the first eight lines.”Mr. Elton certainly did not very well know what to say. He looked ratherdoubtingly—rather confused; said something about“honour,”—glanced at Emma and at Harriet, and then seeing thebook open on the table, took it up, and examined it very attentively. With theview of passing off an awkward moment, Emma smilingly said,“You must make my apologies to your friend; but so good a charade mustnot be confined to one or two. He may be sure of every woman’sapprobation while he writes with such gallantry.”“I have no hesitation in saying,” replied Mr. Elton, thoughhesitating a good deal while he spoke; “I have no hesitation insaying—at least if my friend feels at all as I do—I have notthe smallest doubt that, could he see his little effusion honoured as Isee it, (looking at the book again, and replacing it on the table), he wouldconsider it as the proudest moment of his life.”After this speech he was gone as soon as possible. Emma could not think it toosoon; for with all his good and agreeable qualities, there was a sort of paradein his speeches which was very apt to incline her to laugh. She ran away toindulge the inclination, leaving the tender and the sublime of pleasure toHarriet’s share.CHAPTER XThough now the middle of December, there had yet been no weather to prevent theyoung ladies from tolerably regular exercise; and on the morrow, Emma had acharitable visit to pay to a poor sick family, who lived a little way out ofHighbury.Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane, a lane leading atright angles from the broad, though irregular, main street of the place; and,as may be inferred, containing the blessed abode of Mr. Elton. A few inferiordwellings were first to be passed, and then, about a quarter of a mile down thelane rose the Vicarage, an old and not very good house, almost as close to theroad as it could be. It had no advantage of situation; but had been very muchsmartened up by the present proprietor; and, such as it was, there could be nopossibility of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace andobserving eyes.—Emma’s remark was—“There it is. There go you and your riddle-book one of thesedays.”—Harriet’s was—“Oh, what a sweet house!—How very beautiful!—There are theyellow curtains that Miss Nash admires so much.”“I do not often walk this way now,” said Emma, as theyproceeded, “but then there will be an inducement, and I shallgradually get intimately acquainted with all the hedges, gates, pools andpollards of this part of Highbury.”Harriet, she found, had never in her life been inside the Vicarage, and hercuriosity to see it was so extreme, that, considering exteriors andprobabilities, Emma could only class it, as a proof of love, with Mr.Elton’s seeing ready wit in her.“I wish we could contrive it,” said she; “but I cannot thinkof any tolerable pretence for going in;—no servant that I want to inquireabout of his housekeeper—no message from my father.”She pondered, but could think of nothing. After a mutual silence of someminutes, Harriet thus began again—“I do so wonder, Miss Woodhouse, that you should not be married, or goingto be married! so charming as you are!”—Emma laughed, and replied,“My being charming, Harriet, is not quite enough to induce me to marry; Imust find other people charming—one other person at least. And I am notonly, not going to be married, at present, but have very little intention ofever marrying at all.”“Ah!—so you say; but I cannot believe it.”“I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet, to betempted; Mr. Elton, you know, (recollecting herself,) is out of the question:and I do not wish to see any such person. I would rather not be tempted.I cannot really change for the better. If I were to marry, I must expect torepent it.”“Dear me!—it is so odd to hear a woman talk so!”—“I have none of the usual inducements of women to marry. Were I to fallin love, indeed, it would be a different thing! but I never have been in love;it is not my way, or my nature; and I do not think I ever shall. And, withoutlove, I am sure I should be a fool to change such a situation as mine. FortuneI do not want; employment I do not want; consequence I do not want: I believefew married women are half as much mistress of their husband’s house as Iam of Hartfield; and never, never could I expect to be so truly beloved andimportant; so always first and always right in any man’s eyes as I am inmy father’s.”“But then, to be an old maid at last, like Miss Bates!”“That is as formidable an image as you could present, Harriet; and if Ithought I should ever be like Miss Bates! so silly—so satisfied—sosmiling—so prosing—so undistinguishing and unfastidious—andso apt to tell every thing relative to every body about me, I would marryto-morrow. But between us, I am convinced there never can be anylikeness, except in being unmarried.”“But still, you will be an old maid! and that’s so dreadful!”“Never mind, Harriet, I shall not be a poor old maid; and it is povertyonly which makes celibacy contemptible to a generous public! A single woman,with a very narrow income, must be a ridiculous, disagreeable old maid! theproper sport of boys and girls, but a single woman, of good fortune, is alwaysrespectable, and may be as sensible and pleasant as any body else. And thedistinction is not quite so much against the candour and common sense of theworld as appears at first; for a very narrow income has a tendency to contractthe mind, and sour the temper. Those who can barely live, and who live perforcein a very small, and generally very inferior, society, may well be illiberaland cross. This does not apply, however, to Miss Bates; she is only too goodnatured and too silly to suit me; but, in general, she is very much to thetaste of every body, though single and though poor. Poverty certainly has notcontracted her mind: I really believe, if she had only a shilling in the world,she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it; and nobody is afraid ofher: that is a great charm.”“Dear me! but what shall you do? how shall you employ yourself when yougrow old?”“If I know myself, Harriet, mine is an active, busy mind, with a greatmany independent resources; and I do not perceive why I should be more in wantof employment at forty or fifty than one-and-twenty. Woman’s usualoccupations of hand and mind will be as open to me then as they are now; orwith no important variation. If I draw less, I shall read more; if I give upmusic, I shall take to carpet-work. And as for objects of interest, objects forthe affections, which is in truth the great point of inferiority, the want ofwhich is really the great evil to be avoided in not marrying, I shall bevery well off, with all the children of a sister I love so much, to care about.There will be enough of them, in all probability, to supply every sort ofsensation that declining life can need. There will be enough for every hope andevery fear; and though my attachment to none can equal that of a parent, itsuits my ideas of comfort better than what is warmer and blinder. My nephewsand nieces!—I shall often have a niece with me.”“Do you know Miss Bates’s niece? That is, I know you must have seenher a hundred times—but are you acquainted?”“Oh! yes; we are always forced to be acquainted whenever she comes toHighbury. By the bye, that is almost enough to put one out of conceitwith a niece. Heaven forbid! at least, that I should ever bore people half somuch about all the Knightleys together, as she does about Jane Fairfax. One issick of the very name of Jane Fairfax. Every letter from her is read fortytimes over; her compliments to all friends go round and round again; and if shedoes but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher, or knit a pair of gartersfor her grandmother, one hears of nothing else for a month. I wish Jane Fairfaxvery well; but she tires me to death.”They were now approaching the cottage, and all idle topics were superseded.Emma was very compassionate; and the distresses of the poor were as sure ofrelief from her personal attention and kindness, her counsel and her patience,as from her purse. She understood their ways, could allow for their ignoranceand their temptations, had no romantic expectations of extraordinary virtuefrom those for whom education had done so little; entered into their troubleswith ready sympathy, and always gave her assistance with as much intelligenceas good-will. In the present instance, it was sickness and poverty togetherwhich she came to visit; and after remaining there as long as she could givecomfort or advice, she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the sceneas made her say to Harriet, as they walked away,“These are the sights, Harriet, to do one good. How trifling they makeevery thing else appear!—I feel now as if I could think of nothing butthese poor creatures all the rest of the day; and yet, who can say how soon itmay all vanish from my mind?”“Very true,” said Harriet. “Poor creatures! one can think ofnothing else.”“And really, I do not think the impression will soon be over,” saidEmma, as she crossed the low hedge, and tottering footstep which ended thenarrow, slippery path through the cottage garden, and brought them into thelane again. “I do not think it will,” stopping to look once more atall the outward wretchedness of the place, and recall the still greater within.“Oh! dear, no,” said her companion.They walked on. The lane made a slight bend; and when that bend was passed, Mr.Elton was immediately in sight; and so near as to give Emma time only to sayfarther,“Ah! Harriet, here comes a very sudden trial of our stability in goodthoughts. Well, (smiling,) I hope it may be allowed that if compassion hasproduced exertion and relief to the sufferers, it has done all that is trulyimportant. If we feel for the wretched, enough to do all we can for them, therest is empty sympathy, only distressing to ourselves.”Harriet could just answer, “Oh! dear, yes,” before the gentlemanjoined them. The wants and sufferings of the poor family, however, were thefirst subject on meeting. He had been going to call on them. His visit he wouldnow defer; but they had a very interesting parley about what could be done andshould be done. Mr. Elton then turned back to accompany them.“To fall in with each other on such an errand as this,” thoughtEmma; “to meet in a charitable scheme; this will bring a great increaseof love on each side. I should not wonder if it were to bring on thedeclaration. It must, if I were not here. I wish I were anywhere else.”Anxious to separate herself from them as far as she could, she soon afterwardstook possession of a narrow footpath, a little raised on one side of the lane,leaving them together in the main road. But she had not been there two minuteswhen she found that Harriet’s habits of dependence and imitation werebringing her up too, and that, in short, they would both be soon after her.This would not do; she immediately stopped, under pretence of having somealteration to make in the lacing of her half-boot, and stooping down incomplete occupation of the footpath, begged them to have the goodness to walkon, and she would follow in half a minute. They did as they were desired; andby the time she judged it reasonable to have done with her boot, she had thecomfort of farther delay in her power, being overtaken by a child from thecottage, setting out, according to orders, with her pitcher, to fetch brothfrom Hartfield. To walk by the side of this child, and talk to and questionher, was the most natural thing in the world, or would have been the mostnatural, had she been acting just then without design; and by this means theothers were still able to keep ahead, without any obligation of waiting forher. She gained on them, however, involuntarily: the child’s pace wasquick, and theirs rather slow; and she was the more concerned at it, from theirbeing evidently in a conversation which interested them. Mr. Elton was speakingwith animation, Harriet listening with a very pleased attention; and Emma,having sent the child on, was beginning to think how she might draw back alittle more, when they both looked around, and she was obliged to join them.Mr. Elton was still talking, still engaged in some interesting detail; and Emmaexperienced some disappointment when she found that he was only giving his faircompanion an account of the yesterday’s party at his friend Cole’s,and that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese, the north Wiltshire,the butter, the celery, the beet-root, and all the dessert.“This would soon have led to something better, of course,” was herconsoling reflection; “any thing interests between those who love; andany thing will serve as introduction to what is near the heart. If I could buthave kept longer away!”They now walked on together quietly, till within view of the vicarage pales,when a sudden resolution, of at least getting Harriet into the house, made heragain find something very much amiss about her boot, and fall behind to arrangeit once more. She then broke the lace off short, and dexterously throwing itinto a ditch, was presently obliged to entreat them to stop, and acknowledgedher inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home intolerable comfort.“Part of my lace is gone,” said she, “and I do not know how Iam to contrive. I really am a most troublesome companion to you both, but Ihope I am not often so ill-equipped. Mr. Elton, I must beg leave to stop atyour house, and ask your housekeeper for a bit of ribband or string, or anything just to keep my boot on.”Mr. Elton looked all happiness at this proposition; and nothing could exceedhis alertness and attention in conducting them into his house and endeavouringto make every thing appear to advantage. The room they were taken into was theone he chiefly occupied, and looking forwards; behind it was another with whichit immediately communicated; the door between them was open, and Emma passedinto it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortablemanner. She was obliged to leave the door ajar as she found it; but she fullyintended that Mr. Elton should close it. It was not closed, however, it stillremained ajar; but by engaging the housekeeper in incessant conversation, shehoped to make it practicable for him to chuse his own subject in the adjoiningroom. For ten minutes she could hear nothing but herself. It could beprotracted no longer. She was then obliged to be finished, and make herappearance.The lovers were standing together at one of the windows. It had a mostfavourable aspect; and, for half a minute, Emma felt the glory of havingschemed successfully. But it would not do; he had not come to the point. He hadbeen most agreeable, most delightful; he had told Harriet that he had seen themgo by, and had purposely followed them; other little gallantries and allusionshad been dropt, but nothing serious.“Cautious, very cautious,” thought Emma; “he advances inch byinch, and will hazard nothing till he believes himself secure.”Still, however, though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingeniousdevice, she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of muchpresent enjoyment to both, and must be leading them forward to the great event.CHAPTER XIMr. Elton must now be left to himself. It was no longer in Emma’s powerto superintend his happiness or quicken his measures. The coming of hersister’s family was so very near at hand, that first in anticipation, andthen in reality, it became henceforth her prime object of interest; and duringthe ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be expected—she didnot herself expect—that any thing beyond occasional, fortuitousassistance could be afforded by her to the lovers. They might advance rapidlyif they would, however; they must advance somehow or other whether they wouldor no. She hardly wished to have more leisure for them. There are people, whothe more you do for them, the less they will do for themselves.Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, from having been longer than usual absent fromSurry, were exciting of course rather more than the usual interest. Till thisyear, every long vacation since their marriage had been divided betweenHartfield and Donwell Abbey; but all the holidays of this autumn had been givento sea-bathing for the children, and it was therefore many months since theyhad been seen in a regular way by their Surry connexions, or seen at all by Mr.Woodhouse, who could not be induced to get so far as London, even for poorIsabella’s sake; and who consequently was now most nervously andapprehensively happy in forestalling this too short visit.He thought much of the evils of the journey for her, and not a little of thefatigues of his own horses and coachman who were to bring some of the party thelast half of the way; but his alarms were needless; the sixteen miles beinghappily accomplished, and Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley, their five children, anda competent number of nursery-maids, all reaching Hartfield in safety. Thebustle and joy of such an arrival, the many to be talked to, welcomed,encouraged, and variously dispersed and disposed of, produced a noise andconfusion which his nerves could not have borne under any other cause, nor haveendured much longer even for this; but the ways of Hartfield and the feelingsof her father were so respected by Mrs. John Knightley, that in spite ofmaternal solicitude for the immediate enjoyment of her little ones, and fortheir having instantly all the liberty and attendance, all the eating anddrinking, and sleeping and playing, which they could possibly wish for, withoutthe smallest delay, the children were never allowed to be long a disturbance tohim, either in themselves or in any restless attendance on them.Mrs. John Knightley was a pretty, elegant little woman, of gentle, quietmanners, and a disposition remarkably amiable and affectionate; wrapt up in herfamily; a devoted wife, a doating mother, and so tenderly attached to herfather and sister that, but for these higher ties, a warmer love might haveseemed impossible. She could never see a fault in any of them. She was not awoman of strong understanding or any quickness; and with this resemblance ofher father, she inherited also much of his constitution; was delicate in herown health, over-careful of that of her children, had many fears and manynerves, and was as fond of her own Mr. Wingfield in town as her father could beof Mr. Perry. They were alike too, in a general benevolence of temper, and astrong habit of regard for every old acquaintance.Mr. John Knightley was a tall, gentleman-like, and very clever man; rising inhis profession, domestic, and respectable in his private character; but withreserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing; and capable ofbeing sometimes out of humour. He was not an ill-tempered man, not so oftenunreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach; but his temper was not hisgreat perfection; and, indeed, with such a worshipping wife, it was hardlypossible that any natural defects in it should not be increased. The extremesweetness of her temper must hurt his. He had all the clearness and quicknessof mind which she wanted, and he could sometimes act an ungracious, or say asevere thing.He was not a great favourite with his fair sister-in-law. Nothing wrong in himescaped her. She was quick in feeling the little injuries to Isabella, whichIsabella never felt herself. Perhaps she might have passed over more had hismanners been flattering to Isabella’s sister, but they were only those ofa calmly kind brother and friend, without praise and without blindness; buthardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of thatgreatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into, the want ofrespectful forbearance towards her father. There he had not always the patiencethat could have been wished. Mr. Woodhouse’s peculiarities andfidgetiness were sometimes provoking him to a rational remonstrance or sharpretort equally ill-bestowed. It did not often happen; for Mr. John Knightleyhad really a great regard for his father-in-law, and generally a strong senseof what was due to him; but it was too often for Emma’s charity,especially as there was all the pain of apprehension frequently to be endured,though the offence came not. The beginning, however, of every visit displayednone but the properest feelings, and this being of necessity so short might behoped to pass away in unsullied cordiality. They had not been long seated andcomposed when Mr. Woodhouse, with a melancholy shake of the head and a sigh,called his daughter’s attention to the sad change at Hartfield since shehad been there last.“Ah, my dear,” said he, “poor Miss Taylor—It is agrievous business.”“Oh yes, sir,” cried she with ready sympathy, “how you mustmiss her! And dear Emma, too!—What a dreadful loss to you both!—Ihave been so grieved for you.—I could not imagine how you could possiblydo without her.—It is a sad change indeed.—But I hope she is prettywell, sir.”“Pretty well, my dear—I hope—pretty well.—I do not knowbut that the place agrees with her tolerably.”Mr. John Knightley here asked Emma quietly whether there were any doubts of theair of Randalls.“Oh! no—none in the least. I never saw Mrs. Weston better in mylife—never looking so well. Papa is only speaking his own regret.”“Very much to the honour of both,” was the handsome reply.“And do you see her, sir, tolerably often?” asked Isabella in theplaintive tone which just suited her father.Mr. Woodhouse hesitated.—“Not near so often, my dear, as I couldwish.”“Oh! papa, we have missed seeing them but one entire day since theymarried. Either in the morning or evening of every day, excepting one, have weseen either Mr. Weston or Mrs. Weston, and generally both, either at Randallsor here—and as you may suppose, Isabella, most frequently here. They arevery, very kind in their visits. Mr. Weston is really as kind as herself. Papa,if you speak in that melancholy way, you will be giving Isabella a false ideaof us all. Every body must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed, but everybody ought also to be assured that Mr. and Mrs. Weston do really prevent ourmissing her by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipated—which isthe exact truth.”“Just as it should be,” said Mr. John Knightley, “and just asI hoped it was from your letters. Her wish of shewing you attention could notbe doubted, and his being a disengaged and social man makes it all easy. I havebeen always telling you, my love, that I had no idea of the change being sovery material to Hartfield as you apprehended; and now you have Emma’saccount, I hope you will be satisfied.”“Why, to be sure,” said Mr. Woodhouse—“yes,certainly—I cannot deny that Mrs. Weston, poor Mrs. Weston, does come andsee us pretty often—but then—she is always obliged to go awayagain.”“It would be very hard upon Mr. Weston if she did not, papa.—Youquite forget poor Mr. Weston.”“I think, indeed,” said John Knightley pleasantly, “that Mr.Weston has some little claim. You and I, Emma, will venture to take the part ofthe poor husband. I, being a husband, and you not being a wife, the claims ofthe man may very likely strike us with equal force. As for Isabella, she hasbeen married long enough to see the convenience of putting all the Mr. Westonsaside as much as she can.”“Me, my love,” cried his wife, hearing and understanding only inpart.— “Are you talking about me?—I am sure nobody ought tobe, or can be, a greater advocate for matrimony than I am; and if it had notbeen for the misery of her leaving Hartfield, I should never have thought ofMiss Taylor but as the most fortunate woman in the world; and as to slightingMr. Weston, that excellent Mr. Weston, I think there is nothing he does notdeserve. I believe he is one of the very best-tempered men that ever existed.Excepting yourself and your brother, I do not know his equal for temper. Ishall never forget his flying Henry’s kite for him that very windy daylast Easter—and ever since his particular kindness last Septembertwelvemonth in writing that note, at twelve o’clock at night, on purposeto assure me that there was no scarlet fever at Cobham, I have been convincedthere could not be a more feeling heart nor a better man in existence.—Ifany body can deserve him, it must be Miss Taylor.”“Where is the young man?” said John Knightley. “Has he beenhere on this occasion—or has he not?”“He has not been here yet,” replied Emma. “There was a strongexpectation of his coming soon after the marriage, but it ended in nothing; andI have not heard him mentioned lately.”“But you should tell them of the letter, my dear,” said her father.“He wrote a letter to poor Mrs. Weston, to congratulate her, and a veryproper, handsome letter it was. She shewed it to me. I thought it very welldone of him indeed. Whether it was his own idea you know, one cannot tell. Heis but young, and his uncle, perhaps—”“My dear papa, he is three-and-twenty. You forget how time passes.”“Three-and-twenty!—is he indeed?—Well, I could not havethought it—and he was but two years old when he lost his poor mother!Well, time does fly indeed!—and my memory is very bad. However, it was anexceeding good, pretty letter, and gave Mr. and Mrs. Weston a great deal ofpleasure. I remember it was written from Weymouth, and dated Sept.28th—and began, ‘My dear Madam,’ but I forget how it went on;and it was signed ‘F. C. Weston Churchill.’—I remember thatperfectly.”“How very pleasing and proper of him!” cried the good-hearted Mrs.John Knightley. “I have no doubt of his being a most amiable young man.But how sad it is that he should not live at home with his father! There issomething so shocking in a child’s being taken away from his parents andnatural home! I never could comprehend how Mr. Weston could part with him. Togive up one’s child! I really never could think well of any body whoproposed such a thing to any body else.”“Nobody ever did think well of the Churchills, I fancy,” observedMr. John Knightley coolly. “But you need not imagine Mr. Weston to havefelt what you would feel in giving up Henry or John. Mr. Weston is rather aneasy, cheerful-tempered man, than a man of strong feelings; he takes things ashe finds them, and makes enjoyment of them somehow or other, depending, Isuspect, much more upon what is called society for his comforts, that is, uponthe power of eating and drinking, and playing whist with his neighbours fivetimes a week, than upon family affection, or any thing that homeaffords.”Emma could not like what bordered on a reflection on Mr. Weston, and had half amind to take it up; but she struggled, and let it pass. She would keep thepeace if possible; and there was something honourable and valuable in thestrong domestic habits, the all-sufficiency of home to himself, whence resultedher brother’s disposition to look down on the common rate of socialintercourse, and those to whom it was important.—It had a high claim toforbearance.CHAPTER XIIMr. Knightley was to dine with them—rather against the inclination of Mr.Woodhouse, who did not like that any one should share with him inIsabella’s first day. Emma’s sense of right however had decided it;and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother, she hadparticular pleasure, from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr.Knightley and herself, in procuring him the proper invitation.She hoped they might now become friends again. She thought it was time to makeup. Making-up indeed would not do. She certainly had not been in thewrong, and he would never own that he had. Concession must be out of thequestion; but it was time to appear to forget that they had ever quarrelled;and she hoped it might rather assist the restoration of friendship, that whenhe came into the room she had one of the children with her—the youngest,a nice little girl about eight months old, who was now making her first visitto Hartfield, and very happy to be danced about in her aunt’s arms. Itdid assist; for though he began with grave looks and short questions, he wassoon led on to talk of them all in the usual way, and to take the child out ofher arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity. Emma felt they werefriends again; and the conviction giving her at first great satisfaction, andthen a little sauciness, she could not help saying, as he was admiring thebaby,“What a comfort it is, that we think alike about our nephews and nieces.As to men and women, our opinions are sometimes very different; but with regardto these children, I observe we never disagree.”“If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women,and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them, asyou are where these children are concerned, we might always think alike.”“To be sure—our discordancies must always arise from my being inthe wrong.”“Yes,” said he, smiling—“and reason good. I was sixteenyears old when you were born.”“A material difference then,” she replied—“and no doubtyou were much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives; but does notthe lapse of one-and-twenty years bring our understandings a good dealnearer?”“Yes—a good deal nearer.”“But still, not near enough to give me a chance of being right, if wethink differently.”“I have still the advantage of you by sixteen years’ experience,and by not being a pretty young woman and a spoiled child. Come, my dear Emma,let us be friends, and say no more about it. Tell your aunt, little Emma, thatshe ought to set you a better example than to be renewing old grievances, andthat if she were not wrong before, she is now.”“That’s true,” she cried—“very true. Little Emma,grow up a better woman than your aunt. Be infinitely cleverer and not half soconceited. Now, Mr. Knightley, a word or two more, and I have done. As far asgood intentions went, we were both right, and I must say that no effectson my side of the argument have yet proved wrong. I only want to know that Mr.Martin is not very, very bitterly disappointed.”“A man cannot be more so,” was his short, full answer.“Ah!—Indeed I am very sorry.—Come, shake hands withme.”This had just taken place and with great cordiality, when John Knightley madehis appearance, and “How d’ye do, George?” and “John,how are you?” succeeded in the true English style, burying under acalmness that seemed all but indifference, the real attachment which would haveled either of them, if requisite, to do every thing for the good of the other.The evening was quiet and conversable, as Mr. Woodhouse declined cards entirelyfor the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella, and the little partymade two natural divisions; on one side he and his daughter; on the other thetwo Mr. Knightleys; their subjects totally distinct, or very rarelymixing—and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other.The brothers talked of their own concerns and pursuits, but principally ofthose of the elder, whose temper was by much the most communicative, and whowas always the greater talker. As a magistrate, he had generally some point oflaw to consult John about, or, at least, some curious anecdote to give; and asa farmer, as keeping in hand the home-farm at Donwell, he had to tell whatevery field was to bear next year, and to give all such local information ascould not fail of being interesting to a brother whose home it had equally beenthe longest part of his life, and whose attachments were strong. The plan of adrain, the change of a fence, the felling of a tree, and the destination ofevery acre for wheat, turnips, or spring corn, was entered into with as muchequality of interest by John, as his cooler manners rendered possible; and ifhis willing brother ever left him any thing to inquire about, his inquirieseven approached a tone of eagerness.While they were thus comfortably occupied, Mr. Woodhouse was enjoying a fullflow of happy regrets and fearful affection with his daughter.“My poor dear Isabella,” said he, fondly taking her hand, andinterrupting, for a few moments, her busy labours for some one of her fivechildren—“How long it is, how terribly long since you were here!And how tired you must be after your journey! You must go to bed early, mydear—and I recommend a little gruel to you before you go.—You and Iwill have a nice basin of gruel together. My dear Emma, suppose we all have alittle gruel.”Emma could not suppose any such thing, knowing as she did, that both the Mr.Knightleys were as unpersuadable on that article as herself;—and twobasins only were ordered. After a little more discourse in praise of gruel,with some wondering at its not being taken every evening by every body, heproceeded to say, with an air of grave reflection,“It was an awkward business, my dear, your spending the autumn at SouthEnd instead of coming here. I never had much opinion of the sea air.”“Mr. Wingfield most strenuously recommended it, sir—or we shouldnot have gone. He recommended it for all the children, but particularly for theweakness in little Bella’s throat,—both sea air and bathing.”“Ah! my dear, but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any good;and as to myself, I have been long perfectly convinced, though perhaps I nevertold you so before, that the sea is very rarely of use to any body. I am sureit almost killed me once.”“Come, come,” cried Emma, feeling this to be an unsafe subject,“I must beg you not to talk of the sea. It makes me envious andmiserable;—I who have never seen it! South End is prohibited, if youplease. My dear Isabella, I have not heard you make one inquiry about Mr. Perryyet; and he never forgets you.”“Oh! good Mr. Perry—how is he, sir?”“Why, pretty well; but not quite well. Poor Perry is bilious, and he hasnot time to take care of himself—he tells me he has not time to take careof himself—which is very sad—but he is always wanted all round thecountry. I suppose there is not a man in such practice anywhere. But then thereis not so clever a man any where.”“And Mrs. Perry and the children, how are they? do the children grow? Ihave a great regard for Mr. Perry. I hope he will be calling soon. He will beso pleased to see my little ones.”“I hope he will be here to-morrow, for I have a question or two to askhim about myself of some consequence. And, my dear, whenever he comes, you hadbetter let him look at little Bella’s throat.”“Oh! my dear sir, her throat is so much better that I have hardly anyuneasiness about it. Either bathing has been of the greatest service to her, orelse it is to be attributed to an excellent embrocation of Mr.Wingfield’s, which we have been applying at times ever sinceAugust.”“It is not very likely, my dear, that bathing should have been of use toher—and if I had known you were wanting an embrocation, I would havespoken to—“You seem to me to have forgotten Mrs. and Miss Bates,” said Emma,“I have not heard one inquiry after them.”“Oh! the good Bateses—I am quite ashamed of myself—but youmention them in most of your letters. I hope they are quite well. Good old Mrs.Bates—I will call upon her to-morrow, and take my children.—Theyare always so pleased to see my children.—And that excellent MissBates!—such thorough worthy people!—How are they, sir?”“Why, pretty well, my dear, upon the whole. But poor Mrs. Bates had a badcold about a month ago.”“How sorry I am! But colds were never so prevalent as they have been thisautumn. Mr. Wingfield told me that he has never known them more general orheavy—except when it has been quite an influenza.”“That has been a good deal the case, my dear; but not to the degree youmention. Perry says that colds have been very general, but not so heavy as hehas very often known them in November. Perry does not call it altogether asickly season.”“No, I do not know that Mr. Wingfield considers it very sicklyexcept—“Ah! my poor dear child, the truth is, that in London it is always asickly season. Nobody is healthy in London, nobody can be. It is a dreadfulthing to have you forced to live there! so far off!—and the air sobad!”“No, indeed—we are not at all in a bad air. Our part ofLondon is very superior to most others!—You must not confound us withLondon in general, my dear sir. The neighbourhood of Brunswick Square is verydifferent from almost all the rest. We are so very airy! I should be unwilling,I own, to live in any other part of the town;—there is hardly any otherthat I could be satisfied to have my children in: but we are soremarkably airy!—Mr. Wingfield thinks the vicinity of Brunswick Squaredecidedly the most favourable as to air.”“Ah! my dear, it is not like Hartfield. You make the best of it—butafter you have been a week at Hartfield, you are all of you differentcreatures; you do not look like the same. Now I cannot say, that I think youare any of you looking well at present.”“I am sorry to hear you say so, sir; but I assure you, excepting thoselittle nervous head-aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free fromanywhere, I am quite well myself; and if the children were rather pale beforethey went to bed, it was only because they were a little more tired than usual,from their journey and the happiness of coming. I hope you will think better oftheir looks to-morrow; for I assure you Mr. Wingfield told me, that he did notbelieve he had ever sent us off altogether, in such good case. I trust, atleast, that you do not think Mr. Knightley looking ill,” turning her eyeswith affectionate anxiety towards her husband.“Middling, my dear; I cannot compliment you. I think Mr. John Knightleyvery far from looking well.”“What is the matter, sir?—Did you speak to me?” cried Mr.John Knightley, hearing his own name.“I am sorry to find, my love, that my father does not think you lookingwell—but I hope it is only from being a little fatigued. I could havewished, however, as you know, that you had seen Mr. Wingfield before you lefthome.”“My dear Isabella,”—exclaimed he hastily—“pray donot concern yourself about my looks. Be satisfied with doctoring and coddlingyourself and the children, and let me look as I chuse.”“I did not thoroughly understand what you were telling yourbrother,” cried Emma, “about your friend Mr. Graham’sintending to have a bailiff from Scotland, to look after his new estate. Whatwill it answer? Will not the old prejudice be too strong?”And she talked in this way so long and successfully that, when forced to giveher attention again to her father and sister, she had nothing worse to hearthan Isabella’s kind inquiry after Jane Fairfax; and Jane Fairfax, thoughno great favourite with her in general, she was at that moment very happy toassist in praising.“That sweet, amiable Jane Fairfax!” said Mrs. JohnKnightley.—“It is so long since I have seen her, except now andthen for a moment accidentally in town! What happiness it must be to her goodold grandmother and excellent aunt, when she comes to visit them! I alwaysregret excessively on dear Emma’s account that she cannot be more atHighbury; but now their daughter is married, I suppose Colonel and Mrs.Campbell will not be able to part with her at all. She would be such adelightful companion for Emma.”Mr. Woodhouse agreed to it all, but added,“Our little friend Harriet Smith, however, is just such another prettykind of young person. You will like Harriet. Emma could not have a bettercompanion than Harriet.”“I am most happy to hear it—but only Jane Fairfax one knows to beso very accomplished and superior!—and exactly Emma’s age.”This topic was discussed very happily, and others succeeded of similar moment,and passed away with similar harmony; but the evening did not close without alittle return of agitation. The gruel came and supplied a great deal to besaid—much praise and many comments—undoubting decision of itswholesomeness for every constitution, and pretty severe Philippics upon themany houses where it was never met with tolerably;—but, unfortunately,among the failures which the daughter had to instance, the most recent, andtherefore most prominent, was in her own cook at South End, a young woman hiredfor the time, who never had been able to understand what she meant by a basinof nice smooth gruel, thin, but not too thin. Often as she had wished for andordered it, she had never been able to get any thing tolerable. Here was adangerous opening.“Ah!” said Mr. Woodhouse, shaking his head and fixing his eyes onher with tender concern.—The ejaculation in Emma’s ear expressed,“Ah! there is no end of the sad consequences of your going to South End.It does not bear talking of.” And for a little while she hoped he wouldnot talk of it, and that a silent rumination might suffice to restore him tothe relish of his own smooth gruel. After an interval of some minutes, however,he began with,“I shall always be very sorry that you went to the sea this autumn,instead of coming here.”“But why should you be sorry, sir?—I assure you, it did thechildren a great deal of good.”“And, moreover, if you must go to the sea, it had better not have been toSouth End. South End is an unhealthy place. Perry was surprized to hear you hadfixed upon South End.”“I know there is such an idea with many people, but indeed it is quite amistake, sir.—We all had our health perfectly well there, never found theleast inconvenience from the mud; and Mr. Wingfield says it is entirely amistake to suppose the place unhealthy; and I am sure he may be depended on,for he thoroughly understands the nature of the air, and his own brother andfamily have been there repeatedly.”“You should have gone to Cromer, my dear, if you wentanywhere.—Perry was a week at Cromer once, and he holds it to be the bestof all the sea-bathing places. A fine open sea, he says, and very pure air.And, by what I understand, you might have had lodgings there quite away fromthe sea—a quarter of a mile off—very comfortable. You should haveconsulted Perry.”“But, my dear sir, the difference of the journey;—only consider howgreat it would have been.—An hundred miles, perhaps, instead offorty.”“Ah! my dear, as Perry says, where health is at stake, nothing elseshould be considered; and if one is to travel, there is not much to chusebetween forty miles and an hundred.—Better not move at all, better stayin London altogether than travel forty miles to get into a worse air. This isjust what Perry said. It seemed to him a very ill-judged measure.”Emma’s attempts to stop her father had been vain; and when he had reachedsuch a point as this, she could not wonder at her brother-in-law’sbreaking out.“Mr. Perry,” said he, in a voice of very strong displeasure,“would do as well to keep his opinion till it is asked for. Why does hemake it any business of his, to wonder at what I do?—at my taking myfamily to one part of the coast or another?—I may be allowed, I hope, theuse of my judgment as well as Mr. Perry.—I want his directions no morethan his drugs.” He paused—and growing cooler in a moment, added,with only sarcastic dryness, “If Mr. Perry can tell me how to convey awife and five children a distance of an hundred and thirty miles with nogreater expense or inconvenience than a distance of forty, I should be aswilling to prefer Cromer to South End as he could himself.”“True, true,” cried Mr. Knightley, with most readyinterposition—“very true. That’s a considerationindeed.—But John, as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving thepath to Langham, of turning it more to the right that it may not cut throughthe home meadows, I cannot conceive any difficulty. I should not attempt it, ifit were to be the means of inconvenience to the Highbury people, but if youcall to mind exactly the present line of the path.... The only way of provingit, however, will be to turn to our maps. I shall see you at the Abbeyto-morrow morning I hope, and then we will look them over, and you shall giveme your opinion.”Mr. Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his friendPerry, to whom he had, in fact, though unconsciously, been attributing many ofhis own feelings and expressions;—but the soothing attentions of hisdaughters gradually removed the present evil, and the immediate alertness ofone brother, and better recollections of the other, prevented any renewal ofit.CHAPTER XIIIThere could hardly be a happier creature in the world than Mrs. John Knightley,in this short visit to Hartfield, going about every morning among her oldacquaintance with her five children, and talking over what she had done everyevening with her father and sister. She had nothing to wish otherwise, but thatthe days did not pass so swiftly. It was a delightful visit;—perfect, inbeing much too short.In general their evenings were less engaged with friends than their mornings;but one complete dinner engagement, and out of the house too, there was noavoiding, though at Christmas. Mr. Weston would take no denial; they must alldine at Randalls one day;—even Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded to think it apossible thing in preference to a division of the party.How they were all to be conveyed, he would have made a difficulty if he could,but as his son and daughter’s carriage and horses were actually atHartfield, he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head; ithardly amounted to a doubt; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him thatthey might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also.Harriet, Mr. Elton, and Mr. Knightley, their own especial set, were the onlypersons invited to meet them;—the hours were to be early, as well as thenumbers few; Mr. Woodhouse’s habits and inclination being consulted inevery thing.The evening before this great event (for it was a very great event that Mr.Woodhouse should dine out, on the 24th of December) had been spent by Harrietat Hartfield, and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold, that, butfor her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs. Goddard, Emma could not haveallowed her to leave the house. Emma called on her the next day, and found herdoom already signed with regard to Randalls. She was very feverish and had abad sore throat: Mrs. Goddard was full of care and affection, Mr. Perry wastalked of, and Harriet herself was too ill and low to resist the authoritywhich excluded her from this delightful engagement, though she could not speakof her loss without many tears.Emma sat with her as long as she could, to attend her in Mrs. Goddard’sunavoidable absences, and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr.Elton’s would be depressed when he knew her state; and left her at lasttolerably comfortable, in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortlessvisit, and of their all missing her very much. She had not advanced many yardsfrom Mrs. Goddard’s door, when she was met by Mr. Elton himself,evidently coming towards it, and as they walked on slowly together inconversation about the invalid—of whom he, on the rumour of considerableillness, had been going to inquire, that he might carry some report of her toHartfield—they were overtaken by Mr. John Knightley returning from thedaily visit to Donwell, with his two eldest boys, whose healthy, glowing facesshewed all the benefit of a country run, and seemed to ensure a quick despatchof the roast mutton and rice pudding they were hastening home for. They joinedcompany and proceeded together. Emma was just describing the nature of herfriend’s complaint;—“a throat very much inflamed, with agreat deal of heat about her, a quick, low pulse, &c. and she was sorry tofind from Mrs. Goddard that Harriet was liable to very bad sore-throats, andhad often alarmed her with them.” Mr. Elton looked all alarm on theoccasion, as he exclaimed,“A sore-throat!—I hope not infectious. I hope not of a putridinfectious sort. Has Perry seen her? Indeed you should take care of yourself aswell as of your friend. Let me entreat you to run no risks. Why does not Perrysee her?”Emma, who was not really at all frightened herself, tranquillised this excessof apprehension by assurances of Mrs. Goddard’s experience and care; butas there must still remain a degree of uneasiness which she could not wish toreason away, which she would rather feed and assist than not, she added soonafterwards—as if quite another subject,“It is so cold, so very cold—and looks and feels so very much likesnow, that if it were to any other place or with any other party, I shouldreally try not to go out to-day—and dissuade my father from venturing;but as he has made up his mind, and does not seem to feel the cold himself, Ido not like to interfere, as I know it would be so great a disappointment toMr. and Mrs. Weston. But, upon my word, Mr. Elton, in your case, I shouldcertainly excuse myself. You appear to me a little hoarse already, and when youconsider what demand of voice and what fatigues to-morrow will bring, I thinkit would be no more than common prudence to stay at home and take care ofyourself to-night.”Mr. Elton looked as if he did not very well know what answer to make; which wasexactly the case; for though very much gratified by the kind care of such afair lady, and not liking to resist any advice of her’s, he had notreally the least inclination to give up the visit;—but Emma, too eagerand busy in her own previous conceptions and views to hear him impartially, orsee him with clear vision, was very well satisfied with his mutteringacknowledgment of its being “very cold, certainly very cold,” andwalked on, rejoicing in having extricated him from Randalls, and secured himthe power of sending to inquire after Harriet every hour of the evening.“You do quite right,” said she;—“we will make yourapologies to Mr. and Mrs. Weston.”But hardly had she so spoken, when she found her brother was civilly offering aseat in his carriage, if the weather were Mr. Elton’s only objection, andMr. Elton actually accepting the offer with much prompt satisfaction. It was adone thing; Mr. Elton was to go, and never had his broad handsome faceexpressed more pleasure than at this moment; never had his smile been stronger,nor his eyes more exulting than when he next looked at her.“Well,” said she to herself, “this is moststrange!—After I had got him off so well, to chuse to go into company,and leave Harriet ill behind!—Most strange indeed!—But there is, Ibelieve, in many men, especially single men, such an inclination—such apassion for dining out—a dinner engagement is so high in the class oftheir pleasures, their employments, their dignities, almost their duties, thatany thing gives way to it—and this must be the case with Mr. Elton; amost valuable, amiable, pleasing young man undoubtedly, and very much in lovewith Harriet; but still, he cannot refuse an invitation, he must dine outwherever he is asked. What a strange thing love is! he can see ready wit inHarriet, but will not dine alone for her.”Soon afterwards Mr. Elton quitted them, and she could not but do him thejustice of feeling that there was a great deal of sentiment in his manner ofnaming Harriet at parting; in the tone of his voice while assuring her that heshould call at Mrs. Goddard’s for news of her fair friend, the last thingbefore he prepared for the happiness of meeting her again, when he hoped to beable to give a better report; and he sighed and smiled himself off in a waythat left the balance of approbation much in his favour.After a few minutes of entire silence between them, John Knightley beganwith—“I never in my life saw a man more intent on being agreeable than Mr.Elton. It is downright labour to him where ladies are concerned. With men hecan be rational and unaffected, but when he has ladies to please, every featureworks.”“Mr. Elton’s manners are not perfect,” replied Emma;“but where there is a wish to please, one ought to overlook, and one doesoverlook a great deal. Where a man does his best with only moderate powers, hewill have the advantage over negligent superiority. There is such perfectgood-temper and good-will in Mr. Elton as one cannot but value.”“Yes,” said Mr. John Knightley presently, with some slyness,“he seems to have a great deal of good-will towards you.”“Me!” she replied with a smile of astonishment, “are youimagining me to be Mr. Elton’s object?”“Such an imagination has crossed me, I own, Emma; and if it neveroccurred to you before, you may as well take it into consideration now.”“Mr. Elton in love with me!—What an idea!”“I do not say it is so; but you will do well to consider whether it is soor not, and to regulate your behaviour accordingly. I think your manners to himencouraging. I speak as a friend, Emma. You had better look about you, andascertain what you do, and what you mean to do.”“I thank you; but I assure you you are quite mistaken. Mr. Elton and Iare very good friends, and nothing more;” and she walked on, amusingherself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partialknowledge of circumstances, of the mistakes which people of high pretensions tojudgment are for ever falling into; and not very well pleased with her brotherfor imagining her blind and ignorant, and in want of counsel. He said no more.Mr. Woodhouse had so completely made up his mind to the visit, that in spite ofthe increasing coldness, he seemed to have no idea of shrinking from it, andset forward at last most punctually with his eldest daughter in his owncarriage, with less apparent consciousness of the weather than either of theothers; too full of the wonder of his own going, and the pleasure it was toafford at Randalls to see that it was cold, and too well wrapt up to feel it.The cold, however, was severe; and by the time the second carriage was inmotion, a few flakes of snow were finding their way down, and the sky had theappearance of being so overcharged as to want only a milder air to produce avery white world in a very short time.Emma soon saw that her companion was not in the happiest humour. The preparingand the going abroad in such weather, with the sacrifice of his children afterdinner, were evils, were disagreeables at least, which Mr. John Knightley didnot by any means like; he anticipated nothing in the visit that could be at allworth the purchase; and the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent byhim in expressing his discontent.“A man,” said he, “must have a very good opinion of himselfwhen he asks people to leave their own fireside, and encounter such a day asthis, for the sake of coming to see him. He must think himself a most agreeablefellow; I could not do such a thing. It is the greatestabsurdity—Actually snowing at this moment!—The folly of notallowing people to be comfortable at home—and the folly of people’snot staying comfortably at home when they can! If we were obliged to go outsuch an evening as this, by any call of duty or business, what a hardship weshould deem it;—and here are we, probably with rather thinner clothingthan usual, setting forward voluntarily, without excuse, in defiance of thevoice of nature, which tells man, in every thing given to his view or hisfeelings, to stay at home himself, and keep all under shelter that hecan;—here are we setting forward to spend five dull hours in anotherman’s house, with nothing to say or to hear that was not said and heardyesterday, and may not be said and heard again to-morrow. Going in dismalweather, to return probably in worse;—four horses and four servants takenout for nothing but to convey five idle, shivering creatures into colder roomsand worse company than they might have had at home.”Emma did not find herself equal to give the pleased assent, which no doubt hewas in the habit of receiving, to emulate the “Very true, my love,”which must have been usually administered by his travelling companion; but shehad resolution enough to refrain from making any answer at all. She could notbe complying, she dreaded being quarrelsome; her heroism reached only tosilence. She allowed him to talk, and arranged the glasses, and wrapped herselfup, without opening her lips.They arrived, the carriage turned, the step was let down, and Mr. Elton,spruce, black, and smiling, was with them instantly. Emma thought with pleasureof some change of subject. Mr. Elton was all obligation and cheerfulness; hewas so very cheerful in his civilities indeed, that she began to think he musthave received a different account of Harriet from what had reached her. She hadsent while dressing, and the answer had been, “Much the same—notbetter.”“My report from Mrs. Goddard’s,” said she presently,“was not so pleasant as I had hoped—‘Not better’ wasmy answer.”His face lengthened immediately; and his voice was the voice of sentiment as heanswered.“Oh! no—I am grieved to find—I was on the point of tellingyou that when I called at Mrs. Goddard’s door, which I did the very lastthing before I returned to dress, I was told that Miss Smith was not better, byno means better, rather worse. Very much grieved and concerned—I hadflattered myself that she must be better after such a cordial as I knew hadbeen given her in the morning.”Emma smiled and answered—“My visit was of use to the nervous partof her complaint, I hope; but not even I can charm away a sore throat; it is amost severe cold indeed. Mr. Perry has been with her, as you probablyheard.”“Yes—I imagined—that is—I did not—”“He has been used to her in these complaints, and I hope to-morrowmorning will bring us both a more comfortable report. But it is impossible notto feel uneasiness. Such a sad loss to our party to-day!”“Dreadful!—Exactly so, indeed.—She will be missed everymoment.”This was very proper; the sigh which accompanied it was really estimable; butit should have lasted longer. Emma was rather in dismay when only half a minuteafterwards he began to speak of other things, and in a voice of the greatestalacrity and enjoyment.“What an excellent device,” said he, “the use of a sheepskinfor carriages. How very comfortable they make it;—impossible to feel coldwith such precautions. The contrivances of modern days indeed have rendered agentleman’s carriage perfectly complete. One is so fenced and guardedfrom the weather, that not a breath of air can find its way unpermitted.Weather becomes absolutely of no consequence. It is a very coldafternoon—but in this carriage we know nothing of the matter.—Ha!snows a little I see.”“Yes,” said John Knightley, “and I think we shall have a gooddeal of it.”“Christmas weather,” observed Mr. Elton. “Quite seasonable;and extremely fortunate we may think ourselves that it did not begin yesterday,and prevent this day’s party, which it might very possibly have done, forMr. Woodhouse would hardly have ventured had there been much snow on theground; but now it is of no consequence. This is quite the season indeed forfriendly meetings. At Christmas every body invites their friends about them,and people think little of even the worst weather. I was snowed up at afriend’s house once for a week. Nothing could be pleasanter. I went foronly one night, and could not get away till that very dayse’nnight.”Mr. John Knightley looked as if he did not comprehend the pleasure, but saidonly, coolly,“I cannot wish to be snowed up a week at Randalls.”At another time Emma might have been amused, but she was too much astonishednow at Mr. Elton’s spirits for other feelings. Harriet seemed quiteforgotten in the expectation of a pleasant party.“We are sure of excellent fires,” continued he, “and everything in the greatest comfort. Charming people, Mr. and Mrs. Weston;—Mrs.Weston indeed is much beyond praise, and he is exactly what one values, sohospitable, and so fond of society;—it will be a small party, but wheresmall parties are select, they are perhaps the most agreeable of any. Mr.Weston’s dining-room does not accommodate more than ten comfortably; andfor my part, I would rather, under such circumstances, fall short by two thanexceed by two. I think you will agree with me, (turning with a soft air toEmma,) I think I shall certainly have your approbation, though Mr. Knightleyperhaps, from being used to the large parties of London, may not quite enterinto our feelings.”“I know nothing of the large parties of London, sir—I never dinewith any body.”“Indeed! (in a tone of wonder and pity,) I had no idea that the law hadbeen so great a slavery. Well, sir, the time must come when you will be paidfor all this, when you will have little labour and great enjoyment.”“My first enjoyment,” replied John Knightley, as they passedthrough the sweep-gate, “will be to find myself safe at Hartfieldagain.”CHAPTER XIVSome change of countenance was necessary for each gentleman as they walked intoMrs. Weston’s drawing-room;—Mr. Elton must compose his joyouslooks, and Mr. John Knightley disperse his ill-humour. Mr. Elton must smileless, and Mr. John Knightley more, to fit them for the place.—Emma onlymight be as nature prompted, and shew herself just as happy as she was. To herit was real enjoyment to be with the Westons. Mr. Weston was a great favourite,and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with suchunreserve, as to his wife; not any one, to whom she related with suchconviction of being listened to and understood, of being always interesting andalways intelligible, the little affairs, arrangements, perplexities, andpleasures of her father and herself. She could tell nothing of Hartfield, inwhich Mrs. Weston had not a lively concern; and half an hour’suninterrupted communication of all those little matters on which the dailyhappiness of private life depends, was one of the first gratifications of each.This was a pleasure which perhaps the whole day’s visit might not afford,which certainly did not belong to the present half-hour; but the very sight ofMrs. Weston, her smile, her touch, her voice was grateful to Emma, and shedetermined to think as little as possible of Mr. Elton’s oddities, or ofany thing else unpleasant, and enjoy all that was enjoyable to the utmost.The misfortune of Harriet’s cold had been pretty well gone through beforeher arrival. Mr. Woodhouse had been safely seated long enough to give thehistory of it, besides all the history of his own and Isabella’s coming,and of Emma’s being to follow, and had indeed just got to the end of hissatisfaction that James should come and see his daughter, when the othersappeared, and Mrs. Weston, who had been almost wholly engrossed by herattentions to him, was able to turn away and welcome her dear Emma.Emma’s project of forgetting Mr. Elton for a while made her rather sorryto find, when they had all taken their places, that he was close to her. Thedifficulty was great of driving his strange insensibility towards Harriet, fromher mind, while he not only sat at her elbow, but was continually obtruding hishappy countenance on her notice, and solicitously addressing her upon everyoccasion. Instead of forgetting him, his behaviour was such that she could notavoid the internal suggestion of “Can it really be as my brotherimagined? can it be possible for this man to be beginning to transfer hisaffections from Harriet to me?—Absurd and insufferable!”—Yethe would be so anxious for her being perfectly warm, would be so interestedabout her father, and so delighted with Mrs. Weston; and at last would beginadmiring her drawings with so much zeal and so little knowledge as seemedterribly like a would-be lover, and made it some effort with her to preserveher good manners. For her own sake she could not be rude; and forHarriet’s, in the hope that all would yet turn out right, she was evenpositively civil; but it was an effort; especially as something was going onamongst the others, in the most overpowering period of Mr. Elton’snonsense, which she particularly wished to listen to. She heard enough to knowthat Mr. Weston was giving some information about his son; she heard the words“my son,” and “Frank,” and “my son,”repeated several times over; and, from a few other half-syllables very muchsuspected that he was announcing an early visit from his son; but before shecould quiet Mr. Elton, the subject was so completely past that any revivingquestion from her would have been awkward.Now, it so happened that in spite of Emma’s resolution of never marrying,there was something in the name, in the idea of Mr. Frank Churchill, whichalways interested her. She had frequently thought—especially since hisfather’s marriage with Miss Taylor—that if she were tomarry, he was the very person to suit her in age, character and condition. Heseemed by this connexion between the families, quite to belong to her. Shecould not but suppose it to be a match that every body who knew them must thinkof. That Mr. and Mrs. Weston did think of it, she was very strongly persuaded;and though not meaning to be induced by him, or by any body else, to give up asituation which she believed more replete with good than any she could changeit for, she had a great curiosity to see him, a decided intention of findinghim pleasant, of being liked by him to a certain degree, and a sort of pleasurein the idea of their being coupled in their friends’ imaginations.With such sensations, Mr. Elton’s civilities were dreadfully ill-timed;but she had the comfort of appearing very polite, while feeling verycross—and of thinking that the rest of the visit could not possibly passwithout bringing forward the same information again, or the substance of it,from the open-hearted Mr. Weston.—So it proved;—for when happilyreleased from Mr. Elton, and seated by Mr. Weston, at dinner, he made use ofthe very first interval in the cares of hospitality, the very first leisurefrom the saddle of mutton, to say to her,“We want only two more to be just the right number. I should like to seetwo more here,—your pretty little friend, Miss Smith, and myson—and then I should say we were quite complete. I believe you did nothear me telling the others in the drawing-room that we are expecting Frank. Ihad a letter from him this morning, and he will be with us within afortnight.”Emma spoke with a very proper degree of pleasure; and fully assented to hisproposition of Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Smith making their party quitecomplete.“He has been wanting to come to us,” continued Mr. Weston,“ever since September: every letter has been full of it; but he cannotcommand his own time. He has those to please who must be pleased, and who(between ourselves) are sometimes to be pleased only by a good many sacrifices.But now I have no doubt of seeing him here about the second week inJanuary.”“What a very great pleasure it will be to you! and Mrs. Weston is soanxious to be acquainted with him, that she must be almost as happy asyourself.”“Yes, she would be, but that she thinks there will be another put-off.She does not depend upon his coming so much as I do: but she does not know theparties so well as I do. The case, you see, is—(but this is quite betweenourselves: I did not mention a syllable of it in the other room. There aresecrets in all families, you know)—The case is, that a party of friendsare invited to pay a visit at Enscombe in January; and that Frank’scoming depends upon their being put off. If they are not put off, he cannotstir. But I know they will, because it is a family that a certain lady, of someconsequence, at Enscombe, has a particular dislike to: and though it is thoughtnecessary to invite them once in two or three years, they always are put offwhen it comes to the point. I have not the smallest doubt of the issue. I am asconfident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January, as I am of beinghere myself: but your good friend there (nodding towards the upper end of thetable) has so few vagaries herself, and has been so little used to them atHartfield, that she cannot calculate on their effects, as I have been long inthe practice of doing.”“I am sorry there should be any thing like doubt in the case,”replied Emma; “but am disposed to side with you, Mr. Weston. If you thinkhe will come, I shall think so too; for you know Enscombe.”“Yes—I have some right to that knowledge; though I have never beenat the place in my life.—She is an odd woman!—But I never allowmyself to speak ill of her, on Frank’s account; for I do believe her tobe very fond of him. I used to think she was not capable of being fond of anybody, except herself: but she has always been kind to him (in herway—allowing for little whims and caprices, and expecting every thing tobe as she likes). And it is no small credit, in my opinion, to him, that heshould excite such an affection; for, though I would not say it to any bodyelse, she has no more heart than a stone to people in general; and the devil ofa temper.”Emma liked the subject so well, that she began upon it, to Mrs. Weston, verysoon after their moving into the drawing-room: wishing her joy—yetobserving, that she knew the first meeting must be rather alarming.— Mrs.Weston agreed to it; but added, that she should be very glad to be secure ofundergoing the anxiety of a first meeting at the time talked of: “for Icannot depend upon his coming. I cannot be so sanguine as Mr. Weston. I am verymuch afraid that it will all end in nothing. Mr. Weston, I dare say, has beentelling you exactly how the matter stands?”“Yes—it seems to depend upon nothing but the ill-humour of Mrs.Churchill, which I imagine to be the most certain thing in the world.”“My Emma!” replied Mrs. Weston, smiling, “what is thecertainty of caprice?” Then turning to Isabella, who had not beenattending before—“You must know, my dear Mrs. Knightley, that weare by no means so sure of seeing Mr. Frank Churchill, in my opinion, as hisfather thinks. It depends entirely upon his aunt’s spirits and pleasure;in short, upon her temper. To you—to my two daughters—I may ventureon the truth. Mrs. Churchill rules at Enscombe, and is a very odd-temperedwoman; and his coming now, depends upon her being willing to spare him.”“Oh, Mrs. Churchill; every body knows Mrs. Churchill,” repliedIsabella: “and I am sure I never think of that poor young man without thegreatest compassion. To be constantly living with an ill-tempered person, mustbe dreadful. It is what we happily have never known any thing of; but it mustbe a life of misery. What a blessing, that she never had any children! Poorlittle creatures, how unhappy she would have made them!”Emma wished she had been alone with Mrs. Weston. She should then have heardmore: Mrs. Weston would speak to her, with a degree of unreserve which shewould not hazard with Isabella; and, she really believed, would scarcely try toconceal any thing relative to the Churchills from her, excepting those views onthe young man, of which her own imagination had already given her suchinstinctive knowledge. But at present there was nothing more to be said. Mr.Woodhouse very soon followed them into the drawing-room. To be sitting longafter dinner, was a confinement that he could not endure. Neither wine norconversation was any thing to him; and gladly did he move to those with whom hewas always comfortable.While he talked to Isabella, however, Emma found an opportunity of saying,“And so you do not consider this visit from your son as by any meanscertain. I am sorry for it. The introduction must be unpleasant, whenever ittakes place; and the sooner it could be over, the better.”“Yes; and every delay makes one more apprehensive of other delays. Evenif this family, the Braithwaites, are put off, I am still afraid that someexcuse may be found for disappointing us. I cannot bear to imagine anyreluctance on his side; but I am sure there is a great wish on theChurchills’ to keep him to themselves. There is jealousy. They arejealous even of his regard for his father. In short, I can feel no dependenceon his coming, and I wish Mr. Weston were less sanguine.”“He ought to come,” said Emma. “If he could stay only acouple of days, he ought to come; and one can hardly conceive a youngman’s not having it in his power to do as much as that. A youngwoman, if she fall into bad hands, may be teased, and kept at a distancefrom those she wants to be with; but one cannot comprehend a youngman’s being under such restraint, as not to be able to spend aweek with his father, if he likes it.”“One ought to be at Enscombe, and know the ways of the family, before onedecides upon what he can do,” replied Mrs. Weston. “One ought touse the same caution, perhaps, in judging of the conduct of any one individualof any one family; but Enscombe, I believe, certainly must not be judged bygeneral rules: she is so very unreasonable; and every thing gives way toher.”“But she is so fond of the nephew: he is so very great a favourite. Now,according to my idea of Mrs. Churchill, it would be most natural, that whileshe makes no sacrifice for the comfort of the husband, to whom she owes everything, while she exercises incessant caprice towards him, she shouldfrequently be governed by the nephew, to whom she owes nothing at all.”“My dearest Emma, do not pretend, with your sweet temper, to understand abad one, or to lay down rules for it: you must let it go its own way. I have nodoubt of his having, at times, considerable influence; but it may be perfectlyimpossible for him to know beforehand when it will be.”Emma listened, and then coolly said, “I shall not be satisfied, unless hecomes.”“He may have a great deal of influence on some points,” continuedMrs. Weston, “and on others, very little: and among those, on which sheis beyond his reach, it is but too likely, may be this very circumstance of hiscoming away from them to visit us.”CHAPTER XVMr. Woodhouse was soon ready for his tea; and when he had drank his tea he wasquite ready to go home; and it was as much as his three companions could do, toentertain away his notice of the lateness of the hour, before the othergentlemen appeared. Mr. Weston was chatty and convivial, and no friend to earlyseparations of any sort; but at last the drawing-room party did receive anaugmentation. Mr. Elton, in very good spirits, was one of the first to walk in.Mrs. Weston and Emma were sitting together on a sofa. He joined themimmediately, and, with scarcely an invitation, seated himself between them.Emma, in good spirits too, from the amusement afforded her mind by theexpectation of Mr. Frank Churchill, was willing to forget his lateimproprieties, and be as well satisfied with him as before, and on his makingHarriet his very first subject, was ready to listen with most friendly smiles.He professed himself extremely anxious about her fair friend—her fair,lovely, amiable friend. “Did she know?—had she heard any thingabout her, since their being at Randalls?—he felt much anxiety—hemust confess that the nature of her complaint alarmed him considerably.”And in this style he talked on for some time very properly, not much attendingto any answer, but altogether sufficiently awake to the terror of a bad sorethroat; and Emma was quite in charity with him.But at last there seemed a perverse turn; it seemed all at once as if he weremore afraid of its being a bad sore throat on her account, than onHarriet’s—more anxious that she should escape the infection, thanthat there should be no infection in the complaint. He began with greatearnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick-chamber again, forthe present—to entreat her to promise him not to ventureinto such hazard till he had seen Mr. Perry and learnt his opinion; and thoughshe tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its proper course,there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude about her. She was vexed.It did appear—there was no concealing it—exactly like the pretenceof being in love with her, instead of Harriet; an inconstancy, if real, themost contemptible and abominable! and she had difficulty in behaving withtemper. He turned to Mrs. Weston to implore her assistance, “Would notshe give him her support?—would not she add her persuasions to his, toinduce Miss Woodhouse not to go to Mrs. Goddard’s till it were certainthat Miss Smith’s disorder had no infection? He could not be satisfiedwithout a promise—would not she give him her influence in procuringit?”“So scrupulous for others,” he continued, “and yet socareless for herself! She wanted me to nurse my cold by staying at home to-day,and yet will not promise to avoid the danger of catching an ulcerated sorethroat herself. Is this fair, Mrs. Weston?—Judge between us. Have not Isome right to complain? I am sure of your kind support and aid.”Emma saw Mrs. Weston’s surprize, and felt that it must be great, at anaddress which, in words and manner, was assuming to himself the right of firstinterest in her; and as for herself, she was too much provoked and offended tohave the power of directly saying any thing to the purpose. She could only givehim a look; but it was such a look as she thought must restore him to hissenses, and then left the sofa, removing to a seat by her sister, and givingher all her attention.She had not time to know how Mr. Elton took the reproof, so rapidly did anothersubject succeed; for Mr. John Knightley now came into the room from examiningthe weather, and opened on them all with the information of the ground beingcovered with snow, and of its still snowing fast, with a strong drifting wind;concluding with these words to Mr. Woodhouse:“This will prove a spirited beginning of your winter engagements, sir.Something new for your coachman and horses to be making their way through astorm of snow.”Poor Mr. Woodhouse was silent from consternation; but every body else hadsomething to say; every body was either surprized or not surprized, and hadsome question to ask, or some comfort to offer. Mrs. Weston and Emma triedearnestly to cheer him and turn his attention from his son-in-law, who waspursuing his triumph rather unfeelingly.“I admired your resolution very much, sir,” said he, “inventuring out in such weather, for of course you saw there would be snow verysoon. Every body must have seen the snow coming on. I admired your spirit; andI dare say we shall get home very well. Another hour or two’s snow canhardly make the road impassable; and we are two carriages; if one is blown overin the bleak part of the common field there will be the other at hand. I daresay we shall be all safe at Hartfield before midnight.”Mr. Weston, with triumph of a different sort, was confessing that he had knownit to be snowing some time, but had not said a word, lest it should make Mr.Woodhouse uncomfortable, and be an excuse for his hurrying away. As to therebeing any quantity of snow fallen or likely to fall to impede their return,that was a mere joke; he was afraid they would find no difficulty. He wishedthe road might be impassable, that he might be able to keep them all atRandalls; and with the utmost good-will was sure that accommodation might befound for every body, calling on his wife to agree with him, that with a littlecontrivance, every body might be lodged, which she hardly knew how to do, fromthe consciousness of there being but two spare rooms in the house.“What is to be done, my dear Emma?—what is to be done?” wasMr. Woodhouse’s first exclamation, and all that he could say for sometime. To her he looked for comfort; and her assurances of safety, herrepresentation of the excellence of the horses, and of James, and of theirhaving so many friends about them, revived him a little.His eldest daughter’s alarm was equal to his own. The horror of beingblocked up at Randalls, while her children were at Hartfield, was full in herimagination; and fancying the road to be now just passable for adventurouspeople, but in a state that admitted no delay, she was eager to have itsettled, that her father and Emma should remain at Randalls, while she and herhusband set forward instantly through all the possible accumulations of driftedsnow that might impede them.“You had better order the carriage directly, my love,” said she;“I dare say we shall be able to get along, if we set off directly; and ifwe do come to any thing very bad, I can get out and walk. I am not at allafraid. I should not mind walking half the way. I could change my shoes, youknow, the moment I got home; and it is not the sort of thing that gives mecold.”“Indeed!” replied he. “Then, my dear Isabella, it is the mostextraordinary sort of thing in the world, for in general every thing does giveyou cold. Walk home!—you are prettily shod for walking home, I dare say.It will be bad enough for the horses.”Isabella turned to Mrs. Weston for her approbation of the plan. Mrs. Westoncould only approve. Isabella then went to Emma; but Emma could not so entirelygive up the hope of their being all able to get away; and they were stilldiscussing the point, when Mr. Knightley, who had left the room immediatelyafter his brother’s first report of the snow, came back again, and toldthem that he had been out of doors to examine, and could answer for there notbeing the smallest difficulty in their getting home, whenever they liked it,either now or an hour hence. He had gone beyond the sweep—some way alongthe Highbury road—the snow was nowhere above half an inch deep—inmany places hardly enough to whiten the ground; a very few flakes were fallingat present, but the clouds were parting, and there was every appearance of itsbeing soon over. He had seen the coachmen, and they both agreed with him inthere being nothing to apprehend.To Isabella, the relief of such tidings was very great, and they were scarcelyless acceptable to Emma on her father’s account, who was immediately setas much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed; but thealarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfortfor him while he continued at Randalls. He was satisfied of there being nopresent danger in returning home, but no assurances could convince him that itwas safe to stay; and while the others were variously urging and recommending,Mr. Knightley and Emma settled it in a few brief sentences: thus—“Your father will not be easy; why do not you go?”“I am ready, if the others are.”“Shall I ring the bell?”“Yes, do.”And the bell was rung, and the carriages spoken for. A few minutes more, andEmma hoped to see one troublesome companion deposited in his own house, to getsober and cool, and the other recover his temper and happiness when this visitof hardship were over.The carriage came: and Mr. Woodhouse, always the first object on suchoccasions, was carefully attended to his own by Mr. Knightley and Mr. Weston;but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at thesight of the snow which had actually fallen, and the discovery of a much darkernight than he had been prepared for. “He was afraid they should have avery bad drive. He was afraid poor Isabella would not like it. And there wouldbe poor Emma in the carriage behind. He did not know what they had best do.They must keep as much together as they could;” and James was talked to,and given a charge to go very slow and wait for the other carriage.Isabella stept in after her father; John Knightley, forgetting that he did notbelong to their party, stept in after his wife very naturally; so that Emmafound, on being escorted and followed into the second carriage by Mr. Elton,that the door was to be lawfully shut on them, and that they were to have atête-à-tête drive. It would not have been the awkwardness of a moment, it wouldhave been rather a pleasure, previous to the suspicions of this very day; shecould have talked to him of Harriet, and the three-quarters of a mile wouldhave seemed but one. But now, she would rather it had not happened. Shebelieved he had been drinking too much of Mr. Weston’s good wine, andfelt sure that he would want to be talking nonsense.To restrain him as much as might be, by her own manners, she was immediatelypreparing to speak with exquisite calmness and gravity of the weather and thenight; but scarcely had she begun, scarcely had they passed the sweep-gate andjoined the other carriage, than she found her subject cut up—her handseized—her attention demanded, and Mr. Elton actually making violent loveto her: availing himself of the precious opportunity, declaring sentimentswhich must be already well known,hoping—fearing—adoring—ready to die if she refused him; butflattering himself that his ardent attachment and unequalled love andunexampled passion could not fail of having some effect, and in short, verymuch resolved on being seriously accepted as soon as possible. It really wasso. Without scruple—without apology—without much apparentdiffidence, Mr. Elton, the lover of Harriet, was professing himself herlover. She tried to stop him; but vainly; he would go on, and say it all. Angryas she was, the thought of the moment made her resolve to restrain herself whenshe did speak. She felt that half this folly must be drunkenness, and thereforecould hope that it might belong only to the passing hour. Accordingly, with amixture of the serious and the playful, which she hoped would best suit hishalf and half state, she replied,“I am very much astonished, Mr. Elton. This to me! you forgetyourself—you take me for my friend—any message to Miss Smith Ishall be happy to deliver; but no more of this to me, if youplease.”“Miss Smith!—message to Miss Smith!—What could she possiblymean!”—And he repeated her words with such assurance of accent,such boastful pretence of amazement, that she could not help replying withquickness,“Mr. Elton, this is the most extraordinary conduct! and I can account forit only in one way; you are not yourself, or you could not speak either to me,or of Harriet, in such a manner. Command yourself enough to say no more, and Iwill endeavour to forget it.”But Mr. Elton had only drunk wine enough to elevate his spirits, not at all toconfuse his intellects. He perfectly knew his own meaning; and having warmlyprotested against her suspicion as most injurious, and slightly touched uponhis respect for Miss Smith as her friend,—but acknowledging his wonderthat Miss Smith should be mentioned at all,—he resumed the subject of hisown passion, and was very urgent for a favourable answer.As she thought less of his inebriety, she thought more of his inconstancy andpresumption; and with fewer struggles for politeness, replied,“It is impossible for me to doubt any longer. You have made yourself tooclear. Mr. Elton, my astonishment is much beyond any thing I can express. Aftersuch behaviour, as I have witnessed during the last month, to MissSmith—such attentions as I have been in the daily habit ofobserving—to be addressing me in this manner—this is anunsteadiness of character, indeed, which I had not supposed possible! Believeme, sir, I am far, very far, from gratified in being the object of suchprofessions.”“Good Heaven!” cried Mr. Elton, “what can be the meaning ofthis?—Miss Smith!—I never thought of Miss Smith in the whole courseof my existence—never paid her any attentions, but as your friend: nevercared whether she were dead or alive, but as your friend. If she has fanciedotherwise, her own wishes have misled her, and I am very sorry—extremelysorry—But, Miss Smith, indeed!—Oh! Miss Woodhouse! who can think ofMiss Smith, when Miss Woodhouse is near! No, upon my honour, there is nounsteadiness of character. I have thought only of you. I protest against havingpaid the smallest attention to any one else. Every thing that I have said ordone, for many weeks past, has been with the sole view of marking my adorationof yourself. You cannot really, seriously, doubt it. No!—(in an accentmeant to be insinuating)—I am sure you have seen and understoodme.”It would be impossible to say what Emma felt, on hearing this—which ofall her unpleasant sensations was uppermost. She was too completely overpoweredto be immediately able to reply: and two moments of silence being ampleencouragement for Mr. Elton’s sanguine state of mind, he tried to takeher hand again, as he joyously exclaimed—“Charming Miss Woodhouse! allow me to interpret this interesting silence.It confesses that you have long understood me.”“No, sir,” cried Emma, “it confesses no such thing. So farfrom having long understood you, I have been in a most complete error withrespect to your views, till this moment. As to myself, I am very sorry that youshould have been giving way to any feelings—Nothing could be farther frommy wishes—your attachment to my friend Harriet—your pursuit of her,(pursuit, it appeared,) gave me great pleasure, and I have been very earnestlywishing you success: but had I supposed that she were not your attraction toHartfield, I should certainly have thought you judged ill in making your visitsso frequent. Am I to believe that you have never sought to recommend yourselfparticularly to Miss Smith?—that you have never thought seriously ofher?”“Never, madam,” cried he, affronted in his turn: “never, Iassure you. I think seriously of Miss Smith!—Miss Smith is a verygood sort of girl; and I should be happy to see her respectably settled. I wishher extremely well: and, no doubt, there are men who might not objectto—Every body has their level: but as for myself, I am not, I think,quite so much at a loss. I need not so totally despair of an equal alliance, asto be addressing myself to Miss Smith!—No, madam, my visits to Hartfieldhave been for yourself only; and the encouragement I received—”“Encouragement!—I give you encouragement!—Sir, you have beenentirely mistaken in supposing it. I have seen you only as the admirer of myfriend. In no other light could you have been more to me than a commonacquaintance. I am exceedingly sorry: but it is well that the mistake endswhere it does. Had the same behaviour continued, Miss Smith might have been ledinto a misconception of your views; not being aware, probably, any more thanmyself, of the very great inequality which you are so sensible of. But, as itis, the disappointment is single, and, I trust, will not be lasting. I have nothoughts of matrimony at present.”He was too angry to say another word; her manner too decided to invitesupplication; and in this state of swelling resentment, and mutually deepmortification, they had to continue together a few minutes longer, for thefears of Mr. Woodhouse had confined them to a foot-pace. If there had not beenso much anger, there would have been desperate awkwardness; but theirstraightforward emotions left no room for the little zigzags of embarrassment.Without knowing when the carriage turned into Vicarage Lane, or when itstopped, they found themselves, all at once, at the door of his house; and hewas out before another syllable passed.—Emma then felt it indispensableto wish him a good night. The compliment was just returned, coldly and proudly;and, under indescribable irritation of spirits, she was then conveyed toHartfield.There she was welcomed, with the utmost delight, by her father, who had beentrembling for the dangers of a solitary drive from Vicarage Lane—turninga corner which he could never bear to think of—and in strangehands—a mere common coachman—no James; and there it seemed as ifher return only were wanted to make every thing go well: for Mr. JohnKnightley, ashamed of his ill-humour, was now all kindness and attention; andso particularly solicitous for the comfort of her father, as to seem—ifnot quite ready to join him in a basin of gruel—perfectly sensible of itsbeing exceedingly wholesome; and the day was concluding in peace and comfort toall their little party, except herself.—But her mind had never been insuch perturbation; and it needed a very strong effort to appear attentive andcheerful till the usual hour of separating allowed her the relief of quietreflection.CHAPTER XVIThe hair was curled, and the maid sent away, and Emma sat down to think and bemiserable.—It was a wretched business indeed!—Such an overthrow ofevery thing she had been wishing for!—Such a development of every thingmost unwelcome!—Such a blow for Harriet!—that was the worst of all.Every part of it brought pain and humiliation, of some sort or other; but,compared with the evil to Harriet, all was light; and she would gladly havesubmitted to feel yet more mistaken—more in error—more disgraced bymis-judgment, than she actually was, could the effects of her blunders havebeen confined to herself.“If I had not persuaded Harriet into liking the man, I could have borneany thing. He might have doubled his presumption to me—but poorHarriet!”How she could have been so deceived!—He protested that he had neverthought seriously of Harriet—never! She looked back as well as she could;but it was all confusion. She had taken up the idea, she supposed, and madeevery thing bend to it. His manners, however, must have been unmarked,wavering, dubious, or she could not have been so misled.The picture!—How eager he had been about the picture!—and thecharade!—and an hundred other circumstances;—how clearly they hadseemed to point at Harriet. To be sure, the charade, with its “readywit”—but then the “soft eyes”—in fact it suitedneither; it was a jumble without taste or truth. Who could have seen throughsuch thick-headed nonsense?Certainly she had often, especially of late, thought his manners to herselfunnecessarily gallant; but it had passed as his way, as a mere error ofjudgment, of knowledge, of taste, as one proof among others that he had notalways lived in the best society, that with all the gentleness of his address,true elegance was sometimes wanting; but, till this very day, she had never,for an instant, suspected it to mean any thing but grateful respect to her asHarriet’s friend.To Mr. John Knightley was she indebted for her first idea on the subject, forthe first start of its possibility. There was no denying that those brothershad penetration. She remembered what Mr. Knightley had once said to her aboutMr. Elton, the caution he had given, the conviction he had professed that Mr.Elton would never marry indiscreetly; and blushed to think how much truer aknowledge of his character had been there shewn than any she had reachedherself. It was dreadfully mortifying; but Mr. Elton was proving himself, inmany respects, the very reverse of what she had meant and believed him; proud,assuming, conceited; very full of his own claims, and little concerned aboutthe feelings of others.Contrary to the usual course of things, Mr. Elton’s wanting to pay hisaddresses to her had sunk him in her opinion. His professions and his proposalsdid him no service. She thought nothing of his attachment, and was insulted byhis hopes. He wanted to marry well, and having the arrogance to raise his eyesto her, pretended to be in love; but she was perfectly easy as to his notsuffering any disappointment that need be cared for. There had been no realaffection either in his language or manners. Sighs and fine words had beengiven in abundance; but she could hardly devise any set of expressions, orfancy any tone of voice, less allied with real love. She need not troubleherself to pity him. He only wanted to aggrandise and enrich himself; and ifMiss Woodhouse of Hartfield, the heiress of thirty thousand pounds, were notquite so easily obtained as he had fancied, he would soon try for Miss Somebodyelse with twenty, or with ten.But—that he should talk of encouragement, should consider her as aware ofhis views, accepting his attentions, meaning (in short), to marryhim!—should suppose himself her equal in connexion or mind!—lookdown upon her friend, so well understanding the gradations of rank below him,and be so blind to what rose above, as to fancy himself shewing no presumptionin addressing her!—It was most provoking.Perhaps it was not fair to expect him to feel how very much he was her inferiorin talent, and all the elegancies of mind. The very want of such equality mightprevent his perception of it; but he must know that in fortune and consequenceshe was greatly his superior. He must know that the Woodhouses had been settledfor several generations at Hartfield, the younger branch of a very ancientfamily—and that the Eltons were nobody. The landed property of Hartfieldcertainly was inconsiderable, being but a sort of notch in the Donwell Abbeyestate, to which all the rest of Highbury belonged; but their fortune, fromother sources, was such as to make them scarcely secondary to Donwell Abbeyitself, in every other kind of consequence; and the Woodhouses had long held ahigh place in the consideration of the neighbourhood which Mr. Elton had firstentered not two years ago, to make his way as he could, without any alliancesbut in trade, or any thing to recommend him to notice but his situation and hiscivility.—But he had fancied her in love with him; that evidently musthave been his dependence; and after raving a little about the seemingincongruity of gentle manners and a conceited head, Emma was obliged in commonhonesty to stop and admit that her own behaviour to him had been so complaisantand obliging, so full of courtesy and attention, as (supposing her real motiveunperceived) might warrant a man of ordinary observation and delicacy, like Mr.Elton, in fancying himself a very decided favourite. If she had somisinterpreted his feelings, she had little right to wonder that he,with self-interest to blind him, should have mistaken hers.The first error and the worst lay at her door. It was foolish, it was wrong, totake so active a part in bringing any two people together. It was adventuringtoo far, assuming too much, making light of what ought to be serious, a trickof what ought to be simple. She was quite concerned and ashamed, and resolvedto do such things no more.“Here have I,” said she, “actually talked poor Harriet intobeing very much attached to this man. She might never have thought of him butfor me; and certainly never would have thought of him with hope, if I had notassured her of his attachment, for she is as modest and humble as I used tothink him. Oh! that I had been satisfied with persuading her not to acceptyoung Martin. There I was quite right. That was well done of me; but there Ishould have stopped, and left the rest to time and chance. I was introducingher into good company, and giving her the opportunity of pleasing some oneworth having; I ought not to have attempted more. But now, poor girl, her peaceis cut up for some time. I have been but half a friend to her; and if she werenot to feel this disappointment so very much, I am sure I have not anidea of any body else who would be at all desirable for her;—WilliamCoxe—Oh! no, I could not endure William Coxe—a pert younglawyer.”She stopt to blush and laugh at her own relapse, and then resumed a moreserious, more dispiriting cogitation upon what had been, and might be, and mustbe. The distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet, and all that poorHarriet would be suffering, with the awkwardness of future meetings, thedifficulties of continuing or discontinuing the acquaintance, of subduingfeelings, concealing resentment, and avoiding eclat, were enough to occupy herin most unmirthful reflections some time longer, and she went to bed at lastwith nothing settled but the conviction of her having blundered mostdreadfully.To youth and natural cheerfulness like Emma’s, though under temporarygloom at night, the return of day will hardly fail to bring return of spirits.The youth and cheerfulness of morning are in happy analogy, and of powerfuloperation; and if the distress be not poignant enough to keep the eyesunclosed, they will be sure to open to sensations of softened pain and brighterhope.Emma got up on the morrow more disposed for comfort than she had gone to bed,more ready to see alleviations of the evil before her, and to depend on gettingtolerably out of it.It was a great consolation that Mr. Elton should not be really in love withher, or so particularly amiable as to make it shocking to disappointhim—that Harriet’s nature should not be of that superior sort inwhich the feelings are most acute and retentive—and that there could beno necessity for any body’s knowing what had passed except the threeprincipals, and especially for her father’s being given a moment’suneasiness about it.These were very cheering thoughts; and the sight of a great deal of snow on theground did her further service, for any thing was welcome that might justifytheir all three being quite asunder at present.The weather was most favourable for her; though Christmas Day, she could not goto church. Mr. Woodhouse would have been miserable had his daughter attemptedit, and she was therefore safe from either exciting or receiving unpleasant andmost unsuitable ideas. The ground covered with snow, and the atmosphere in thatunsettled state between frost and thaw, which is of all others the mostunfriendly for exercise, every morning beginning in rain or snow, and everyevening setting in to freeze, she was for many days a most honourable prisoner.No intercourse with Harriet possible but by note; no church for her on Sundayany more than on Christmas Day; and no need to find excuses for Mr.Elton’s absenting himself.It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home; and though shehoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some society or other, itwas very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being all alonein his own house, too wise to stir out; and to hear him say to Mr. Knightley,whom no weather could keep entirely from them,—“Ah! Mr. Knightley, why do not you stay at home like poor Mr.Elton?”These days of confinement would have been, but for her private perplexities,remarkably comfortable, as such seclusion exactly suited her brother, whosefeelings must always be of great importance to his companions; and he had,besides, so thoroughly cleared off his ill-humour at Randalls, that hisamiableness never failed him during the rest of his stay at Hartfield. He wasalways agreeable and obliging, and speaking pleasantly of every body. But withall the hopes of cheerfulness, and all the present comfort of delay, there wasstill such an evil hanging over her in the hour of explanation with Harriet, asmade it impossible for Emma to be ever perfectly at ease.CHAPTER XVIIMr. and Mrs. John Knightley were not detained long at Hartfield. The weathersoon improved enough for those to move who must move; and Mr. Woodhouse having,as usual, tried to persuade his daughter to stay behind with all her children,was obliged to see the whole party set off, and return to his lamentations overthe destiny of poor Isabella;—which poor Isabella, passing her life withthose she doated on, full of their merits, blind to their faults, and alwaysinnocently busy, might have been a model of right feminine happiness.The evening of the very day on which they went brought a note from Mr. Elton toMr. Woodhouse, a long, civil, ceremonious note, to say, with Mr. Elton’sbest compliments, “that he was proposing to leave Highbury the followingmorning in his way to Bath; where, in compliance with the pressing entreatiesof some friends, he had engaged to spend a few weeks, and very much regrettedthe impossibility he was under, from various circumstances of weather andbusiness, of taking a personal leave of Mr. Woodhouse, of whose friendlycivilities he should ever retain a grateful sense—and had Mr. Woodhouseany commands, should be happy to attend to them.”Emma was most agreeably surprized.—Mr. Elton’s absence just at thistime was the very thing to be desired. She admired him for contriving it,though not able to give him much credit for the manner in which it wasannounced. Resentment could not have been more plainly spoken than in acivility to her father, from which she was so pointedly excluded. She had noteven a share in his opening compliments.—Her name was notmentioned;—and there was so striking a change in all this, and such anill-judged solemnity of leave-taking in his graceful acknowledgments, as shethought, at first, could not escape her father’s suspicion.It did, however.—Her father was quite taken up with the surprize of sosudden a journey, and his fears that Mr. Elton might never get safely to theend of it, and saw nothing extraordinary in his language. It was a very usefulnote, for it supplied them with fresh matter for thought and conversationduring the rest of their lonely evening. Mr. Woodhouse talked over his alarms,and Emma was in spirits to persuade them away with all her usual promptitude.She now resolved to keep Harriet no longer in the dark. She had reason tobelieve her nearly recovered from her cold, and it was desirable that sheshould have as much time as possible for getting the better of her othercomplaint before the gentleman’s return. She went to Mrs. Goddard’saccordingly the very next day, to undergo the necessary penance ofcommunication; and a severe one it was.—She had to destroy all the hopeswhich she had been so industriously feeding—to appear in the ungraciouscharacter of the one preferred—and acknowledge herself grossly mistakenand mis-judging in all her ideas on one subject, all her observations, all herconvictions, all her prophecies for the last six weeks.The confession completely renewed her first shame—and the sight ofHarriet’s tears made her think that she should never be in charity withherself again.Harriet bore the intelligence very well—blaming nobody—and in everything testifying such an ingenuousness of disposition and lowly opinion ofherself, as must appear with particular advantage at that moment to her friend.Emma was in the humour to value simplicity and modesty to the utmost; and allthat was amiable, all that ought to be attaching, seemed on Harriet’sside, not her own. Harriet did not consider herself as having any thing tocomplain of. The affection of such a man as Mr. Elton would have been too greata distinction.—She never could have deserved him—and nobody but sopartial and kind a friend as Miss Woodhouse would have thought it possible.Her tears fell abundantly—but her grief was so truly artless, that nodignity could have made it more respectable in Emma’s eyes—and shelistened to her and tried to console her with all her heart andunderstanding—really for the time convinced that Harriet was the superiorcreature of the two—and that to resemble her would be more for her ownwelfare and happiness than all that genius or intelligence could do.It was rather too late in the day to set about being simple-minded andignorant; but she left her with every previous resolution confirmed of beinghumble and discreet, and repressing imagination all the rest of her life. Hersecond duty now, inferior only to her father’s claims, was to promoteHarriet’s comfort, and endeavour to prove her own affection in somebetter method than by match-making. She got her to Hartfield, and shewed herthe most unvarying kindness, striving to occupy and amuse her, and by books andconversation, to drive Mr. Elton from her thoughts.Time, she knew, must be allowed for this being thoroughly done; and she couldsuppose herself but an indifferent judge of such matters in general, and veryinadequate to sympathise in an attachment to Mr. Elton in particular; but itseemed to her reasonable that at Harriet’s age, and with the entireextinction of all hope, such a progress might be made towards a state ofcomposure by the time of Mr. Elton’s return, as to allow them all to meetagain in the common routine of acquaintance, without any danger of betrayingsentiments or increasing them.Harriet did think him all perfection, and maintained the non-existence of anybody equal to him in person or goodness—and did, in truth, prove herselfmore resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen; but yet it appeared to her sonatural, so inevitable to strive against an inclination of that sortunrequited, that she could not comprehend its continuing very long inequal force.If Mr. Elton, on his return, made his own indifference as evident andindubitable as she could not doubt he would anxiously do, she could not imagineHarriet’s persisting to place her happiness in the sight or therecollection of him.Their being fixed, so absolutely fixed, in the same place, was bad for each,for all three. Not one of them had the power of removal, or of effecting anymaterial change of society. They must encounter each other, and make the bestof it.Harriet was farther unfortunate in the tone of her companions at Mrs.Goddard’s; Mr. Elton being the adoration of all the teachers and greatgirls in the school; and it must be at Hartfield only that she could have anychance of hearing him spoken of with cooling moderation or repellent truth.Where the wound had been given, there must the cure be found if anywhere; andEmma felt that, till she saw her in the way of cure, there could be no truepeace for herself.CHAPTER XVIIIMr. Frank Churchill did not come. When the time proposed drew near, Mrs.Weston’s fears were justified in the arrival of a letter of excuse. Forthe present, he could not be spared, to his “very great mortification andregret; but still he looked forward with the hope of coming to Randalls at nodistant period.”Mrs. Weston was exceedingly disappointed—much more disappointed, in fact,than her husband, though her dependence on seeing the young man had been somuch more sober: but a sanguine temper, though for ever expecting more goodthan occurs, does not always pay for its hopes by any proportionate depression.It soon flies over the present failure, and begins to hope again. For half anhour Mr. Weston was surprized and sorry; but then he began to perceive thatFrank’s coming two or three months later would be a much better plan;better time of year; better weather; and that he would be able, without anydoubt, to stay considerably longer with them than if he had come sooner.These feelings rapidly restored his comfort, while Mrs. Weston, of a moreapprehensive disposition, foresaw nothing but a repetition of excuses anddelays; and after all her concern for what her husband was to suffer, suffereda great deal more herself.Emma was not at this time in a state of spirits to care really about Mr. FrankChurchill’s not coming, except as a disappointment at Randalls. Theacquaintance at present had no charm for her. She wanted, rather, to be quiet,and out of temptation; but still, as it was desirable that she should appear,in general, like her usual self, she took care to express as much interest inthe circumstance, and enter as warmly into Mr. and Mrs. Weston’sdisappointment, as might naturally belong to their friendship.She was the first to announce it to Mr. Knightley; and exclaimed quite as muchas was necessary, (or, being acting a part, perhaps rather more,) at theconduct of the Churchills, in keeping him away. She then proceeded to say agood deal more than she felt, of the advantage of such an addition to theirconfined society in Surry; the pleasure of looking at somebody new; thegala-day to Highbury entire, which the sight of him would have made; and endingwith reflections on the Churchills again, found herself directly involved in adisagreement with Mr. Knightley; and, to her great amusement, perceived thatshe was taking the other side of the question from her real opinion, and makinguse of Mrs. Weston’s arguments against herself.“The Churchills are very likely in fault,” said Mr. Knightley,coolly; “but I dare say he might come if he would.”“I do not know why you should say so. He wishes exceedingly to come; buthis uncle and aunt will not spare him.”“I cannot believe that he has not the power of coming, if he made a pointof it. It is too unlikely, for me to believe it without proof.”“How odd you are! What has Mr. Frank Churchill done, to make you supposehim such an unnatural creature?”“I am not supposing him at all an unnatural creature, in suspecting thathe may have learnt to be above his connexions, and to care very little for anything but his own pleasure, from living with those who have always set him theexample of it. It is a great deal more natural than one could wish, that ayoung man, brought up by those who are proud, luxurious, and selfish, should beproud, luxurious, and selfish too. If Frank Churchill had wanted to see hisfather, he would have contrived it between September and January. A man at hisage—what is he?—three or four-and-twenty—cannot be withoutthe means of doing as much as that. It is impossible.”“That’s easily said, and easily felt by you, who have always beenyour own master. You are the worst judge in the world, Mr. Knightley, of thedifficulties of dependence. You do not know what it is to have tempers tomanage.”“It is not to be conceived that a man of three or four-and-twenty shouldnot have liberty of mind or limb to that amount. He cannot want money—hecannot want leisure. We know, on the contrary, that he has so much of both,that he is glad to get rid of them at the idlest haunts in the kingdom. We hearof him for ever at some watering-place or other. A little while ago, he was atWeymouth. This proves that he can leave the Churchills.”“Yes, sometimes he can.”“And those times are whenever he thinks it worth his while; wheneverthere is any temptation of pleasure.”“It is very unfair to judge of any body’s conduct, without anintimate knowledge of their situation. Nobody, who has not been in the interiorof a family, can say what the difficulties of any individual of that family maybe. We ought to be acquainted with Enscombe, and with Mrs. Churchill’stemper, before we pretend to decide upon what her nephew can do. He may, attimes, be able to do a great deal more than he can at others.”“There is one thing, Emma, which a man can always do, if he chuses, andthat is, his duty; not by manoeuvring and finessing, but by vigour andresolution. It is Frank Churchill’s duty to pay this attention to hisfather. He knows it to be so, by his promises and messages; but if he wished todo it, it might be done. A man who felt rightly would say at once, simply andresolutely, to Mrs. Churchill—‘Every sacrifice of mere pleasure youwill always find me ready to make to your convenience; but I must go and see myfather immediately. I know he would be hurt by my failing in such a mark ofrespect to him on the present occasion. I shall, therefore, set offto-morrow.’—If he would say so to her at once, in the tone ofdecision becoming a man, there would be no opposition made to his going.”“No,” said Emma, laughing; “but perhaps there might be somemade to his coming back again. Such language for a young man entirelydependent, to use!—Nobody but you, Mr. Knightley, would imagine itpossible. But you have not an idea of what is requisite in situations directlyopposite to your own. Mr. Frank Churchill to be making such a speech as that tothe uncle and aunt, who have brought him up, and are to provide forhim!—Standing up in the middle of the room, I suppose, and speaking asloud as he could!—How can you imagine such conduct practicable?”“Depend upon it, Emma, a sensible man would find no difficulty in it. Hewould feel himself in the right; and the declaration—made, of course, asa man of sense would make it, in a proper manner—would do him more good,raise him higher, fix his interest stronger with the people he depended on,than all that a line of shifts and expedients can ever do. Respect would beadded to affection. They would feel that they could trust him; that the nephewwho had done rightly by his father, would do rightly by them; for they know, aswell as he does, as well as all the world must know, that he ought to pay thisvisit to his father; and while meanly exerting their power to delay it, are intheir hearts not thinking the better of him for submitting to their whims.Respect for right conduct is felt by every body. If he would act in this sortof manner, on principle, consistently, regularly, their little minds would bendto his.”“I rather doubt that. You are very fond of bending little minds; butwhere little minds belong to rich people in authority, I think they have aknack of swelling out, till they are quite as unmanageable as great ones. I canimagine, that if you, as you are, Mr. Knightley, were to be transported andplaced all at once in Mr. Frank Churchill’s situation, you would be ableto say and do just what you have been recommending for him; and it might have avery good effect. The Churchills might not have a word to say in return; butthen, you would have no habits of early obedience and long observance to breakthrough. To him who has, it might not be so easy to burst forth at once intoperfect independence, and set all their claims on his gratitude and regard atnought. He may have as strong a sense of what would be right, as you can have,without being so equal, under particular circumstances, to act up to it.”“Then it would not be so strong a sense. If it failed to produce equalexertion, it could not be an equal conviction.”“Oh, the difference of situation and habit! I wish you would try tounderstand what an amiable young man may be likely to feel in directly opposingthose, whom as child and boy he has been looking up to all his life.”“Our amiable young man is a very weak young man, if this be the firstoccasion of his carrying through a resolution to do right against the will ofothers. It ought to have been a habit with him by this time, of following hisduty, instead of consulting expediency. I can allow for the fears of the child,but not of the man. As he became rational, he ought to have roused himself andshaken off all that was unworthy in their authority. He ought to have opposedthe first attempt on their side to make him slight his father. Had he begun ashe ought, there would have been no difficulty now.”“We shall never agree about him,” cried Emma; “but that isnothing extraordinary. I have not the least idea of his being a weak young man:I feel sure that he is not. Mr. Weston would not be blind to folly, though inhis own son; but he is very likely to have a more yielding, complying, milddisposition than would suit your notions of man’s perfection. I dare sayhe has; and though it may cut him off from some advantages, it will secure himmany others.”“Yes; all the advantages of sitting still when he ought to move, and ofleading a life of mere idle pleasure, and fancying himself extremely expert infinding excuses for it. He can sit down and write a fine flourishing letter,full of professions and falsehoods, and persuade himself that he has hit uponthe very best method in the world of preserving peace at home and preventinghis father’s having any right to complain. His letters disgust me.”“Your feelings are singular. They seem to satisfy every body else.”“I suspect they do not satisfy Mrs. Weston. They hardly can satisfy awoman of her good sense and quick feelings: standing in a mother’s place,but without a mother’s affection to blind her. It is on her account thatattention to Randalls is doubly due, and she must doubly feel the omission. Hadshe been a person of consequence herself, he would have come I dare say; and itwould not have signified whether he did or no. Can you think your friendbehindhand in these sort of considerations? Do you suppose she does not oftensay all this to herself? No, Emma, your amiable young man can be amiable onlyin French, not in English. He may be very ‘amiable,’ have very goodmanners, and be very agreeable; but he can have no English delicacy towards thefeelings of other people: nothing really amiable about him.”“You seem determined to think ill of him.”“Me!—not at all,” replied Mr. Knightley, rather displeased;“I do not want to think ill of him. I should be as ready to acknowledgehis merits as any other man; but I hear of none, except what are merelypersonal; that he is well-grown and good-looking, with smooth, plausiblemanners.”“Well, if he have nothing else to recommend him, he will be a treasure atHighbury. We do not often look upon fine young men, well-bred and agreeable. Wemust not be nice and ask for all the virtues into the bargain. Cannot youimagine, Mr. Knightley, what a sensation his coming will produce? Therewill be but one subject throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury; butone interest—one object of curiosity; it will be all Mr. Frank Churchill;we shall think and speak of nobody else.”“You will excuse my being so much over-powered. If I find himconversable, I shall be glad of his acquaintance; but if he is only achattering coxcomb, he will not occupy much of my time or thoughts.”“My idea of him is, that he can adapt his conversation to the taste ofevery body, and has the power as well as the wish of being universallyagreeable. To you, he will talk of farming; to me, of drawing or music; and soon to every body, having that general information on all subjects which willenable him to follow the lead, or take the lead, just as propriety may require,and to speak extremely well on each; that is my idea of him.”“And mine,” said Mr. Knightley warmly, “is, that if he turnout any thing like it, he will be the most insufferable fellow breathing! What!at three-and-twenty to be the king of his company—the great man—thepractised politician, who is to read every body’s character, and makeevery body’s talents conduce to the display of his own superiority; to bedispensing his flatteries around, that he may make all appear like foolscompared with himself! My dear Emma, your own good sense could not endure sucha puppy when it came to the point.”“I will say no more about him,” cried Emma, “you turn everything to evil. We are both prejudiced; you against, I for him; and we have nochance of agreeing till he is really here.”“Prejudiced! I am not prejudiced.”“But I am very much, and without being at all ashamed of it. My love forMr. and Mrs. Weston gives me a decided prejudice in his favour.”“He is a person I never think of from one month’s end toanother,” said Mr. Knightley, with a degree of vexation, which made Emmaimmediately talk of something else, though she could not comprehend why heshould be angry.To take a dislike to a young man, only because he appeared to be of a differentdisposition from himself, was unworthy the real liberality of mind which shewas always used to acknowledge in him; for with all the high opinion ofhimself, which she had often laid to his charge, she had never before for amoment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another.VOLUME IICHAPTER IEmma and Harriet had been walking together one morning, and, in Emma’sopinion, had been talking enough of Mr. Elton for that day. She could not thinkthat Harriet’s solace or her own sins required more; and she wastherefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they returned;—butit burst out again when she thought she had succeeded, and after speaking sometime of what the poor must suffer in winter, and receiving no other answer thana very plaintive—“Mr. Elton is so good to the poor!” shefound something else must be done.They were just approaching the house where lived Mrs. and Miss Bates. Shedetermined to call upon them and seek safety in numbers. There was alwayssufficient reason for such an attention; Mrs. and Miss Bates loved to be calledon, and she knew she was considered by the very few who presumed ever to seeimperfection in her, as rather negligent in that respect, and as notcontributing what she ought to the stock of their scanty comforts.She had had many a hint from Mr. Knightley and some from her own heart, as toher deficiency—but none were equal to counteract the persuasion of itsbeing very disagreeable,—a waste of time—tiresome women—andall the horror of being in danger of falling in with the second-rate andthird-rate of Highbury, who were calling on them for ever, and therefore sheseldom went near them. But now she made the sudden resolution of not passingtheir door without going in—observing, as she proposed it to Harriet,that, as well as she could calculate, they were just now quite safe from anyletter from Jane Fairfax.The house belonged to people in business. Mrs. and Miss Bates occupied thedrawing-room floor; and there, in the very moderate-sized apartment, which wasevery thing to them, the visitors were most cordially and even gratefullywelcomed; the quiet neat old lady, who with her knitting was seated in thewarmest corner, wanting even to give up her place to Miss Woodhouse, and hermore active, talking daughter, almost ready to overpower them with care andkindness, thanks for their visit, solicitude for their shoes, anxious inquiriesafter Mr. Woodhouse’s health, cheerful communications about hermother’s, and sweet-cake from the beaufet—“Mrs. Cole had justbeen there, just called in for ten minutes, and had been so good as to sit anhour with them, and she had taken a piece of cake and been so kind as tosay she liked it very much; and, therefore, she hoped Miss Woodhouse and MissSmith would do them the favour to eat a piece too.”The mention of the Coles was sure to be followed by that of Mr. Elton. Therewas intimacy between them, and Mr. Cole had heard from Mr. Elton since hisgoing away. Emma knew what was coming; they must have the letter over again,and settle how long he had been gone, and how much he was engaged in company,and what a favourite he was wherever he went, and how full the Master of theCeremonies’ ball had been; and she went through it very well, with allthe interest and all the commendation that could be requisite, and alwaysputting forward to prevent Harriet’s being obliged to say a word.This she had been prepared for when she entered the house; but meant, havingonce talked him handsomely over, to be no farther incommoded by any troublesometopic, and to wander at large amongst all the Mistresses and Misses ofHighbury, and their card-parties. She had not been prepared to have JaneFairfax succeed Mr. Elton; but he was actually hurried off by Miss Bates, shejumped away from him at last abruptly to the Coles, to usher in a letter fromher niece.“Oh! yes—Mr. Elton, I understand—certainly as todancing—Mrs. Cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bathwas—Mrs. Cole was so kind as to sit some time with us, talking of Jane;for as soon as she came in, she began inquiring after her, Jane is so verygreat a favourite there. Whenever she is with us, Mrs. Cole does not know howto shew her kindness enough; and I must say that Jane deserves it as much asany body can. And so she began inquiring after her directly, saying, ‘Iknow you cannot have heard from Jane lately, because it is not her time forwriting;’ and when I immediately said, ‘But indeed we have, we hada letter this very morning,’ I do not know that I ever saw any body moresurprized. ‘Have you, upon your honour?’ said she; ‘well,that is quite unexpected. Do let me hear what she says.’”Emma’s politeness was at hand directly, to say, with smilinginterest—“Have you heard from Miss Fairfax so lately? I am extremely happy. I hopeshe is well?”“Thank you. You are so kind!” replied the happily deceived aunt,while eagerly hunting for the letter.—“Oh! here it is. I was sureit could not be far off; but I had put my huswife upon it, you see, withoutbeing aware, and so it was quite hid, but I had it in my hand so very latelythat I was almost sure it must be on the table. I was reading it to Mrs. Cole,and since she went away, I was reading it again to my mother, for it is such apleasure to her—a letter from Jane—that she can never hear it oftenenough; so I knew it could not be far off, and here it is, only just under myhuswife—and since you are so kind as to wish to hear what shesays;—but, first of all, I really must, in justice to Jane, apologise forher writing so short a letter—only two pages you see—hardlytwo—and in general she fills the whole paper and crosses half. My motheroften wonders that I can make it out so well. She often says, when the letteris first opened, ‘Well, Hetty, now I think you will be put to it to makeout all that checker-work’—don’t you, ma’am?—Andthen I tell her, I am sure she would contrive to make it out herself, if shehad nobody to do it for her—every word of it—I am sure she wouldpore over it till she had made out every word. And, indeed, though mymother’s eyes are not so good as they were, she can see amazingly wellstill, thank God! with the help of spectacles. It is such a blessing! Mymother’s are really very good indeed. Jane often says, when she is here,‘I am sure, grandmama, you must have had very strong eyes to see as youdo—and so much fine work as you have done too!—I only wish my eyesmay last me as well.’”All this spoken extremely fast obliged Miss Bates to stop for breath; and Emmasaid something very civil about the excellence of Miss Fairfax’shandwriting.“You are extremely kind,” replied Miss Bates, highly gratified;“you who are such a judge, and write so beautifully yourself. I am surethere is nobody’s praise that could give us so much pleasure as MissWoodhouse’s. My mother does not hear; she is a little deaf you know.Ma’am,” addressing her, “do you hear what Miss Woodhouse isso obliging to say about Jane’s handwriting?”And Emma had the advantage of hearing her own silly compliment repeated twiceover before the good old lady could comprehend it. She was pondering, in themeanwhile, upon the possibility, without seeming very rude, of making herescape from Jane Fairfax’s letter, and had almost resolved on hurryingaway directly under some slight excuse, when Miss Bates turned to her again andseized her attention.“My mother’s deafness is very trifling you see—just nothingat all. By only raising my voice, and saying any thing two or three times over,she is sure to hear; but then she is used to my voice. But it is veryremarkable that she should always hear Jane better than she does me. Janespeaks so distinct! However, she will not find her grandmama at all deafer thanshe was two years ago; which is saying a great deal at my mother’s timeof life—and it really is full two years, you know, since she was here. Wenever were so long without seeing her before, and as I was telling Mrs. Cole,we shall hardly know how to make enough of her now.”“Are you expecting Miss Fairfax here soon?”“Oh yes; next week.”“Indeed!—that must be a very great pleasure.”“Thank you. You are very kind. Yes, next week. Every body is sosurprized; and every body says the same obliging things. I am sure she will beas happy to see her friends at Highbury, as they can be to see her. Yes, Fridayor Saturday; she cannot say which, because Colonel Campbell will be wanting thecarriage himself one of those days. So very good of them to send her the wholeway! But they always do, you know. Oh yes, Friday or Saturday next. That iswhat she writes about. That is the reason of her writing out of rule, as wecall it; for, in the common course, we should not have heard from her beforenext Tuesday or Wednesday.”“Yes, so I imagined. I was afraid there could be little chance of myhearing any thing of Miss Fairfax to-day.”“So obliging of you! No, we should not have heard, if it had not been forthis particular circumstance, of her being to come here so soon. My mother isso delighted!—for she is to be three months with us at least. Threemonths, she says so, positively, as I am going to have the pleasure of readingto you. The case is, you see, that the Campbells are going to Ireland. Mrs.Dixon has persuaded her father and mother to come over and see her directly.They had not intended to go over till the summer, but she is so impatient tosee them again—for till she married, last October, she was never awayfrom them so much as a week, which must make it very strange to be in differentkingdoms, I was going to say, but however different countries, and so she wrotea very urgent letter to her mother—or her father, I declare I do not knowwhich it was, but we shall see presently in Jane’s letter—wrote inMr. Dixon’s name as well as her own, to press their coming over directly,and they would give them the meeting in Dublin, and take them back to theircountry seat, Baly-craig, a beautiful place, I fancy. Jane has heard a greatdeal of its beauty; from Mr. Dixon, I mean—I do not know that she everheard about it from any body else; but it was very natural, you know, that heshould like to speak of his own place while he was paying hisaddresses—and as Jane used to be very often walking out withthem—for Colonel and Mrs. Campbell were very particular about theirdaughter’s not walking out often with only Mr. Dixon, for which I do notat all blame them; of course she heard every thing he might be telling MissCampbell about his own home in Ireland; and I think she wrote us word that hehad shewn them some drawings of the place, views that he had taken himself. Heis a most amiable, charming young man, I believe. Jane was quite longing to goto Ireland, from his account of things.”At this moment, an ingenious and animating suspicion entering Emma’sbrain with regard to Jane Fairfax, this charming Mr. Dixon, and the not goingto Ireland, she said, with the insidious design of farther discovery,“You must feel it very fortunate that Miss Fairfax should be allowed tocome to you at such a time. Considering the very particular friendship betweenher and Mrs. Dixon, you could hardly have expected her to be excused fromaccompanying Colonel and Mrs. Campbell.”“Very true, very true, indeed. The very thing that we have always beenrather afraid of; for we should not have liked to have her at such a distancefrom us, for months together—not able to come if any thing was to happen.But you see, every thing turns out for the best. They want her (Mr. and Mrs.Dixon) excessively to come over with Colonel and Mrs. Campbell; quite dependupon it; nothing can be more kind or pressing than their jointinvitation, Jane says, as you will hear presently; Mr. Dixon does not seem inthe least backward in any attention. He is a most charming young man. Eversince the service he rendered Jane at Weymouth, when they were out in thatparty on the water, and she, by the sudden whirling round of something or otheramong the sails, would have been dashed into the sea at once, and actually wasall but gone, if he had not, with the greatest presence of mind, caught hold ofher habit— (I can never think of it without trembling!)—But eversince we had the history of that day, I have been so fond of Mr. Dixon!”“But, in spite of all her friends’ urgency, and her own wish ofseeing Ireland, Miss Fairfax prefers devoting the time to you and Mrs.Bates?”“Yes—entirely her own doing, entirely her own choice; and Coloneland Mrs. Campbell think she does quite right, just what they should recommend;and indeed they particularly wish her to try her native air, as she hasnot been quite so well as usual lately.”“I am concerned to hear of it. I think they judge wisely. But Mrs. Dixonmust be very much disappointed. Mrs. Dixon, I understand, has no remarkabledegree of personal beauty; is not, by any means, to be compared with MissFairfax.”“Oh! no. You are very obliging to say such things—but certainlynot. There is no comparison between them. Miss Campbell always was absolutelyplain—but extremely elegant and amiable.”“Yes, that of course.”“Jane caught a bad cold, poor thing! so long ago as the 7th of November,(as I am going to read to you,) and has never been well since. A long time, isnot it, for a cold to hang upon her? She never mentioned it before, because shewould not alarm us. Just like her! so considerate!—But however, she is sofar from well, that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better comehome, and try an air that always agrees with her; and they have no doubt thatthree or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her—and it iscertainly a great deal better that she should come here, than go to Ireland, ifshe is unwell. Nobody could nurse her, as we should do.”“It appears to me the most desirable arrangement in the world.”“And so she is to come to us next Friday or Saturday, and the Campbellsleave town in their way to Holyhead the Monday following—as you will findfrom Jane’s letter. So sudden!—You may guess, dear Miss Woodhouse,what a flurry it has thrown me in! If it was not for the drawback of herillness—but I am afraid we must expect to see her grown thin, and lookingvery poorly. I must tell you what an unlucky thing happened to me, as to that.I always make a point of reading Jane’s letters through to myself first,before I read them aloud to my mother, you know, for fear of there being anything in them to distress her. Jane desired me to do it, so I always do: and soI began to-day with my usual caution; but no sooner did I come to the mentionof her being unwell, than I burst out, quite frightened, with ‘Bless me!poor Jane is ill!’—which my mother, being on the watch, hearddistinctly, and was sadly alarmed at. However, when I read on, I found it wasnot near so bad as I had fancied at first; and I make so light of it now toher, that she does not think much about it. But I cannot imagine how I could beso off my guard. If Jane does not get well soon, we will call in Mr. Perry. Theexpense shall not be thought of; and though he is so liberal, and so fond ofJane that I dare say he would not mean to charge any thing for attendance, wecould not suffer it to be so, you know. He has a wife and family to maintain,and is not to be giving away his time. Well, now I have just given you a hintof what Jane writes about, we will turn to her letter, and I am sure she tellsher own story a great deal better than I can tell it for her.”“I am afraid we must be running away,” said Emma, glancing atHarriet, and beginning to rise—“My father will be expecting us. Ihad no intention, I thought I had no power of staying more than five minutes,when I first entered the house. I merely called, because I would not pass thedoor without inquiring after Mrs. Bates; but I have been so pleasantlydetained! Now, however, we must wish you and Mrs. Bates good morning.”And not all that could be urged to detain her succeeded. She regained thestreet—happy in this, that though much had been forced on her against herwill, though she had in fact heard the whole substance of Jane Fairfax’sletter, she had been able to escape the letter itself.CHAPTER IIJane Fairfax was an orphan, the only child of Mrs. Bates’s youngestdaughter.The marriage of Lieut. Fairfax of the ——regiment of infantry, andMiss Jane Bates, had had its day of fame and pleasure, hope and interest; butnothing now remained of it, save the melancholy remembrance of him dying inaction abroad—of his widow sinking under consumption and grief soonafterwards—and this girl.By birth she belonged to Highbury: and when at three years old, on losing hermother, she became the property, the charge, the consolation, the foundling ofher grandmother and aunt, there had seemed every probability of her beingpermanently fixed there; of her being taught only what very limited means couldcommand, and growing up with no advantages of connexion or improvement, to beengrafted on what nature had given her in a pleasing person, goodunderstanding, and warm-hearted, well-meaning relations.But the compassionate feelings of a friend of her father gave a change to herdestiny. This was Colonel Campbell, who had very highly regarded Fairfax, as anexcellent officer and most deserving young man; and farther, had been indebtedto him for such attentions, during a severe camp-fever, as he believed hadsaved his life. These were claims which he did not learn to overlook, thoughsome years passed away from the death of poor Fairfax, before his own return toEngland put any thing in his power. When he did return, he sought out the childand took notice of her. He was a married man, with only one living child, agirl, about Jane’s age: and Jane became their guest, paying them longvisits and growing a favourite with all; and before she was nine years old, hisdaughter’s great fondness for her, and his own wish of being a realfriend, united to produce an offer from Colonel Campbell of undertaking thewhole charge of her education. It was accepted; and from that period Jane hadbelonged to Colonel Campbell’s family, and had lived with them entirely,only visiting her grandmother from time to time.The plan was that she should be brought up for educating others; the very fewhundred pounds which she inherited from her father making independenceimpossible. To provide for her otherwise was out of Colonel Campbell’spower; for though his income, by pay and appointments, was handsome, hisfortune was moderate and must be all his daughter’s; but, by giving heran education, he hoped to be supplying the means of respectable subsistencehereafter.Such was Jane Fairfax’s history. She had fallen into good hands, knownnothing but kindness from the Campbells, and been given an excellent education.Living constantly with right-minded and well-informed people, her heart andunderstanding had received every advantage of discipline and culture; andColonel Campbell’s residence being in London, every lighter talent hadbeen done full justice to, by the attendance of first-rate masters. Herdisposition and abilities were equally worthy of all that friendship could do;and at eighteen or nineteen she was, as far as such an early age can bequalified for the care of children, fully competent to the office ofinstruction herself; but she was too much beloved to be parted with. Neitherfather nor mother could promote, and the daughter could not endure it. The evilday was put off. It was easy to decide that she was still too young; and Janeremained with them, sharing, as another daughter, in all the rational pleasuresof an elegant society, and a judicious mixture of home and amusement, with onlythe drawback of the future, the sobering suggestions of her own goodunderstanding to remind her that all this might soon be over.The affection of the whole family, the warm attachment of Miss Campbell inparticular, was the more honourable to each party from the circumstance ofJane’s decided superiority both in beauty and acquirements. That naturehad given it in feature could not be unseen by the young woman, nor could herhigher powers of mind be unfelt by the parents. They continued together withunabated regard however, till the marriage of Miss Campbell, who by thatchance, that luck which so often defies anticipation in matrimonial affairs,giving attraction to what is moderate rather than to what is superior, engagedthe affections of Mr. Dixon, a young man, rich and agreeable, almost as soon asthey were acquainted; and was eligibly and happily settled, while Jane Fairfaxhad yet her bread to earn.This event had very lately taken place; too lately for any thing to be yetattempted by her less fortunate friend towards entering on her path of duty;though she had now reached the age which her own judgment had fixed on forbeginning. She had long resolved that one-and-twenty should be the period. Withthe fortitude of a devoted novitiate, she had resolved at one-and-twenty tocomplete the sacrifice, and retire from all the pleasures of life, of rationalintercourse, equal society, peace and hope, to penance and mortification forever.The good sense of Colonel and Mrs. Campbell could not oppose such a resolution,though their feelings did. As long as they lived, no exertions would benecessary, their home might be hers for ever; and for their own comfort theywould have retained her wholly; but this would be selfishness:—what mustbe at last, had better be soon. Perhaps they began to feel it might have beenkinder and wiser to have resisted the temptation of any delay, and spared herfrom a taste of such enjoyments of ease and leisure as must now berelinquished. Still, however, affection was glad to catch at any reasonableexcuse for not hurrying on the wretched moment. She had never been quite wellsince the time of their daughter’s marriage; and till she should havecompletely recovered her usual strength, they must forbid her engaging induties, which, so far from being compatible with a weakened frame and varyingspirits, seemed, under the most favourable circumstances, to require somethingmore than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged with tolerablecomfort.With regard to her not accompanying them to Ireland, her account to her auntcontained nothing but truth, though there might be some truths not told. It washer own choice to give the time of their absence to Highbury; to spend,perhaps, her last months of perfect liberty with those kind relations to whomshe was so very dear: and the Campbells, whatever might be their motive ormotives, whether single, or double, or treble, gave the arrangement their readysanction, and said, that they depended more on a few months spent in her nativeair, for the recovery of her health, than on any thing else. Certain it wasthat she was to come; and that Highbury, instead of welcoming that perfectnovelty which had been so long promised it—Mr. Frank Churchill—mustput up for the present with Jane Fairfax, who could bring only the freshness ofa two years’ absence.Emma was sorry;—to have to pay civilities to a person she did not likethrough three long months!—to be always doing more than she wished, andless than she ought! Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficultquestion to answer; Mr. Knightley had once told her it was because she saw inher the really accomplished young woman, which she wanted to be thoughtherself; and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time, therewere moments of self-examination in which her conscience could not quite acquither. But “she could never get acquainted with her: she did not know howit was, but there was such coldness and reserve—such apparentindifference whether she pleased or not—and then, her aunt was such aneternal talker!—and she was made such a fuss with by everybody!—and it had been always imagined that they were to be sointimate—because their ages were the same, every body had supposed theymust be so fond of each other.” These were her reasons—she had nobetter.It was a dislike so little just—every imputed fault was so magnified byfancy, that she never saw Jane Fairfax the first time after any considerableabsence, without feeling that she had injured her; and now, when the due visitwas paid, on her arrival, after a two years’ interval, she wasparticularly struck with the very appearance and manners, which for those twowhole years she had been depreciating. Jane Fairfax was very elegant,remarkably elegant; and she had herself the highest value for elegance. Herheight was pretty, just such as almost every body would think tall, and nobodycould think very tall; her figure particularly graceful; her size a mostbecoming medium, between fat and thin, though a slight appearance of ill-healthseemed to point out the likeliest evil of the two. Emma could not but feel allthis; and then, her face—her features—there was more beauty in themaltogether than she had remembered; it was not regular, but it was verypleasing beauty. Her eyes, a deep grey, with dark eye-lashes and eyebrows, hadnever been denied their praise; but the skin, which she had been used to cavilat, as wanting colour, had a clearness and delicacy which really needed nofuller bloom. It was a style of beauty, of which elegance was the reigningcharacter, and as such, she must, in honour, by all her principles, admireit:—elegance, which, whether of person or of mind, she saw so little inHighbury. There, not to be vulgar, was distinction, and merit.In short, she sat, during the first visit, looking at Jane Fairfax with twofoldcomplacency; the sense of pleasure and the sense of rendering justice, and wasdetermining that she would dislike her no longer. When she took in her history,indeed, her situation, as well as her beauty; when she considered what all thiselegance was destined to, what she was going to sink from, how she was going tolive, it seemed impossible to feel any thing but compassion and respect;especially, if to every well-known particular entitling her to interest, wereadded the highly probable circumstance of an attachment to Mr. Dixon, which shehad so naturally started to herself. In that case, nothing could be morepitiable or more honourable than the sacrifices she had resolved on. Emma wasvery willing now to acquit her of having seduced Mr. Dixon’s affectionsfrom his wife, or of any thing mischievous which her imagination had suggestedat first. If it were love, it might be simple, single, successless love on herside alone. She might have been unconsciously sucking in the sad poison, whilea sharer of his conversation with her friend; and from the best, the purest ofmotives, might now be denying herself this visit to Ireland, and resolving todivide herself effectually from him and his connexions by soon beginning hercareer of laborious duty.Upon the whole, Emma left her with such softened, charitable feelings, as madeher look around in walking home, and lament that Highbury afforded no young manworthy of giving her independence; nobody that she could wish to scheme aboutfor her.These were charming feelings—but not lasting. Before she had committedherself by any public profession of eternal friendship for Jane Fairfax, ordone more towards a recantation of past prejudices and errors, than saying toMr. Knightley, “She certainly is handsome; she is better thanhandsome!” Jane had spent an evening at Hartfield with her grandmotherand aunt, and every thing was relapsing much into its usual state. Formerprovocations reappeared. The aunt was as tiresome as ever; more tiresome,because anxiety for her health was now added to admiration of her powers; andthey had to listen to the description of exactly how little bread and buttershe ate for breakfast, and how small a slice of mutton for dinner, as well asto see exhibitions of new caps and new workbags for her mother and herself; andJane’s offences rose again. They had music; Emma was obliged to play; andthe thanks and praise which necessarily followed appeared to her an affectationof candour, an air of greatness, meaning only to shew off in higher style herown very superior performance. She was, besides, which was the worst of all, socold, so cautious! There was no getting at her real opinion. Wrapt up in acloak of politeness, she seemed determined to hazard nothing. She wasdisgustingly, was suspiciously reserved.If any thing could be more, where all was most, she was more reserved on thesubject of Weymouth and the Dixons than any thing. She seemed bent on giving noreal insight into Mr. Dixon’s character, or her own value for hiscompany, or opinion of the suitableness of the match. It was all generalapprobation and smoothness; nothing delineated or distinguished. It did her noservice however. Her caution was thrown away. Emma saw its artifice, andreturned to her first surmises. There probably was something more toconceal than her own preference; Mr. Dixon, perhaps, had been very nearchanging one friend for the other, or been fixed only to Miss Campbell, for thesake of the future twelve thousand pounds.The like reserve prevailed on other topics. She and Mr. Frank Churchill hadbeen at Weymouth at the same time. It was known that they were a littleacquainted; but not a syllable of real information could Emma procure as towhat he truly was. “Was he handsome?”—“She believed hewas reckoned a very fine young man.” “Was heagreeable?”—“He was generally thought so.” “Didhe appear a sensible young man; a young man ofinformation?”—“At a watering-place, or in a common Londonacquaintance, it was difficult to decide on such points. Manners were all thatcould be safely judged of, under a much longer knowledge than they had yet hadof Mr. Churchill. She believed every body found his manners pleasing.”Emma could not forgive her.CHAPTER IIIEmma could not forgive her;—but as neither provocation nor resentmentwere discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had been of the party, and had seen onlyproper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side, he was expressing thenext morning, being at Hartfield again on business with Mr. Woodhouse, hisapprobation of the whole; not so openly as he might have done had her fatherbeen out of the room, but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible toEmma. He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now great pleasurein marking an improvement.“A very pleasant evening,” he began, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse hadbeen talked into what was necessary, told that he understood, and the papersswept away;—“particularly pleasant. You and Miss Fairfax gave ussome very good music. I do not know a more luxurious state, sir, than sittingat one’s ease to be entertained a whole evening by two such young women;sometimes with music and sometimes with conversation. I am sure Miss Fairfaxmust have found the evening pleasant, Emma. You left nothing undone. I was gladyou made her play so much, for having no instrument at her grandmother’s,it must have been a real indulgence.”“I am happy you approved,” said Emma, smiling; “but I hope Iam not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield.”“No, my dear,” said her father instantly; “that I amsure you are not. There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are. Ifany thing, you are too attentive. The muffin last night—if it had beenhanded round once, I think it would have been enough.”“No,” said Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time; “you arenot often deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. Ithink you understand me, therefore.”An arch look expressed—“I understand you well enough;” butshe said only, “Miss Fairfax is reserved.”“I always told you she was—a little; but you will soon overcome allthat part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that has itsfoundation in diffidence. What arises from discretion must be honoured.”“You think her diffident. I do not see it.”“My dear Emma,” said he, moving from his chair into one close byher, “you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you had not a pleasantevening.”“Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions; andamused to think how little information I obtained.”“I am disappointed,” was his only answer.“I hope every body had a pleasant evening,” said Mr. Woodhouse, inhis quiet way. “I had. Once, I felt the fire rather too much; but then Imoved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did not disturb me. MissBates was very chatty and good-humoured, as she always is, though she speaksrather too quick. However, she is very agreeable, and Mrs. Bates too, in adifferent way. I like old friends; and Miss Jane Fairfax is a very pretty sortof young lady, a very pretty and a very well-behaved young lady indeed. Shemust have found the evening agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she hadEmma.”“True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax.”Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for the present,said, and with a sincerity which no one could question—“She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one’s eyesfrom. I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from myheart.”Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared to express; andbefore he could make any reply, Mr. Woodhouse, whose thoughts were on theBates’s, said—“It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined! agreat pity indeed! and I have often wished—but it is so little one canventure to do—small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon—Nowwe have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them a loin or a leg; it isvery small and delicate—Hartfield pork is not like any otherpork—but still it is pork—and, my dear Emma, unless one could besure of their making it into steaks, nicely fried, as ours are fried, withoutthe smallest grease, and not roast it, for no stomach can bear roastpork—I think we had better send the leg—do not you think so, mydear?”“My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. I knew you would wish it.There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice, and theloin to be dressed directly in any manner they like.”“That’s right, my dear, very right. I had not thought of it before,but that is the best way. They must not over-salt the leg; and then, if it isnot over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled, just as Serle boils ours,and eaten very moderately of, with a boiled turnip, and a little carrot orparsnip, I do not consider it unwholesome.”“Emma,” said Mr. Knightley presently, “I have a piece of newsfor you. You like news—and I heard an article in my way hither that Ithink will interest you.”“News! Oh! yes, I always like news. What is it?—why do you smileso?—where did you hear it?—at Randalls?”He had time only to say,“No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls,” when the doorwas thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. Full ofthanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to give quickest. Mr.Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment, and that not another syllableof communication could rest with him.“Oh! my dear sir, how are you this morning? My dear MissWoodhouse—I come quite over-powered. Such a beautiful hind-quarter ofpork! You are too bountiful! Have you heard the news? Mr. Elton is going to bemarried.”Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she was so completelysurprized that she could not avoid a little start, and a little blush, at thesound.“There is my news:—I thought it would interest you,” said Mr.Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction of some part of what hadpassed between them.“But where could you hear it?” cried Miss Bates.“Where could you possibly hear it, Mr. Knightley? For it is not fiveminutes since I received Mrs. Cole’s note—no, it cannot be morethan five—or at least ten—for I had got my bonnet and spencer on,just ready to come out—I was only gone down to speak to Patty again aboutthe pork—Jane was standing in the passage—were not you,Jane?—for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting-pan largeenough. So I said I would go down and see, and Jane said, ‘Shall I godown instead? for I think you have a little cold, and Patty has been washingthe kitchen.’—‘Oh! my dear,’ said I—well, andjust then came the note. A Miss Hawkins—that’s all I know. A MissHawkins of Bath. But, Mr. Knightley, how could you possibly have heard it? forthe very moment Mr. Cole told Mrs. Cole of it, she sat down and wrote to me. AMiss Hawkins—”“I was with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. He had just readElton’s letter as I was shewn in, and handed it to me directly.”“Well! that is quite—I suppose there never was a piece of news moregenerally interesting. My dear sir, you really are too bountiful. My motherdesires her very best compliments and regards, and a thousand thanks, and saysyou really quite oppress her.”“We consider our Hartfield pork,” replied Mr.Woodhouse—“indeed it certainly is, so very superior to all otherpork, that Emma and I cannot have a greater pleasure than—”“Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good to us.If ever there were people who, without having great wealth themselves, hadevery thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us. We may well say that‘our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.’ Well, Mr. Knightley, and soyou actually saw the letter; well—”“It was short—merely to announce—but cheerful, exulting, ofcourse.”— Here was a sly glance at Emma. “He had been sofortunate as to—I forget the precise words—one has no business toremember them. The information was, as you state, that he was going to bemarried to a Miss Hawkins. By his style, I should imagine it justsettled.”“Mr. Elton going to be married!” said Emma, as soon as she couldspeak. “He will have every body’s wishes for his happiness.”“He is very young to settle,” was Mr. Woodhouse’sobservation. “He had better not be in a hurry. He seemed to me very welloff as he was. We were always glad to see him at Hartfield.”“A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!” said Miss Bates,joyfully; “my mother is so pleased!—she says she cannot bear tohave the poor old Vicarage without a mistress. This is great news, indeed.Jane, you have never seen Mr. Elton!—no wonder that you have such acuriosity to see him.”Jane’s curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly tooccupy her.“No—I have never seen Mr. Elton,” she replied, starting onthis appeal; “is he—is he a tall man?”“Who shall answer that question?” cried Emma. “My fatherwould say ‘yes,’ Mr. Knightley ‘no;’ and Miss Bates andI that he is just the happy medium. When you have been here a little longer,Miss Fairfax, you will understand that Mr. Elton is the standard of perfectionin Highbury, both in person and mind.”“Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. He is the very best youngman—But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday he wasprecisely the height of Mr. Perry. Miss Hawkins,—I dare say, an excellentyoung woman. His extreme attention to my mother—wanting her to sit in thevicarage pew, that she might hear the better, for my mother is a little deaf,you know—it is not much, but she does not hear quite quick. Jane saysthat Colonel Campbell is a little deaf. He fancied bathing might be good forit—the warm bath—but she says it did him no lasting benefit.Colonel Campbell, you know, is quite our angel. And Mr. Dixon seems a verycharming young man, quite worthy of him. It is such a happiness when goodpeople get together—and they always do. Now, here will be Mr. Elton andMiss Hawkins; and there are the Coles, such very good people; and thePerrys—I suppose there never was a happier or a better couple than Mr.and Mrs. Perry. I say, sir,” turning to Mr. Woodhouse, “I thinkthere are few places with such society as Highbury. I always say, we are quiteblessed in our neighbours.—My dear sir, if there is one thing my motherloves better than another, it is pork—a roast loin of pork—”“As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been acquaintedwith her,” said Emma, “nothing I suppose can be known. One feelsthat it cannot be a very long acquaintance. He has been gone only fourweeks.”Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings, Emmasaid,“You are silent, Miss Fairfax—but I hope you mean to take aninterest in this news. You, who have been hearing and seeing so much of late onthese subjects, who must have been so deep in the business on MissCampbell’s account—we shall not excuse your being indifferent aboutMr. Elton and Miss Hawkins.”“When I have seen Mr. Elton,” replied Jane, “I dare say Ishall be interested—but I believe it requires that with me. And asit is some months since Miss Campbell married, the impression may be a littleworn off.”“Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, MissWoodhouse,” said Miss Bates, “four weeks yesterday.—A MissHawkins!—Well, I had always rather fancied it would be some young ladyhereabouts; not that I ever—Mrs. Cole once whispered to me—but Iimmediately said, ‘No, Mr. Elton is a most worthy youngman—but’—In short, I do not think I am particularly quick atthose sort of discoveries. I do not pretend to it. What is before me, I see. Atthe same time, nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton should have aspired—MissWoodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly. She knows I would not offendfor the world. How does Miss Smith do? She seems quite recovered now. Have youheard from Mrs. John Knightley lately? Oh! those dear little children. Jane, doyou know I always fancy Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley. I mean inperson—tall, and with that sort of look—and not verytalkative.”“Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all.”“Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.One takes up a notion, and runs away with it. Mr. Dixon, you say, is not,strictly speaking, handsome?”“Handsome! Oh! no—far from it—certainly plain. I told you hewas plain.”“My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,and that you yourself—”“Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing. Where I have a regard, Ialways think a person well-looking. But I gave what I believed the generalopinion, when I called him plain.”“Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. The weather doesnot look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. You are too obliging, my dear MissWoodhouse; but we really must take leave. This has been a most agreeable pieceof news indeed. I shall just go round by Mrs. Cole’s; but I shall notstop three minutes: and, Jane, you had better go home directly—I wouldnot have you out in a shower!—We think she is the better for Highburyalready. Thank you, we do indeed. I shall not attempt calling on Mrs. Goddard,for I really do not think she cares for any thing but boiled pork: whenwe dress the leg it will be another thing. Good morning to you, my dear sir.Oh! Mr. Knightley is coming too. Well, that is so very!—I am sure if Janeis tired, you will be so kind as to give her your arm.—Mr. Elton, andMiss Hawkins!—Good morning to you.”Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while helamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry—and to marrystrangers too—and the other half she could give to her own view of thesubject. It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome piece of news, asproving that Mr. Elton could not have suffered long; but she was sorry forHarriet: Harriet must feel it—and all that she could hope was, by givingthe first information herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly fromothers. It was now about the time that she was likely to call. If she were tomeet Miss Bates in her way!—and upon its beginning to rain, Emma wasobliged to expect that the weather would be detaining her at Mrs.Goddard’s, and that the intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon herwithout preparation.The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes, when incame Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which hurrying thither with afull heart was likely to give; and the “Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what do youthink has happened!” which instantly burst forth, had all the evidence ofcorresponding perturbation. As the blow was given, Emma felt that she could notnow shew greater kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, raneagerly through what she had to tell. “She had set out from Mrs.Goddard’s half an hour ago—she had been afraid it wouldrain—she had been afraid it would pour down every moment—but shethought she might get to Hartfield first—she had hurried on as fast aspossible; but then, as she was passing by the house where a young woman wasmaking up a gown for her, she thought she would just step in and see how itwent on; and though she did not seem to stay half a moment there, soon aftershe came out it began to rain, and she did not know what to do; so she ran ondirectly, as fast as she could, and took shelter atFord’s.”—Ford’s was the principal woollen-draper,linen-draper, and haberdasher’s shop united; the shop first in size andfashion in the place.—“And so, there she had set, without an ideaof any thing in the world, full ten minutes, perhaps—when, all of asudden, who should come in—to be sure it was so very odd!—but theyalways dealt at Ford’s—who should come in, but Elizabeth Martin andher brother!—Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think. I thought I should havefainted. I did not know what to do. I was sitting near the door—Elizabethsaw me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the umbrella. I am sure shesaw me, but she looked away directly, and took no notice; and they both went toquite the farther end of the shop; and I kept sitting near the door!—Oh!dear; I was so miserable! I am sure I must have been as white as my gown. Icould not go away you know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myselfanywhere in the world but there.—Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse—well, atlast, I fancy, he looked round and saw me; for instead of going on with herbuyings, they began whispering to one another. I am sure they were talking ofme; and I could not help thinking that he was persuading her to speak tome—(do you think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)—for presently she cameforward—came quite up to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready toshake hands, if I would. She did not do any of it in the same way that sheused; I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to try to bevery friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time; but I know nomore what I said—I was in such a tremble!—I remember she said shewas sorry we never met now; which I thought almost too kind! Dear, MissWoodhouse, I was absolutely miserable! By that time, it was beginning to holdup, and I was determined that nothing should stop me from gettingaway—and then—only think!—I found he was coming up towards metoo—slowly you know, and as if he did not quite know what to do; and sohe came and spoke, and I answered—and I stood for a minute, feelingdreadfully, you know, one can’t tell how; and then I took courage, andsaid it did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not got threeyards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I was going toHartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr. Cole’s stables,for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain. Oh! dear, I thoughtit would have been the death of me! So I said, I was very much obliged to him:you know I could not do less; and then he went back to Elizabeth, and I cameround by the stables—I believe I did—but I hardly knew where I was,or any thing about it. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I would rather done any thing thanhave it happen: and yet, you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in seeinghim behave so pleasantly and so kindly. And Elizabeth, too. Oh! Miss Woodhouse,do talk to me and make me comfortable again.”Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in her power.She was obliged to stop and think. She was not thoroughly comfortable herself.The young man’s conduct, and his sister’s, seemed the result ofreal feeling, and she could not but pity them. As Harriet described it, therehad been an interesting mixture of wounded affection and genuine delicacy intheir behaviour. But she had believed them to be well-meaning, worthy peoplebefore; and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion? It wasfolly to be disturbed by it. Of course, he must be sorry to lose her—theymust be all sorry. Ambition, as well as love, had probably been mortified. Theymight all have hoped to rise by Harriet’s acquaintance: and besides, whatwas the value of Harriet’s description?—So easily pleased—solittle discerning;—what signified her praise?She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by considering allthat had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of being dwelt on,“It might be distressing, for the moment,” said she; “but youseem to have behaved extremely well; and it is over—and maynever—can never, as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you neednot think about it.”Harriet said, “very true,” and she “would not think aboutit;” but still she talked of it—still she could talk of nothingelse; and Emma, at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head, wasobliged to hurry on the news, which she had meant to give with so much tendercaution; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed or onlyamused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet—such a conclusion of Mr.Elton’s importance with her!Mr. Elton’s rights, however, gradually revived. Though she did not feelthe first intelligence as she might have done the day before, or an hourbefore, its interest soon increased; and before their first conversation wasover, she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity, wonder andregret, pain and pleasure, as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which couldconduce to place the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy.Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. It had beenserviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining any influence toalarm. As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not get at her, without seekingher, where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension toseek her; for since her refusal of the brother, the sisters never had been atMrs. Goddard’s; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being throwntogether again, with any necessity, or even any power of speech.CHAPTER IVHuman nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interestingsituations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure of beingkindly spoken of.A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins’s name was first mentioned inHighbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to have everyrecommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant, highlyaccomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr. Elton himself arrived totriumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of her merits, there wasvery little more for him to do, than to tell her Christian name, and say whosemusic she principally played.Mr. Elton returned, a very happy man. He had gone away rejected andmortified—disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series of whatappeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the right lady, butfinding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one. He had gone awaydeeply offended—he came back engaged to another—and to another assuperior, of course, to the first, as under such circumstances what is gainedalways is to what is lost. He came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy,caring nothing for Miss Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith.The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages ofperfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent fortune, of somany thousands as would always be called ten; a point of some dignity, as wellas some convenience: the story told well; he had not thrown himselfaway—he had gained a woman of 10,000 l. or thereabouts; and he hadgained her with such delightful rapidity—the first hour of introductionhad been so very soon followed by distinguishing notice; the history which hehad to give Mrs. Cole of the rise and progress of the affair was soglorious—the steps so quick, from the accidental rencontre, to the dinnerat Mr. Green’s, and the party at Mrs. Brown’s—smiles andblushes rising in importance—with consciousness and agitation richlyscattered—the lady had been so easily impressed—so sweetlydisposed—had in short, to use a most intelligible phrase, been so veryready to have him, that vanity and prudence were equally contented.He had caught both substance and shadow—both fortune and affection, andwas just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself and his ownconcerns—expecting to be congratulated—ready to be laughedat—and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing all the youngladies of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago, he would have been morecautiously gallant.The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves to please,and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for; and when he set out forBath again, there was a general expectation, which a certain glance of Mrs.Cole’s did not seem to contradict, that when he next entered Highbury hewould bring his bride.During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just enough tofeel that the first meeting was over, and to give her the impression of his notbeing improved by the mixture of pique and pretension, now spread over his air.She was, in fact, beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought himpleasing at all; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some verydisagreeable feelings, that, except in a moral light, as a penance, a lesson, asource of profitable humiliation to her own mind, she would have been thankfulto be assured of never seeing him again. She wished him very well; but he gaveher pain, and his welfare twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction.The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must certainly belessened by his marriage. Many vain solicitudes would be prevented—manyawkwardnesses smoothed by it. A Mrs. Elton would be an excuse forany change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink without remark. It wouldbe almost beginning their life of civility again.Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little. She was good enough forMr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury—handsomeenough—to look plain, probably, by Harriet’s side. As to connexion,there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded, that after all his own vaunted claimsand disdain of Harriet, he had done nothing. On that article, truth seemedattainable. What she was, must be uncertain; but who she was,might be found out; and setting aside the 10,000 l., it did not appear that shewas at all Harriet’s superior. She brought no name, no blood, noalliance. Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of aBristol—merchant, of course, he must be called; but, as the whole of theprofits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate, it was not unfair toguess the dignity of his line of trade had been very moderate also. Part ofevery winter she had been used to spend in Bath; but Bristol was her home, thevery heart of Bristol; for though the father and mother had died some yearsago, an uncle remained—in the law line—nothing more distinctlyhonourable was hazarded of him, than that he was in the law line; and with himthe daughter had lived. Emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorney, andtoo stupid to rise. And all the grandeur of the connexion seemed dependent onthe elder sister, who was very well married, to agentleman in a great way, near Bristol, who kept two carriages!That was the wind-up of the history; that was the glory of Miss Hawkins.Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! She had talked herinto love; but, alas! she was not so easily to be talked out of it. The charmof an object to occupy the many vacancies of Harriet’s mind was not to betalked away. He might be superseded by another; he certainly would indeed;nothing could be clearer; even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient; butnothing else, she feared, would cure her. Harriet was one of those, who, havingonce begun, would be always in love. And now, poor girl! she was considerablyworse from this reappearance of Mr. Elton. She was always having a glimpse ofhim somewhere or other. Emma saw him only once; but two or three times everyday Harriet was sure just to meet with him, or just to miss him,just to hear his voice, or see his shoulder, just to havesomething occur to preserve him in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth ofsurprize and conjecture. She was, moreover, perpetually hearing about him; for,excepting when at Hartfield, she was always among those who saw no fault in Mr.Elton, and found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concerns; andevery report, therefore, every guess—all that had already occurred, allthat might occur in the arrangement of his affairs, comprehending income,servants, and furniture, was continually in agitation around her. Her regardwas receiving strength by invariable praise of him, and her regrets kept alive,and feelings irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins’shappiness, and continual observation of, how much he seemed attached!—hisair as he walked by the house—the very sitting of his hat, being all inproof of how much he was in love!Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain to her friend, orreproach to herself, in the waverings of Harriet’s mind, Emma would havebeen amused by its variations. Sometimes Mr. Elton predominated, sometimes theMartins; and each was occasionally useful as a check to the other. Mr.Elton’s engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting Mr.Martin. The unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been alittle put aside by Elizabeth Martin’s calling at Mrs. Goddard’s afew days afterwards. Harriet had not been at home; but a note had been preparedand left for her, written in the very style to touch; a small mixture ofreproach, with a great deal of kindness; and till Mr. Elton himself appeared,she had been much occupied by it, continually pondering over what could be donein return, and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. But Mr. Elton, inperson, had driven away all such cares. While he staid, the Martins wereforgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off for Bath again, Emma, todissipate some of the distress it occasioned, judged it best for her to returnElizabeth Martin’s visit.How that visit was to be acknowledged—what would be necessary—andwhat might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful consideration. Absoluteneglect of the mother and sisters, when invited to come, would be ingratitude.It must not be: and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance—!After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, thanHarriet’s returning the visit; but in a way that, if they hadunderstanding, should convince them that it was to be only a formalacquaintance. She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the AbbeyMill, while she drove a little farther, and call for her again so soon, as toallow no time for insidious applications or dangerous recurrences to the past,and give the most decided proof of what degree of intimacy was chosen for thefuture.She could think of nothing better: and though there was something in it whichher own heart could not approve—something of ingratitude, merely glossedover—it must be done, or what would become of Harriet?CHAPTER VSmall heart had Harriet for visiting. Only half an hour before her friendcalled for her at Mrs. Goddard’s, her evil stars had led her to the veryspot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to The Rev. Philip Elton,White-Hart, Bath, was to be seen under the operation of being lifted intothe butcher’s cart, which was to convey it to where the coaches past; andevery thing in this world, excepting that trunk and the direction, wasconsequently a blank.She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to be put down,at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led between espalierapple-trees to the front door, the sight of every thing which had given her somuch pleasure the autumn before, was beginning to revive a little localagitation; and when they parted, Emma observed her to be looking around with asort of fearful curiosity, which determined her not to allow the visit toexceed the proposed quarter of an hour. She went on herself, to give thatportion of time to an old servant who was married, and settled in Donwell.The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again; and MissSmith receiving her summons, was with her without delay, and unattended by anyalarming young man. She came solitarily down the gravel walk—a MissMartin just appearing at the door, and parting with her seemingly withceremonious civility.Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. She was feeling toomuch; but at last Emma collected from her enough to understand the sort ofmeeting, and the sort of pain it was creating. She had seen only Mrs. Martinand the two girls. They had received her doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothingbeyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time—tilljust at last, when Mrs. Martin’s saying, all of a sudden, that shethought Miss Smith was grown, had brought on a more interesting subject, and awarmer manner. In that very room she had been measured last September, with hertwo friends. There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot bythe window. He had done it. They all seemed to remember the day, thehour, the party, the occasion—to feel the same consciousness, the sameregrets—to be ready to return to the same good understanding; and theywere just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma must suspect, asready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,) when the carriagereappeared, and all was over. The style of the visit, and the shortness of it,were then felt to be decisive. Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whomshe had thankfully passed six weeks not six months ago!—Emma could notbut picture it all, and feel how justly they might resent, how naturallyHarriet must suffer. It was a bad business. She would have given a great deal,or endured a great deal, to have had the Martins in a higher rank of life. Theywere so deserving, that a little higher should have been enough: but asit was, how could she have done otherwise?—Impossible!—She couldnot repent. They must be separated; but there was a great deal of pain in theprocess—so much to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessityof a little consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls toprocure it. Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Elton and the Martins. Therefreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary.It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard that neither“master nor mistress was at home;” they had both been out sometime; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield.“This is too bad,” cried Emma, as they turned away. “And nowwe shall just miss them; too provoking!—I do not know when I have been sodisappointed.” And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge her murmurs,or to reason them away; probably a little of both—such being thecommonest process of a not ill-disposed mind. Presently the carriage stopt; shelooked up; it was stopt by Mr. and Mrs. Weston, who were standing to speak toher. There was instant pleasure in the sight of them, and still greaterpleasure was conveyed in sound—for Mr. Weston immediately accosted herwith,“How d’ye do?—how d’ye do?—We have been sittingwith your father—glad to see him so well. Frank comes to-morrow—Ihad a letter this morning—we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to acertainty—he is at Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; Iknew it would be so. If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid threedays; I was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going to havejust the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather. We shall enjoy himcompletely; every thing has turned out exactly as we could wish.”There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding the influence ofsuch a happy face as Mr. Weston’s, confirmed as it all was by the wordsand the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter, but not less to thepurpose. To know that she thought his coming certain was enough to makeEmma consider it so, and sincerely did she rejoice in their joy. It was a mostdelightful reanimation of exhausted spirits. The worn-out past was sunk in thefreshness of what was coming; and in the rapidity of half a moment’sthought, she hoped Mr. Elton would now be talked of no more.Mr. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe, which allowedhis son to answer for having an entire fortnight at his command, as well as theroute and the method of his journey; and she listened, and smiled, andcongratulated.“I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield,” said he, at theconclusion.Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech, from his wife.“We had better move on, Mr. Weston,” said she, “we aredetaining the girls.”“Well, well, I am ready;”—and turning again to Emma,“but you must not be expecting such a very fine young man; youhave only had my account you know; I dare say he is really nothingextraordinary:”—though his own sparkling eyes at the moment werespeaking a very different conviction.Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer in a manner thatappropriated nothing.“Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o’clock,”was Mrs. Weston’s parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety, and meantonly for her.“Four o’clock!—depend upon it he will be here bythree,” was Mr. Weston’s quick amendment; and so ended a mostsatisfactory meeting. Emma’s spirits were mounted quite up to happiness;every thing wore a different air; James and his horses seemed not half sosluggish as before. When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder atleast must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet, she sawsomething like a look of spring, a tender smile even there.“Will Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well asOxford?”—was a question, however, which did not augur much.But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once, and Emma was nowin a humour to resolve that they should both come in time.The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs. Weston’s faithfulpupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve o’clock, thatshe was to think of her at four.“My dear, dear anxious friend,”—said she, in mentalsoliloquy, while walking downstairs from her own room, “alwaysovercareful for every body’s comfort but your own; I see you now in allyour little fidgets, going again and again into his room, to be sure that allis right.” The clock struck twelve as she passed through the hall.“’Tis twelve; I shall not forget to think of you four hours hence;and by this time to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later, I may be thinking ofthe possibility of their all calling here. I am sure they will bring himsoon.”She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with herfather—Mr. Weston and his son. They had been arrived only a few minutes,and Mr. Weston had scarcely finished his explanation of Frank’s being aday before his time, and her father was yet in the midst of his very civilwelcome and congratulations, when she appeared, to have her share of surprize,introduction, and pleasure.The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest, was actually beforeher—he was presented to her, and she did not think too much had been saidin his praise; he was a very good looking young man; height, air,address, all were unexceptionable, and his countenance had a great deal of thespirit and liveliness of his father’s; he looked quick and sensible. Shefelt immediately that she should like him; and there was a well-bred ease ofmanner, and a readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending tobe acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be.He had reached Randalls the evening before. She was pleased with the eagernessto arrive which had made him alter his plan, and travel earlier, later, andquicker, that he might gain half a day.“I told you yesterday,” cried Mr. Weston with exultation, “Itold you all that he would be here before the time named. I remembered what Iused to do myself. One cannot creep upon a journey; one cannot help getting onfaster than one has planned; and the pleasure of coming in upon one’sfriends before the look-out begins, is worth a great deal more than any littleexertion it needs.”“It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it,” said theyoung man, “though there are not many houses that I should presume on sofar; but in coming home I felt I might do any thing.”The word home made his father look on him with fresh complacency. Emmawas directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable; the convictionwas strengthened by what followed. He was very much pleased with Randalls,thought it a most admirably arranged house, would hardly allow it even to bevery small, admired the situation, the walk to Highbury, Highbury itself,Hartfield still more, and professed himself to have always felt the sort ofinterest in the country which none but one’s own country gives,and the greatest curiosity to visit it. That he should never have been able toindulge so amiable a feeling before, passed suspiciously through Emma’sbrain; but still, if it were a falsehood, it was a pleasant one, and pleasantlyhandled. His manner had no air of study or exaggeration. He did really look andspeak as if in a state of no common enjoyment.Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance. Onhis side were the inquiries,—“Was she a horsewoman?—Pleasantrides?—Pleasant walks?—Had they a largeneighbourhood?—Highbury, perhaps, afforded society enough?—Therewere several very pretty houses in and about it.—Balls—had theyballs?—Was it a musical society?”But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintance proportionablyadvanced, he contrived to find an opportunity, while their two fathers wereengaged with each other, of introducing his mother-in-law, and speaking of herwith so much handsome praise, so much warm admiration, so much gratitude forthe happiness she secured to his father, and her very kind reception ofhimself, as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please—and ofhis certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her. He did not advancea word of praise beyond what she knew to be thoroughly deserved by Mrs. Weston;but, undoubtedly he could know very little of the matter. He understood whatwould be welcome; he could be sure of little else. “His father’smarriage,” he said, “had been the wisest measure, every friend mustrejoice in it; and the family from whom he had received such a blessing must beever considered as having conferred the highest obligation on him.”He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor’s merits,without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it was tobe rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse’scharacter, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor’s. And at last, as if resolvedto qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object, he woundit all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person.“Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for,” said he;“but I confess that, considering every thing, I had not expected morethan a very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age; I did not know thatI was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. Weston.”“You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. Weston for myfeelings,” said Emma; “were you to guess her to be eighteen,I should listen with pleasure; but she would be ready to quarrel withyou for using such words. Don’t let her imagine that you have spoken ofher as a pretty young woman.”“I hope I should know better,” he replied; “no, depend uponit, (with a gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. Weston I should understandwhom I might praise without any danger of being thought extravagant in myterms.”Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected from theirknowing each other, which had taken strong possession of her mind, had evercrossed his; and whether his compliments were to be considered as marks ofacquiescence, or proofs of defiance. She must see more of him to understand hisways; at present she only felt they were agreeable.She had no doubt of what Mr. Weston was often thinking about. His quick eye shedetected again and again glancing towards them with a happy expression; andeven, when he might have determined not to look, she was confident that he wasoften listening.Her own father’s perfect exemption from any thought of the kind, theentire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration or suspicion, was amost comfortable circumstance. Happily he was not farther from approvingmatrimony than from foreseeing it.—Though always objecting to everymarriage that was arranged, he never suffered beforehand from the apprehensionof any; it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons’understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were proved againstthem. She blessed the favouring blindness. He could now, without the drawbackof a single unpleasant surmise, without a glance forward at any possibletreachery in his guest, give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility insolicitous inquiries after Mr. Frank Churchill’s accommodation on hisjourney, through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road, and expressvery genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped catchingcold—which, however, he could not allow him to feel quite assured ofhimself till after another night.A reasonable visit paid, Mr. Weston began to move.—“He must begoing. He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands forMrs. Weston at Ford’s, but he need not hurry any body else.” Hisson, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also, saying,“As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the opportunityof paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other, and therefore may aswell be paid now. I have the honour of being acquainted with a neighbour ofyours, (turning to Emma,) a lady residing in or near Highbury; a family of thename of Fairfax. I shall have no difficulty, I suppose, in finding the house;though Fairfax, I believe, is not the proper name—I should rather sayBarnes, or Bates. Do you know any family of that name?”“To be sure we do,” cried his father; “Mrs. Bates—wepassed her house—I saw Miss Bates at the window. True, true, you areacquainted with Miss Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a finegirl she is. Call upon her, by all means.”“There is no necessity for my calling this morning,” said the youngman; “another day would do as well; but there was that degree ofacquaintance at Weymouth which—”“Oh! go to-day, go to-day. Do not defer it. What is right to be donecannot be done too soon. And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank; any wantof attention to her here should be carefully avoided. You saw her withthe Campbells, when she was the equal of every body she mixed with, but hereshe is with a poor old grandmother, who has barely enough to live on. If you donot call early it will be a slight.”The son looked convinced.“I have heard her speak of the acquaintance,” said Emma; “sheis a very elegant young woman.”He agreed to it, but with so quiet a “Yes,” as inclined her almostto doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct sort ofelegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could be thought onlyordinarily gifted with it.“If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,” saidshe, “I think you will to-day. You will see her to advantage; see her andhear her—no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all, for she has anaunt who never holds her tongue.”“You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?” said Mr.Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation; “then give meleave to assure you that you will find her a very agreeable young lady. She isstaying here on a visit to her grandmama and aunt, very worthy people; I haveknown them all my life. They will be extremely glad to see you, I am sure; andone of my servants shall go with you to shew you the way.”“My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can directme.”“But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great many houses; youmight be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk, unless you keep onthe footpath; but my coachman can tell you where you had best cross thestreet.”Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could, and hisfather gave his hearty support by calling out, “My good friend, this isquite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it, and as toMrs. Bates’s, he may get there from the Crown in a hop, step, andjump.”They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one, and agraceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave. Emma remained verywell pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance, and could now engage tothink of them all at Randalls any hour of the day, with full confidence intheir comfort.CHAPTER VIThe next morning brought Mr. Frank Churchill again. He came with Mrs. Weston,to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially. He had been sittingwith her, it appeared, most companionably at home, till her usual hour ofexercise; and on being desired to chuse their walk, immediately fixed onHighbury.—“He did not doubt there being very pleasant walks inevery direction, but if left to him, he should always chuse the same. Highbury,that airy, cheerful, happy-looking Highbury, would be his constantattraction.”—Highbury, with Mrs. Weston, stood for Hartfield; andshe trusted to its bearing the same construction with him. They walked thitherdirectly.Emma had hardly expected them: for Mr. Weston, who had called in for half aminute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome, knew nothing of theirplans; and it was an agreeable surprize to her, therefore, to perceive themwalking up to the house together, arm in arm. She was wanting to see him again,and especially to see him in company with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour towhom her opinion of him was to depend. If he were deficient there, nothingshould make amends for it. But on seeing them together, she became perfectlysatisfied. It was not merely in fine words or hyperbolical compliment that hepaid his duty; nothing could be more proper or pleasing than his whole mannerto her—nothing could more agreeably denote his wish of considering her asa friend and securing her affection. And there was time enough for Emma to forma reasonable judgment, as their visit included all the rest of the morning.They were all three walking about together for an hour or two—first roundthe shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury. He was delighted withevery thing; admired Hartfield sufficiently for Mr. Woodhouse’s ear; andwhen their going farther was resolved on, confessed his wish to be madeacquainted with the whole village, and found matter of commendation andinterest much oftener than Emma could have supposed.Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings. He begged tobe shewn the house which his father had lived in so long, and which had beenthe home of his father’s father; and on recollecting that an old womanwho had nursed him was still living, walked in quest of her cottage from oneend of the street to the other; and though in some points of pursuit orobservation there was no positive merit, they shewed, altogether, a good-willtowards Highbury in general, which must be very like a merit to those he waswith.Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn, it couldnot be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily absenting himself;that he had not been acting a part, or making a parade of insincereprofessions; and that Mr. Knightley certainly had not done him justice.Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house, though theprincipal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of post-horses were kept,more for the convenience of the neighbourhood than from any run on the road;and his companions had not expected to be detained by any interest excitedthere; but in passing it they gave the history of the large room visibly added;it had been built many years ago for a ball-room, and while the neighbourhoodhad been in a particularly populous, dancing state, had been occasionally usedas such;—but such brilliant days had long passed away, and now thehighest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist clubestablished among the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place. He wasimmediately interested. Its character as a ball-room caught him; and instead ofpassing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two superior sashed windowswhich were open, to look in and contemplate its capabilities, and lament thatits original purpose should have ceased. He saw no fault in the room, he wouldacknowledge none which they suggested. No, it was long enough, broad enough,handsome enough. It would hold the very number for comfort. They ought to haveballs there at least every fortnight through the winter. Why had not MissWoodhouse revived the former good old days of the room?—She who could doany thing in Highbury! The want of proper families in the place, and theconviction that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could betempted to attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied. He could not bepersuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw around him, could notfurnish numbers enough for such a meeting; and even when particulars were givenand families described, he was still unwilling to admit that the inconvenienceof such a mixture would be any thing, or that there would be the smallestdifficulty in every body’s returning into their proper place the nextmorning. He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma wasrather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail so decidedlyagainst the habits of the Churchills. He seemed to have all the life andspirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclinations of his father, and nothingof the pride or reserve of Enscombe. Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps,scarcely enough; his indifference to a confusion of rank, bordered too much oninelegance of mind. He could be no judge, however, of the evil he was holdingcheap. It was but an effusion of lively spirits.At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown; and being nowalmost facing the house where the Bateses lodged, Emma recollected his intendedvisit the day before, and asked him if he had paid it.“Yes, oh! yes”—he replied; “I was just going to mentionit. A very successful visit:—I saw all the three ladies; and felt verymuch obliged to you for your preparatory hint. If the talking aunt had taken mequite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. As it was, I was onlybetrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit. Ten minutes would have been allthat was necessary, perhaps all that was proper; and I had told my father Ishould certainly be at home before him—but there was no getting away, nopause; and, to my utter astonishment, I found, when he (finding me nowhereelse) joined me there at last, that I had been actually sitting with them verynearly three-quarters of an hour. The good lady had not given me thepossibility of escape before.”“And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?”“Ill, very ill—that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to lookill. But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs. Weston, is it? Ladies cannever look ill. And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally so pale, as almostalways to give the appearance of ill health.—A most deplorable want ofcomplexion.”Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss Fairfax’scomplexion. “It was certainly never brilliant, but she would not allow itto have a sickly hue in general; and there was a softness and delicacy in herskin which gave peculiar elegance to the character of her face.” Helistened with all due deference; acknowledged that he had heard many people saythe same—but yet he must confess, that to him nothing could make amendsfor the want of the fine glow of health. Where features were indifferent, afine complexion gave beauty to them all; and where they were good, the effectwas—fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the effect was.“Well,” said Emma, “there is no disputing abouttaste.—At least you admire her except her complexion.”He shook his head and laughed.—“I cannot separate Miss Fairfax andher complexion.”“Did you see her often at Weymouth? Were you often in the samesociety?”At this moment they were approaching Ford’s, and he hastily exclaimed,“Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day oftheir lives, as my father informs me. He comes to Highbury himself, he says,six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford’s. If it benot inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may prove myself to belongto the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. I must buy something atFord’s. It will be taking out my freedom.—I dare say they sellgloves.”“Oh! yes, gloves and every thing. I do admire your patriotism. You willbe adored in Highbury. You were very popular before you came, because you wereMr. Weston’s son—but lay out half a guinea at Ford’s, andyour popularity will stand upon your own virtues.”They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of “Men’sBeavers” and “York Tan” were bringing down and displaying onthe counter, he said—“But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, youwere speaking to me, you were saying something at the very moment of this burstof my amor patriae. Do not let me lose it. I assure you theutmost stretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of anyhappiness in private life.”“I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax and her partyat Weymouth.”“And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be avery unfair one. It is always the lady’s right to decide on the degree ofacquaintance. Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.—I shallnot commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow.”“Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. But heraccount of every thing leaves so much to be guessed, she is so very reserved,so very unwilling to give the least information about any body, that I reallythink you may say what you like of your acquaintance with her.”“May I, indeed?—Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits meso well. I met her frequently at Weymouth. I had known the Campbells a littlein town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set. Colonel Campbell isa very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly, warm-hearted woman. I likethem all.”“You know Miss Fairfax’s situation in life, I conclude; what she isdestined to be?”“Yes—(rather hesitatingly)—I believe I do.”“You get upon delicate subjects, Emma,” said Mrs. Weston smiling;“remember that I am here.—Mr. Frank Churchill hardly knows what tosay when you speak of Miss Fairfax’s situation in life. I will move alittle farther off.”“I certainly do forget to think of her,” said Emma,“as having ever been any thing but my friend and my dearestfriend.”He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment.When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again, “Didyou ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?” said FrankChurchill.“Ever hear her!” repeated Emma. “You forget how much shebelongs to Highbury. I have heard her every year of our lives since we bothbegan. She plays charmingly.”“You think so, do you?—I wanted the opinion of some one who couldreally judge. She appeared to me to play well, that is, with considerabletaste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.—I am excessively fond ofmusic, but without the smallest skill or right of judging of any body’sperformance.—I have been used to hear her’s admired; and I rememberone proof of her being thought to play well:—a man, a very musical man,and in love with another woman—engaged to her—on the point ofmarriage—would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to theinstrument, if the lady in question could sit down instead—never seemedto like to hear one if he could hear the other. That, I thought, in a man ofknown musical talent, was some proof.”“Proof indeed!” said Emma, highly amused.—“Mr. Dixon isvery musical, is he? We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, fromyou, than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year.”“Yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought it avery strong proof.”“Certainly—very strong it was; to own the truth, a great dealstronger than, if I had been Miss Campbell, would have been at allagreeable to me. I could not excuse a man’s having more music thanlove—more ear than eye—a more acute sensibility to fine sounds thanto my feelings. How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?”“It was her very particular friend, you know.”“Poor comfort!” said Emma, laughing. “One would rather have astranger preferred than one’s very particular friend—with astranger it might not recur again—but the misery of having a veryparticular friend always at hand, to do every thing better than one doesoneself!—Poor Mrs. Dixon! Well, I am glad she is gone to settle inIreland.”“You are right. It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell; but shereally did not seem to feel it.”“So much the better—or so much the worse:—I do not knowwhich. But be it sweetness or be it stupidity in her—quickness offriendship, or dulness of feeling—there was one person, I think, who musthave felt it: Miss Fairfax herself. She must have felt the improper anddangerous distinction.”“As to that—I do not—”“Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax’ssensations from you, or from any body else. They are known to no human being, Iguess, but herself. But if she continued to play whenever she was asked by Mr.Dixon, one may guess what one chuses.”“There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among themall—” he began rather quickly, but checking himself, added,“however, it is impossible for me to say on what terms they reallywere—how it might all be behind the scenes. I can only say that there wassmoothness outwardly. But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from a child, mustbe a better judge of her character, and of how she is likely to conduct herselfin critical situations, than I can be.”“I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children andwomen together; and it is natural to suppose that we should beintimate,—that we should have taken to each other whenever she visitedher friends. But we never did. I hardly know how it has happened; a little,perhaps, from that wickedness on my side which was prone to take disgusttowards a girl so idolized and so cried up as she always was, by her aunt andgrandmother, and all their set. And then, her reserve—I never couldattach myself to any one so completely reserved.”“It is a most repulsive quality, indeed,” said he.“Oftentimes very convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing. There issafety in reserve, but no attraction. One cannot love a reserved person.”“Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction maybe the greater. But I must be more in want of a friend, or an agreeablecompanion, than I have yet been, to take the trouble of conquering anybody’s reserve to procure one. Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me isquite out of the question. I have no reason to think ill of her—not theleast—except that such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word andmanner, such a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body, is apt tosuggest suspicions of there being something to conceal.”He perfectly agreed with her: and after walking together so long, and thinkingso much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him, that she couldhardly believe it to be only their second meeting. He was not exactly what shehad expected; less of the man of the world in some of his notions, less of thespoiled child of fortune, therefore better than she had expected. His ideasseemed more moderate—his feelings warmer. She was particularly struck byhis manner of considering Mr. Elton’s house, which, as well as thechurch, he would go and look at, and would not join them in finding much faultwith. No, he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house as a man was tobe pitied for having. If it were to be shared with the woman he loved, he couldnot think any man to be pitied for having that house. There must be ample roomin it for every real comfort. The man must be a blockhead who wanted more.Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking about. Usedonly to a large house himself, and without ever thinking how many advantagesand accommodations were attached to its size, he could be no judge of theprivations inevitably belonging to a small one. But Emma, in her own mind,determined that he did know what he was talking about, and that heshewed a very amiable inclination to settle early in life, and to marry, fromworthy motives. He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to beoccasioned by no housekeeper’s room, or a bad butler’s pantry, butno doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make him happy, and thatwhenever he were attached, he would willingly give up much of wealth to beallowed an early establishment.CHAPTER VIIEmma’s very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken thefollowing day, by hearing that he was gone off to London, merely to have hishair cut. A sudden freak seemed to have seized him at breakfast, and he hadsent for a chaise and set off, intending to return to dinner, but with no moreimportant view that appeared than having his hair cut. There was certainly noharm in his travelling sixteen miles twice over on such an errand; but therewas an air of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve. It didnot accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense, or even theunselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself to discern in himyesterday. Vanity, extravagance, love of change, restlessness of temper, whichmust be doing something, good or bad; heedlessness as to the pleasure of hisfather and Mrs. Weston, indifferent as to how his conduct might appear ingeneral; he became liable to all these charges. His father only called him acoxcomb, and thought it a very good story; but that Mrs. Weston did not likeit, was clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible, and makingno other comment than that “all young people would have their littlewhims.”With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit hitherto hadgiven her friend only good ideas of him. Mrs. Weston was very ready to say howattentive and pleasant a companion he made himself—how much she saw tolike in his disposition altogether. He appeared to have a very opentemper—certainly a very cheerful and lively one; she could observenothing wrong in his notions, a great deal decidedly right; he spoke of hisuncle with warm regard, was fond of talking of him—said he would be thebest man in the world if he were left to himself; and though there was no beingattached to the aunt, he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude, and seemedto mean always to speak of her with respect. This was all very promising; and,but for such an unfortunate fancy for having his hair cut, there was nothing todenote him unworthy of the distinguished honour which her imagination had givenhim; the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of being at leastvery near it, and saved only by her own indifference—(for still herresolution held of never marrying)—the honour, in short, of being markedout for her by all their joint acquaintance.Mr. Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which must have someweight. He gave her to understand that Frank admired herextremely—thought her very beautiful and very charming; and with so muchto be said for him altogether, she found she must not judge him harshly. AsMrs. Weston observed, “all young people would have their littlewhims.”There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so lenientlydisposed. In general he was judged, throughout the parishes of Donwell andHighbury, with great candour; liberal allowances were made for the littleexcesses of such a handsome young man—one who smiled so often and bowedso well; but there was one spirit among them not to be softened, from its powerof censure, by bows or smiles—Mr. Knightley. The circumstance was toldhim at Hartfield; for the moment, he was silent; but Emma heard him almostimmediately afterwards say to himself, over a newspaper he held in his hand,“Hum! just the trifling, silly fellow I took him for.” She had halfa mind to resent; but an instant’s observation convinced her that it wasreally said only to relieve his own feelings, and not meant to provoke; andtherefore she let it pass.Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings, Mr. and Mrs.Weston’s visit this morning was in another respect particularlyopportune. Something occurred while they were at Hartfield, to make Emma wanttheir advice; and, which was still more lucky, she wanted exactly the advicethey gave.This was the occurrence:—The Coles had been settled some years inHighbury, and were very good sort of people—friendly, liberal, andunpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin, in trade, andonly moderately genteel. On their first coming into the country, they had livedin proportion to their income, quietly, keeping little company, and that littleunexpensively; but the last year or two had brought them a considerableincrease of means—the house in town had yielded greater profits, andfortune in general had smiled on them. With their wealth, their viewsincreased; their want of a larger house, their inclination for more company.They added to their house, to their number of servants, to their expenses ofevery sort; and by this time were, in fortune and style of living, second onlyto the family at Hartfield. Their love of society, and their new dining-room,prepared every body for their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties,chiefly among the single men, had already taken place. The regular and bestfamilies Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite—neitherDonwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. Nothing should tempt her to go, ifthey did; and she regretted that her father’s known habits would begiving her refusal less meaning than she could wish. The Coles were veryrespectable in their way, but they ought to be taught that it was not for themto arrange the terms on which the superior families would visit them. Thislesson, she very much feared, they would receive only from herself; she hadlittle hope of Mr. Knightley, none of Mr. Weston.But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many weeks beforeit appeared, that when the insult came at last, it found her very differentlyaffected. Donwell and Randalls had received their invitation, and none had comefor her father and herself; and Mrs. Weston’s accounting for it with“I suppose they will not take the liberty with you; they know you do notdine out,” was not quite sufficient. She felt that she should like tohave had the power of refusal; and afterwards, as the idea of the party to beassembled there, consisting precisely of those whose society was dearest toher, occurred again and again, she did not know that she might not have beentempted to accept. Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the Bateses.They had been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before, andFrank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence. Might not the eveningend in a dance? had been a question of his. The bare possibility of it acted asa farther irritation on her spirits; and her being left in solitary grandeur,even supposing the omission to be intended as a compliment, was but poorcomfort.It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were at Hartfield,which made their presence so acceptable; for though her first remark, onreading it, was that “of course it must be declined,” she so verysoon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do, that their advice forher going was most prompt and successful.She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely withoutinclination for the party. The Coles expressed themselves soproperly—there was so much real attention in the manner of it—somuch consideration for her father. “They would have solicited the honourearlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen from London,which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught of air, andtherefore induce him the more readily to give them the honour of hiscompany.” Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and it being brieflysettled among themselves how it might be done without neglecting hiscomfort—how certainly Mrs. Goddard, if not Mrs. Bates, might be dependedon for bearing him company—Mr. Woodhouse was to be talked into anacquiescence of his daughter’s going out to dinner on a day now near athand, and spending the whole evening away from him. As for his going,Emma did not wish him to think it possible, the hours would be too late, andthe party too numerous. He was soon pretty well resigned.“I am not fond of dinner-visiting,” said he—“I neverwas. No more is Emma. Late hours do not agree with us. I am sorry Mr. and Mrs.Cole should have done it. I think it would be much better if they would come inone afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us—take us in theirafternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so reasonable, and yetget home without being out in the damp of the evening. The dews of a summerevening are what I would not expose any body to. However, as they are so verydesirous to have dear Emma dine with them, and as you will both be there, andMr. Knightley too, to take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, providedthe weather be what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy.” Thenturning to Mrs. Weston, with a look of gentle reproach—“Ah! MissTaylor, if you had not married, you would have staid at home with me.”“Well, sir,” cried Mr. Weston, “as I took Miss Taylor away,it is incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.Goddard in a moment, if you wish it.”But the idea of any thing to be done in a moment, was increasing, notlessening, Mr. Woodhouse’s agitation. The ladies knew better how to allayit. Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately arranged.With this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking asusual. “He should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. He had a great regard forMrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite her. James could takethe note. But first of all, there must be an answer written to Mrs.Cole.”“You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible. You will saythat I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must decline theirobliging invitation; beginning with my compliments, of course. But youwill do every thing right. I need not tell you what is to be done. We mustremember to let James know that the carriage will be wanted on Tuesday. I shallhave no fears for you with him. We have never been there above once since thenew approach was made; but still I have no doubt that James will take you verysafely. And when you get there, you must tell him at what time you would havehim come for you again; and you had better name an early hour. You will notlike staying late. You will get very tired when tea is over.”“But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?”“Oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. There will be a great manypeople talking at once. You will not like the noise.”“But, my dear sir,” cried Mr. Weston, “if Emma comes awayearly, it will be breaking up the party.”“And no great harm if it does,” said Mr. Woodhouse. “Thesooner every party breaks up, the better.”“But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. Emma’sgoing away directly after tea might be giving offence. They are good-naturedpeople, and think little of their own claims; but still they must feel that anybody’s hurrying away is no great compliment; and Miss Woodhouse’sdoing it would be more thought of than any other person’s in the room.You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I am sure, sir;friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who have been your neighboursthese ten years.”“No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I am much obliged to youfor reminding me. I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any pain. Iknow what worthy people they are. Perry tells me that Mr. Cole never touchesmalt liquor. You would not think it to look at him, but he is bilious—Mr.Cole is very bilious. No, I would not be the means of giving them any pain. Mydear Emma, we must consider this. I am sure, rather than run the risk ofhurting Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you would stay a little longer than you might wish.You will not regard being tired. You will be perfectly safe, you know, amongyour friends.”“Oh yes, papa. I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have noscruples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. I am onlyafraid of your sitting up for me. I am not afraid of your not being exceedinglycomfortable with Mrs. Goddard. She loves piquet, you know; but when she is gonehome, I am afraid you will be sitting up by yourself, instead of going to bedat your usual time—and the idea of that would entirely destroy mycomfort. You must promise me not to sit up.”He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that, if shecame home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if hungry, thatshe would take something to eat; that her own maid should sit up for her; andthat Serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house,as usual.CHAPTER VIIIFrank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father’s dinnerwaiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston was too anxious for hisbeing a favourite with Mr. Woodhouse, to betray any imperfection which could beconcealed.He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with a very goodgrace, but without seeming really at all ashamed of what he had done. He had noreason to wish his hair longer, to conceal any confusion of face; no reason towish the money unspent, to improve his spirits. He was quite as undaunted andas lively as ever; and, after seeing him, Emma thus moralised toherself:—“I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things docease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an impudent way.Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not always folly.—Itdepends upon the character of those who handle it. Mr. Knightley, he isnot a trifling, silly young man. If he were, he would have done thisdifferently. He would either have gloried in the achievement, or been ashamedof it. There would have been either the ostentation of a coxcomb, or theevasions of a mind too weak to defend its own vanities.—No, I amperfectly sure that he is not trifling or silly.”With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again, and for a longertime than hitherto; of judging of his general manners, and by inference, of themeaning of his manners towards herself; of guessing how soon it might benecessary for her to throw coldness into her air; and of fancying what theobservations of all those might be, who were now seeing them together for thefirst time.She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene being laid at Mr.Cole’s; and without being able to forget that among the failings of Mr.Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed her more than hispropensity to dine with Mr. Cole.Her father’s comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Bates as well as Mrs.Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty, before she left thehouse, was to pay her respects to them as they sat together after dinner; andwhile her father was fondly noticing the beauty of her dress, to make the twoladies all the amends in her power, by helping them to large slices of cake andfull glasses of wine, for whatever unwilling self-denial his care of theirconstitution might have obliged them to practise during the meal.—She hadprovided a plentiful dinner for them; she wished she could know that they hadbeen allowed to eat it.She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole’s door; and was pleased to seethat it was Mr. Knightley’s; for Mr. Knightley keeping no horses, havinglittle spare money and a great deal of health, activity, and independence, wastoo apt, in Emma’s opinion, to get about as he could, and not use hiscarriage so often as became the owner of Donwell Abbey. She had an opportunitynow of speaking her approbation while warm from her heart, for he stopped tohand her out.“This is coming as you should do,” said she; “like agentleman.—I am quite glad to see you.”He thanked her, observing, “How lucky that we should arrive at the samemoment! for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether you wouldhave discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.—You might nothave distinguished how I came, by my look or manner.”“Yes I should, I am sure I should. There is always a look ofconsciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know to be beneaththem. You think you carry it off very well, I dare say, but with you it is asort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern; I always observe it whenever Imeet you under those circumstances. Now you have nothing to try for. Youare not afraid of being supposed ashamed. You are not striving to look tallerthan any body else. Now I shall really be very happy to walk into thesame room with you.”“Nonsensical girl!” was his reply, but not at all in anger.Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party as with Mr.Knightley. She was received with a cordial respect which could not but please,and given all the consequence she could wish for. When the Westons arrived, thekindest looks of love, the strongest of admiration were for her, from bothhusband and wife; the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which markedher as his peculiar object, and at dinner she found him seated byher—and, as she firmly believed, not without some dexterity on his side.The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a properunobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage of namingamong their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Cox’s family, thelawyer of Highbury. The less worthy females were to come in the evening, withMiss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith; but already, at dinner, they were toonumerous for any subject of conversation to be general; and, while politics andMr. Elton were talked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her attention tothe pleasantness of her neighbour. The first remote sound to which she feltherself obliged to attend, was the name of Jane Fairfax. Mrs. Cole seemed to berelating something of her that was expected to be very interesting. Shelistened, and found it well worth listening to. That very dear part of Emma,her fancy, received an amusing supply. Mrs. Cole was telling that she had beencalling on Miss Bates, and as soon as she entered the room had been struck bythe sight of a pianoforte—a very elegant looking instrument—not agrand, but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the substance of the story, theend of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize, and inquiry, andcongratulations on her side, and explanations on Miss Bates’s, was, thatthis pianoforte had arrived from Broadwood’s the day before, to the greatastonishment of both aunt and niece—entirely unexpected; that at first,by Miss Bates’s account, Jane herself was quite at a loss, quitebewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it—but now, they wereboth perfectly satisfied that it could be from only one quarter;—ofcourse it must be from Colonel Campbell.“One can suppose nothing else,” added Mrs. Cole, “and I wasonly surprized that there could ever have been a doubt. But Jane, it seems, hada letter from them very lately, and not a word was said about it. She knowstheir ways best; but I should not consider their silence as any reason fortheir not meaning to make the present. They might chuse to surprize her.”Mrs. Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the subject wasequally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell, and equally rejoicedthat such a present had been made; and there were enough ready to speak toallow Emma to think her own way, and still listen to Mrs. Cole.“I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given memore satisfaction!—It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax, whoplays so delightfully, should not have an instrument. It seemed quite a shame,especially considering how many houses there are where fine instruments areabsolutely thrown away. This is like giving ourselves a slap, to be sure! andit was but yesterday I was telling Mr. Cole, I really was ashamed to look atour new grand pianoforte in the drawing-room, while I do not know one note fromanother, and our little girls, who are but just beginning, perhaps may nevermake any thing of it; and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music,has not any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest oldspinet in the world, to amuse herself with.—I was saying this to Mr. Colebut yesterday, and he quite agreed with me; only he is so particularly fond ofmusic that he could not help indulging himself in the purchase, hoping thatsome of our good neighbours might be so obliging occasionally to put it to abetter use than we can; and that really is the reason why the instrument wasbought—or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed of it.—We are ingreat hopes that Miss Woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it thisevening.”Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence; and finding that nothing more wasto be entrapped from any communication of Mrs. Cole’s, turned to FrankChurchill.“Why do you smile?” said she.“Nay, why do you?”“Me!—I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell’sbeing so rich and so liberal.—It is a handsome present.”“Very.”“I rather wonder that it was never made before.”“Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before.”“Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument—whichmust now be shut up in London, untouched by any body.”“That is a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large for Mrs.Bates’s house.”“You may say what you chuse—but your countenance testifiesthat your thoughts on this subject are very much like mine.”“I do not know. I rather believe you are giving me more credit foracuteness than I deserve. I smile because you smile, and shall probably suspectwhatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what there is toquestion. If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can be?”“What do you say to Mrs. Dixon?”“Mrs. Dixon! very true indeed. I had not thought of Mrs. Dixon. She mustknow as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument would be; and perhapsthe mode of it, the mystery, the surprize, is more like a young woman’sscheme than an elderly man’s. It is Mrs. Dixon, I dare say. I told youthat your suspicions would guide mine.”“If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend Mr. Dixonin them.”“Mr. Dixon.—Very well. Yes, I immediately perceive that it must bethe joint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon. We were speaking the other day, youknow, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance.”“Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I hadentertained before.—I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions ofeither Mr. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help suspecting either that,after making his proposals to her friend, he had the misfortune to fall in lovewith her, or that he became conscious of a little attachment on herside. One might guess twenty things without guessing exactly the right; but Iam sure there must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to Highburyinstead of going with the Campbells to Ireland. Here, she must be leading alife of privation and penance; there it would have been all enjoyment. As tothe pretence of trying her native air, I look upon that as a mereexcuse.—In the summer it might have passed; but what can any body’snative air do for them in the months of January, February, and March? Goodfires and carriages would be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicatehealth, and I dare say in her’s. I do not require you to adopt all mysuspicions, though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestlytell you what they are.”“And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. Mr.Dixon’s preference of her music to her friend’s, I can answer forbeing very decided.”“And then, he saved her life. Did you ever hear of that?—A waterparty; and by some accident she was falling overboard. He caught her.”“He did. I was there—one of the party.”“Were you really?—Well!—But you observed nothing of course,for it seems to be a new idea to you.—If I had been there, I think Ishould have made some discoveries.”“I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact, thatMiss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr. Dixon caughther.—It was the work of a moment. And though the consequent shock andalarm was very great and much more durable—indeed I believe it was halfan hour before any of us were comfortable again—yet that was too generala sensation for any thing of peculiar anxiety to be observable. I do not meanto say, however, that you might not have made discoveries.”The conversation was here interrupted. They were called on to share in theawkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses, and obliged to be asformal and as orderly as the others; but when the table was again safelycovered, when every corner dish was placed exactly right, and occupation andease were generally restored, Emma said,“The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me. I wanted to know alittle more, and this tells me quite enough. Depend upon it, we shall soon hearthat it is a present from Mr. and Mrs. Dixon.”“And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we mustconclude it to come from the Campbells.”“No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. Miss Fairfax knows it is notfrom the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first. She would nothave been puzzled, had she dared fix on them. I may not have convinced youperhaps, but I am perfectly convinced myself that Mr. Dixon is a principal inthe business.”“Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced. Your reasoningscarry my judgment along with them entirely. At first, while I supposed yousatisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw it only as paternalkindness, and thought it the most natural thing in the world. But when youmentioned Mrs. Dixon, I felt how much more probable that it should be thetribute of warm female friendship. And now I can see it in no other light thanas an offering of love.”There was no occasion to press the matter farther. The conviction seemed real;he looked as if he felt it. She said no more, other subjects took their turn;and the rest of the dinner passed away; the dessert succeeded, the childrencame in, and were talked to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation; afew clever things said, a few downright silly, but by much the largerproportion neither the one nor the other—nothing worse than everydayremarks, dull repetitions, old news, and heavy jokes.The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other ladies, intheir different divisions, arrived. Emma watched the entree of her ownparticular little friend; and if she could not exult in her dignity and grace,she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the artless manner, butcould most heartily rejoice in that light, cheerful, unsentimental dispositionwhich allowed her so many alleviations of pleasure, in the midst of the pangsof disappointed affection. There she sat—and who would have guessed howmany tears she had been lately shedding? To be in company, nicely dressedherself and seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty, andsay nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. Jane Fairfax didlook and move superior; but Emma suspected she might have been glad to changefeelings with Harriet, very glad to have purchased the mortification of havingloved—yes, of having loved even Mr. Elton in vain—by the surrenderof all the dangerous pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of herfriend.In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her. She didnot wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much in the secret herself,to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair, and therefore purposelykept at a distance; but by the others, the subject was almost immediatelyintroduced, and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulationswere received, the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of “myexcellent friend Colonel Campbell.”Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interested by thecircumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance indwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone,touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little aboutit as possible, which she plainly read in the fair heroine’s countenance.They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very first of the earlywas Frank Churchill. In he walked, the first and the handsomest; and afterpaying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and her niece, made his waydirectly to the opposite side of the circle, where sat Miss Woodhouse; and tillhe could find a seat by her, would not sit at all. Emma divined what every bodypresent must be thinking. She was his object, and every body must perceive it.She introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient momentsafterwards, heard what each thought of the other. “He had never seen solovely a face, and was delighted with her naïveté.” And she, “Onlyto be sure it was paying him too great a compliment, but she did think therewere some looks a little like Mr. Elton.” Emma restrained herindignation, and only turned from her in silence.Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first glancingtowards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech. He told her thathe had been impatient to leave the dining-room—hated sittinglong—was always the first to move when he could—that his father,Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left very busy over parishbusiness—that as long as he had staid, however, it had been pleasantenough, as he had found them in general a set of gentlemanlike, sensible men;and spoke so handsomely of Highbury altogether—thought it so abundant inagreeable families—that Emma began to feel she had been used to despisethe place rather too much. She questioned him as to the society inYorkshire—the extent of the neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort;and could make out from his answers that, as far as Enscombe was concerned,there was very little going on, that their visitings were among a range ofgreat families, none very near; and that even when days were fixed, andinvitations accepted, it was an even chance that Mrs. Churchill were not inhealth and spirits for going; that they made a point of visiting no freshperson; and that, though he had his separate engagements, it was not withoutdifficulty, without considerable address at times, that he couldget away, or introduce an acquaintance for a night.She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury, taken at its best,might reasonably please a young man who had more retirement at home than heliked. His importance at Enscombe was very evident. He did not boast, but itnaturally betrayed itself, that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle coulddo nothing, and on her laughing and noticing it, he owned that he believed(excepting one or two points) he could with time persuade her toany thing. One of those points on which his influence failed, he thenmentioned. He had wanted very much to go abroad—had been very eagerindeed to be allowed to travel—but she would not hear of it. This hadhappened the year before. Now, he said, he was beginning to have nolonger the same wish.The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to be goodbehaviour to his father.“I have made a most wretched discovery,” said he, after a shortpause.— “I have been here a week to-morrow—half my time. Inever knew days fly so fast. A week to-morrow!—And I have hardly begun toenjoy myself. But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!—Ihate the recollection.”“Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, out ofso few, in having your hair cut.”“No,” said he, smiling, “that is no subject of regret at all.I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to beseen.”The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself obliged toturn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole. When Mr. Cole hadmoved away, and her attention could be restored as before, she saw FrankChurchill looking intently across the room at Miss Fairfax, who was sittingexactly opposite.“What is the matter?” said she.He started. “Thank you for rousing me,” he replied. “Ibelieve I have been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair in soodd a way—so very odd a way—that I cannot keep my eyes from her. Inever saw any thing so outrée!—Those curls!—This must be a fancy ofher own. I see nobody else looking like her!—I must go and ask herwhether it is an Irish fashion. Shall I?—Yes, I will—I declare Iwill—and you shall see how she takes it;—whether shecolours.”He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss Fairfax,and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady, as he hadimprovidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in front of MissFairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston.“This is the luxury of a large party,” said she:—“onecan get near every body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I am longing totalk to you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just likeyourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you know how MissBates and her niece came here?”“How?—They were invited, were not they?”“Oh! yes—but how they were conveyed hither?—the manner oftheir coming?”“They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?”“Very true.—Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sadit would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night, and cold asthe nights are now. And as I looked at her, though I never saw her appear tomore advantage, it struck me that she was heated, and would therefore beparticularly liable to take cold. Poor girl! I could not bear the idea of it;so, as soon as Mr. Weston came into the room, and I could get at him, I spoketo him about the carriage. You may guess how readily he came into my wishes;and having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure herthat the carriage would be at her service before it took us home; for I thoughtit would be making her comfortable at once. Good soul! she was as grateful aspossible, you may be sure. ‘Nobody was ever so fortunate asherself!’—but with many, many thanks—‘there was nooccasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley’s carriage had brought, and wasto take them home again.’ I was quite surprized;—very glad, I amsure; but really quite surprized. Such a very kind attention—and sothoughtful an attention!—the sort of thing that so few men would thinkof. And, in short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined tothink that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all. I dosuspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself, and that it wasonly as an excuse for assisting them.”“Very likely,” said Emma—“nothing more likely. I knowno man more likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing—to do anything really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not agallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering JaneFairfax’s ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;—andfor an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on morethan on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day—for we arrivedtogether; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word that couldbetray.”“Well,” said Mrs. Weston, smiling, “you give him credit formore simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for whileMiss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have never beenable to get it out again. The more I think of it, the more probable it appears.In short, I have made a match between Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax. See theconsequence of keeping you company!—What do you say to it?”“Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!” exclaimed Emma. “Dear Mrs.Weston, how could you think of such a thing?—Mr. Knightley!—Mr.Knightley must not marry!—You would not have little Henry cut out fromDonwell?—Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all consent toMr. Knightley’s marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. I amamazed that you should think of such a thing.”“My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. I do not wantthe match—I do not want to injure dear little Henry—but the ideahas been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley really wished tomarry, you would not have him refrain on Henry’s account, a boy of sixyears old, who knows nothing of the matter?”“Yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.—Mr.Knightley marry!—No, I have never had such an idea, and I cannot adopt itnow. And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!”“Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you very wellknow.”“But the imprudence of such a match!”“I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability.”“I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation thanwhat you mention. His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you, would be quiteenough to account for the horses. He has a great regard for the Bateses, youknow, independent of Jane Fairfax—and is always glad to shew themattention. My dear Mrs. Weston, do not take to match-making. You do it veryill. Jane Fairfax mistress of the Abbey!—Oh! no, no;—every feelingrevolts. For his own sake, I would not have him do so mad a thing.”“Imprudent, if you please—but not mad. Excepting inequality offortune, and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothingunsuitable.”“But Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. I am sure he has not the leastidea of it. Do not put it into his head. Why should he marry?—He is ashappy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep, and his library,and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely fond of his brother’schildren. He has no occasion to marry, either to fill up his time or hisheart.”“My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really lovesJane Fairfax—”“Nonsense! He does not care about Jane Fairfax. In the way of love, I amsure he does not. He would do any good to her, or her family; but—”“Well,” said Mrs. Weston, laughing, “perhaps the greatestgood he could do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home.”“If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself; avery shameful and degrading connexion. How would he bear to have Miss Batesbelonging to him?—To have her haunting the Abbey, and thanking him allday long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?—‘So very kind andobliging!—But he always had been such a very kind neighbour!’ Andthen fly off, through half a sentence, to her mother’s old petticoat.‘Not that it was such a very old petticoat either—for still itwould last a great while—and, indeed, she must thankfully say that theirpetticoats were all very strong.’”“For shame, Emma! Do not mimic her. You divert me against my conscience.And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would be much disturbed by MissBates. Little things do not irritate him. She might talk on; and if he wantedto say any thing himself, he would only talk louder, and drown her voice. Butthe question is not, whether it would be a bad connexion for him, but whetherhe wishes it; and I think he does. I have heard him speak, and so must you, sovery highly of Jane Fairfax! The interest he takes in her—his anxietyabout her health—his concern that she should have no happier prospect! Ihave heard him express himself so warmly on those points!—Such an admirerof her performance on the pianoforte, and of her voice! I have heard him saythat he could listen to her for ever. Oh! and I had almost forgotten one ideathat occurred to me—this pianoforte that has been sent here bysomebody—though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it apresent from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr. Knightley? I cannot helpsuspecting him. I think he is just the person to do it, even without being inlove.”“Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love. But I do notthink it is at all a likely thing for him to do. Mr. Knightley does nothingmysteriously.”“I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly; oftenerthan I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common course ofthings, occur to him.”“Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have toldher so.”“There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma. I have a very strongnotion that it comes from him. I am sure he was particularly silent when Mrs.Cole told us of it at dinner.”“You take up an idea, Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you have manya time reproached me with doing. I see no sign of attachment—I believenothing of the pianoforte—and proof only shall convince me that Mr.Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax.”They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather gainingground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Weston was the most used of thetwo to yield; till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over,and the instrument in preparation;—and at the same moment Mr. Coleapproaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it.Frank Churchill, of whom, in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs.Weston, she had been seeing nothing, except that he had found a seat by MissFairfax, followed Mr. Cole, to add his very pressing entreaties; and as, inevery respect, it suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very proper compliance.She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt more than shecould perform with credit; she wanted neither taste nor spirit in the littlethings which are generally acceptable, and could accompany her own voice well.One accompaniment to her song took her agreeably by surprize—a second,slightly but correctly taken by Frank Churchill. Her pardon was duly begged atthe close of the song, and every thing usual followed. He was accused of havinga delightful voice, and a perfect knowledge of music; which was properlydenied; and that he knew nothing of the matter, and had no voice at all,roundly asserted. They sang together once more; and Emma would then resign herplace to Miss Fairfax, whose performance, both vocal and instrumental, shenever could attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior to herown.With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the numbersround the instrument, to listen. Frank Churchill sang again. They had sungtogether once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. But the sight of Mr.Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew away half Emma’s mind; andshe fell into a train of thinking on the subject of Mrs. Weston’ssuspicions, to which the sweet sounds of the united voices gave only momentaryinterruptions. Her objections to Mr. Knightley’s marrying did not in theleast subside. She could see nothing but evil in it. It would be a greatdisappointment to Mr. John Knightley; consequently to Isabella. A real injuryto the children—a most mortifying change, and material loss to themall;—a very great deduction from her father’s dailycomfort—and, as to herself, she could not at all endure the idea of JaneFairfax at Donwell Abbey. A Mrs. Knightley for them all to give wayto!—No—Mr. Knightley must never marry. Little Henry must remain theheir of Donwell.Presently Mr. Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her. They talkedat first only of the performance. His admiration was certainly very warm; yetshe thought, but for Mrs. Weston, it would not have struck her. As a sort oftouchstone, however, she began to speak of his kindness in conveying the auntand niece; and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short,she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any kindness ofhis own.“I often feel concern,” said she, “that I dare not make ourcarriage more useful on such occasions. It is not that I am without the wish;but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James should put-tofor such a purpose.”“Quite out of the question, quite out of the question,” hereplied;—“but you must often wish it, I am sure.” And hesmiled with such seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceedanother step.“This present from the Campbells,” said she—“thispianoforte is very kindly given.”“Yes,” he replied, and without the smallest apparentembarrassment.—“But they would have done better had they given hernotice of it. Surprizes are foolish things. The pleasure is not enhanced, andthe inconvenience is often considerable. I should have expected better judgmentin Colonel Campbell.”From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr. Knightley had had noconcern in giving the instrument. But whether he were entirely free frompeculiar attachment—whether there were no actualpreference—remained a little longer doubtful. Towards the end ofJane’s second song, her voice grew thick.“That will do,” said he, when it was finished, thinkingaloud—“you have sung quite enough for one evening—now bequiet.”Another song, however, was soon begged for. “One more;—they wouldnot fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for onemore.” And Frank Churchill was heard to say, “I think you couldmanage this without effort; the first part is so very trifling. The strength ofthe song falls on the second.”Mr. Knightley grew angry.“That fellow,” said he, indignantly, “thinks of nothing butshewing off his own voice. This must not be.” And touching Miss Bates,who at that moment passed near—“Miss Bates, are you mad, to letyour niece sing herself hoarse in this manner? Go, and interfere. They have nomercy on her.”Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even to begrateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all farther singing. Hereceased the concert part of the evening, for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfaxwere the only young lady performers; but soon (within five minutes) theproposal of dancing—originating nobody exactly knew where—was soeffectually promoted by Mr. and Mrs. Cole, that every thing was rapidlyclearing away, to give proper space. Mrs. Weston, capital in hercountry-dances, was seated, and beginning an irresistible waltz; and FrankChurchill, coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma, had secured herhand, and led her up to the top.While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off, Emma foundtime, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her voice and her taste,to look about, and see what became of Mr. Knightley. This would be a trial. Hewas no dancer in general. If he were to be very alert in engaging Jane Fairfaxnow, it might augur something. There was no immediate appearance. No; he wastalking to Mrs. Cole—he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked bysomebody else, and he was still talking to Mrs. Cole.Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe; and she ledoff the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. Not more than five couplecould be mustered; but the rarity and the suddenness of it made it verydelightful, and she found herself well matched in a partner. They were a coupleworth looking at.Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed. It was growing late,and Miss Bates became anxious to get home, on her mother’s account. Aftersome attempts, therefore, to be permitted to begin again, they were obliged tothank Mrs. Weston, look sorrowful, and have done.“Perhaps it is as well,” said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emmato her carriage. “I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid dancingwould not have agreed with me, after yours.”CHAPTER IXEmma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles. The visit affordedher many pleasant recollections the next day; and all that she might besupposed to have lost on the side of dignified seclusion, must be amply repaidin the splendour of popularity. She must have delighted the Coles—worthypeople, who deserved to be made happy!—And left a name behind her thatwould not soon die away.Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were two points onwhich she was not quite easy. She doubted whether she had not transgressed theduty of woman by woman, in betraying her suspicions of Jane Fairfax’sfeelings to Frank Churchill. It was hardly right; but it had been so strong anidea, that it would escape her, and his submission to all that she told, was acompliment to her penetration, which made it difficult for her to be quitecertain that she ought to have held her tongue.The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax; and there shehad no doubt. She did unfeignedly and unequivocally regret the inferiority ofher own playing and singing. She did most heartily grieve over the idleness ofher childhood—and sat down and practised vigorously an hour and a half.She was then interrupted by Harriet’s coming in; and if Harriet’spraise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted.“Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!”“Don’t class us together, Harriet. My playing is no more likeher’s, than a lamp is like sunshine.”“Oh! dear—I think you play the best of the two. I think you playquite as well as she does. I am sure I had much rather hear you. Every bodylast night said how well you played.”“Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference. Thetruth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised, but JaneFairfax’s is much beyond it.”“Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does, orthat if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out. Mr. Cole saidhow much taste you had; and Mr. Frank Churchill talked a great deal about yourtaste, and that he valued taste much more than execution.”“Ah! but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet.”“Are you sure? I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had anytaste. Nobody talked about it. And I hate Italian singing.—There is nounderstanding a word of it. Besides, if she does play so very well, you know,it is no more than she is obliged to do, because she will have to teach. TheCoxes were wondering last night whether she would get into any great family.How did you think the Coxes looked?”“Just as they always do—very vulgar.”“They told me something,” said Harriet rather hesitatingly;“but it is nothing of any consequence.”Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful of its producingMr. Elton.“They told me—that Mr. Martin dined with them last Saturday.”“Oh!”“He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him to stay todinner.”“Oh!”“They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox. I do not knowwhat she meant, but she asked me if I thought I should go and stay there againnext summer.”“She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox shouldbe.”“She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there. He sat by her atdinner. Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would be very glad to marryhim.”“Very likely.—I think they are, without exception, the most vulgargirls in Highbury.”Harriet had business at Ford’s.—Emma thought it most prudent to gowith her. Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible, and in herpresent state, would be dangerous.Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was always very longat a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins and changing hermind, Emma went to the door for amusement.—Much could not be hoped fromthe traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;—Mr. Perry walkinghastily by, Mr. William Cox letting himself in at the office-door, Mr.Cole’s carriage-horses returning from exercise, or a stray letter-boy onan obstinate mule, were the liveliest objects she could presume to expect; andwhen her eyes fell only on the butcher with his tray, a tidy old womantravelling homewards from shop with her full basket, two curs quarrelling overa dirty bone, and a string of dawdling children round the baker’s littlebow-window eyeing the gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain, andwas amused enough; quite enough still to stand at the door. A mind lively andat ease, can do with seeing nothing, and can see nothing that does not answer.She looked down the Randalls road. The scene enlarged; two persons appeared;Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they were walking into Highbury;—toHartfield of course. They were stopping, however, in the first place at Mrs.Bates’s; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford’s; andhad all but knocked, when Emma caught their eye.—Immediately they crossedthe road and came forward to her; and the agreeableness of yesterday’sengagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting. Mrs. Westoninformed her that she was going to call on the Bateses, in order to hear thenew instrument.“For my companion tells me,” said she, “that I absolutelypromised Miss Bates last night, that I would come this morning. I was not awareof it myself. I did not know that I had fixed a day, but as he says I did, I amgoing now.”“And while Mrs. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope,”said Frank Churchill, “to join your party and wait for her atHartfield—if you are going home.”Mrs. Weston was disappointed.“I thought you meant to go with me. They would be very muchpleased.”“Me! I should be quite in the way. But, perhaps—I may be equally inthe way here. Miss Woodhouse looks as if she did not want me. My aunt alwayssends me off when she is shopping. She says I fidget her to death; and MissWoodhouse looks as if she could almost say the same. What am I to do?”“I am here on no business of my own,” said Emma; “I am onlywaiting for my friend. She will probably have soon done, and then we shall gohome. But you had better go with Mrs. Weston and hear the instrument.”“Well—if you advise it.—But (with a smile) if ColonelCampbell should have employed a careless friend, and if it should prove to havean indifferent tone—what shall I say? I shall be no support to Mrs.Weston. She might do very well by herself. A disagreeable truth would bepalatable through her lips, but I am the wretchedest being in the world at acivil falsehood.”“I do not believe any such thing,” replied Emma.—“I ampersuaded that you can be as insincere as your neighbours, when it isnecessary; but there is no reason to suppose the instrument is indifferent.Quite otherwise indeed, if I understood Miss Fairfax’s opinion lastnight.”“Do come with me,” said Mrs. Weston, “if it be not verydisagreeable to you. It need not detain us long. We will go to Hartfieldafterwards. We will follow them to Hartfield. I really wish you to call withme. It will be felt so great an attention! and I always thought you meantit.”He could say no more; and with the hope of Hartfield to reward him, returnedwith Mrs. Weston to Mrs. Bates’s door. Emma watched them in, and thenjoined Harriet at the interesting counter,—trying, with all the force ofher own mind, to convince her that if she wanted plain muslin it was of no useto look at figured; and that a blue ribbon, be it ever so beautiful, wouldstill never match her yellow pattern. At last it was all settled, even to thedestination of the parcel.“Should I send it to Mrs. Goddard’s, ma’am?” asked Mrs.Ford.—“Yes—no—yes, to Mrs. Goddard’s. Only mypattern gown is at Hartfield. No, you shall send it to Hartfield, if youplease. But then, Mrs. Goddard will want to see it.—And I could take thepattern gown home any day. But I shall want the ribbon directly—so it hadbetter go to Hartfield—at least the ribbon. You could make it into twoparcels, Mrs. Ford, could not you?”“It is not worth while, Harriet, to give Mrs. Ford the trouble of twoparcels.”“No more it is.”“No trouble in the world, ma’am,” said the obliging Mrs.Ford.“Oh! but indeed I would much rather have it only in one. Then, if youplease, you shall send it all to Mrs. Goddard’s—I do notknow—No, I think, Miss Woodhouse, I may just as well have it sent toHartfield, and take it home with me at night. What do you advise?”“That you do not give another half-second to the subject. To Hartfield,if you please, Mrs. Ford.”“Aye, that will be much best,” said Harriet, quite satisfied,“I should not at all like to have it sent to Mrs. Goddard’s.”Voices approached the shop—or rather one voice and two ladies: Mrs.Weston and Miss Bates met them at the door.“My dear Miss Woodhouse,” said the latter, “I am just runacross to entreat the favour of you to come and sit down with us a littlewhile, and give us your opinion of our new instrument; you and Miss Smith. Howdo you do, Miss Smith?—Very well I thank you.—And I begged Mrs.Weston to come with me, that I might be sure of succeeding.”“I hope Mrs. Bates and Miss Fairfax are—”“Very well, I am much obliged to you. My mother is delightfully well; andJane caught no cold last night. How is Mr. Woodhouse?—I am so glad tohear such a good account. Mrs. Weston told me you were here.—Oh! then,said I, I must run across, I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to runacross and entreat her to come in; my mother will be so very happy to seeher—and now we are such a nice party, she cannotrefuse.—‘Aye, pray do,’ said Mr. Frank Churchill, ‘MissWoodhouse’s opinion of the instrument will be worthhaving.’—But, said I, I shall be more sure of succeeding if one ofyou will go with me.—‘Oh,’ said he, ‘wait half aminute, till I have finished my job;’—For, would you believe it,Miss Woodhouse, there he is, in the most obliging manner in the world,fastening in the rivet of my mother’s spectacles.—The rivet cameout, you know, this morning.—So very obliging!—For my mother had nouse of her spectacles—could not put them on. And, by the bye, every bodyought to have two pair of spectacles; they should indeed. Jane said so. I meantto take them over to John Saunders the first thing I did, but something orother hindered me all the morning; first one thing, then another, there is nosaying what, you know. At one time Patty came to say she thought the kitchenchimney wanted sweeping. Oh, said I, Patty do not come with your bad news tome. Here is the rivet of your mistress’s spectacles out. Then the bakedapples came home, Mrs. Wallis sent them by her boy; they are extremely civiland obliging to us, the Wallises, always—I have heard some people saythat Mrs. Wallis can be uncivil and give a very rude answer, but we have neverknown any thing but the greatest attention from them. And it cannot be for thevalue of our custom now, for what is our consumption of bread, you know? Onlythree of us.—besides dear Jane at present—and she really eatsnothing—makes such a shocking breakfast, you would be quite frightened ifyou saw it. I dare not let my mother know how little she eats—so I sayone thing and then I say another, and it passes off. But about the middle ofthe day she gets hungry, and there is nothing she likes so well as these bakedapples, and they are extremely wholesome, for I took the opportunity the otherday of asking Mr. Perry; I happened to meet him in the street. Not that I hadany doubt before—I have so often heard Mr. Woodhouse recommend a bakedapple. I believe it is the only way that Mr. Woodhouse thinks the fruitthoroughly wholesome. We have apple-dumplings, however, very often. Patty makesan excellent apple-dumpling. Well, Mrs. Weston, you have prevailed, I hope, andthese ladies will oblige us.”Emma would be “very happy to wait on Mrs. Bates, &c.,” and theydid at last move out of the shop, with no farther delay from Miss Bates than,“How do you do, Mrs. Ford? I beg your pardon. I did not see you before. Ihear you have a charming collection of new ribbons from town. Jane came backdelighted yesterday. Thank ye, the gloves do very well—only a little toolarge about the wrist; but Jane is taking them in.”“What was I talking of?” said she, beginning again when they wereall in the street.Emma wondered on what, of all the medley, she would fix.“I declare I cannot recollect what I was talking of.—Oh! mymother’s spectacles. So very obliging of Mr. Frank Churchill!‘Oh!’ said he, ‘I do think I can fasten the rivet; I like ajob of this kind excessively.’—Which you know shewed him to be sovery.... Indeed I must say that, much as I had heard of him before and much asI had expected, he very far exceeds any thing.... I do congratulate you, Mrs.Weston, most warmly. He seems every thing the fondest parent could....‘Oh!’ said he, ‘I can fasten the rivet. I like a job of thatsort excessively.’ I never shall forget his manner. And when I broughtout the baked apples from the closet, and hoped our friends would be so veryobliging as to take some, ‘Oh!’ said he directly, ‘there isnothing in the way of fruit half so good, and these are the finest-lookinghome-baked apples I ever saw in my life.’ That, you know, was so very....And I am sure, by his manner, it was no compliment. Indeed they are verydelightful apples, and Mrs. Wallis does them full justice—only we do nothave them baked more than twice, and Mr. Woodhouse made us promise to have themdone three times—but Miss Woodhouse will be so good as not to mention it.The apples themselves are the very finest sort for baking, beyond a doubt; allfrom Donwell—some of Mr. Knightley’s most liberal supply. He sendsus a sack every year; and certainly there never was such a keeping appleanywhere as one of his trees—I believe there is two of them. My mothersays the orchard was always famous in her younger days. But I was really quiteshocked the other day—for Mr. Knightley called one morning, and Jane waseating these apples, and we talked about them and said how much she enjoyedthem, and he asked whether we were not got to the end of our stock. ‘I amsure you must be,’ said he, ‘and I will send you another supply;for I have a great many more than I can ever use. William Larkins let me keep alarger quantity than usual this year. I will send you some more, before theyget good for nothing.’ So I begged he would not—for really as toours being gone, I could not absolutely say that we had a great manyleft—it was but half a dozen indeed; but they should be all kept forJane; and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more, so liberalas he had been already; and Jane said the same. And when he was gone, shealmost quarrelled with me—No, I should not say quarrelled, for we neverhad a quarrel in our lives; but she was quite distressed that I had owned theapples were so nearly gone; she wished I had made him believe we had a greatmany left. Oh, said I, my dear, I did say as much as I could. However, the verysame evening William Larkins came over with a large basket of apples, the samesort of apples, a bushel at least, and I was very much obliged, and went downand spoke to William Larkins and said every thing, as you may suppose. WilliamLarkins is such an old acquaintance! I am always glad to see him. But, however,I found afterwards from Patty, that William said it was all the apples ofthat sort his master had; he had brought them all—and now hismaster had not one left to bake or boil. William did not seem to mind ithimself, he was so pleased to think his master had sold so many; for William,you know, thinks more of his master’s profit than any thing; but Mrs.Hodges, he said, was quite displeased at their being all sent away. She couldnot bear that her master should not be able to have another apple-tart thisspring. He told Patty this, but bid her not mind it, and be sure not to say anything to us about it, for Mrs. Hodges would be cross sometimes, and aslong as so many sacks were sold, it did not signify who ate the remainder. Andso Patty told me, and I was excessively shocked indeed! I would not have Mr.Knightley know any thing about it for the world! He would be so very.... Iwanted to keep it from Jane’s knowledge; but, unluckily, I had mentionedit before I was aware.”Miss Bates had just done as Patty opened the door; and her visitors walkedupstairs without having any regular narration to attend to, pursued only by thesounds of her desultory good-will.“Pray take care, Mrs. Weston, there is a step at the turning. Pray takecare, Miss Woodhouse, ours is rather a dark staircase—rather darker andnarrower than one could wish. Miss Smith, pray take care. Miss Woodhouse, I amquite concerned, I am sure you hit your foot. Miss Smith, the step at theturning.”CHAPTER XThe appearance of the little sitting-room as they entered, was tranquillityitself; Mrs. Bates, deprived of her usual employment, slumbering on one side ofthe fire, Frank Churchill, at a table near her, most deedily occupied about herspectacles, and Jane Fairfax, standing with her back to them, intent on herpianoforte.Busy as he was, however, the young man was yet able to shew a most happycountenance on seeing Emma again.“This is a pleasure,” said he, in rather a low voice, “comingat least ten minutes earlier than I had calculated. You find me trying to beuseful; tell me if you think I shall succeed.”“What!” said Mrs. Weston, “have not you finished it yet? youwould not earn a very good livelihood as a working silversmith at thisrate.”“I have not been working uninterruptedly,” he replied, “Ihave been assisting Miss Fairfax in trying to make her instrument standsteadily, it was not quite firm; an unevenness in the floor, I believe. You seewe have been wedging one leg with paper. This was very kind of you to bepersuaded to come. I was almost afraid you would be hurrying home.”He contrived that she should be seated by him; and was sufficiently employed inlooking out the best baked apple for her, and trying to make her help or advisehim in his work, till Jane Fairfax was quite ready to sit down to thepianoforte again. That she was not immediately ready, Emma did suspect to arisefrom the state of her nerves; she had not yet possessed the instrument longenough to touch it without emotion; she must reason herself into the power ofperformance; and Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their origin,and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again.At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given, the powers ofthe instrument were gradually done full justice to. Mrs. Weston had beendelighted before, and was delighted again; Emma joined her in all her praise;and the pianoforte, with every proper discrimination, was pronounced to bealtogether of the highest promise.“Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ,” said Frank Churchill, witha smile at Emma, “the person has not chosen ill. I heard a good deal ofColonel Campbell’s taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the upper notesI am sure is exactly what he and all that party wouldparticularly prize. I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave his friendvery minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself. Do not you thinkso?”Jane did not look round. She was not obliged to hear. Mrs. Weston had beenspeaking to her at the same moment.“It is not fair,” said Emma, in a whisper; “mine was a randomguess. Do not distress her.”He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little doubt andvery little mercy. Soon afterwards he began again,“How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on thisoccasion, Miss Fairfax. I dare say they often think of you, and wonder whichwill be the day, the precise day of the instrument’s coming to hand. Doyou imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to be going forward just atthis time?—Do you imagine it to be the consequence of an immediatecommission from him, or that he may have sent only a general direction, anorder indefinite as to time, to depend upon contingencies andconveniences?”He paused. She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,“Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell,” said she, in a voiceof forced calmness, “I can imagine nothing with any confidence. It mustbe all conjecture.”“Conjecture—aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes oneconjectures wrong. I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make this rivetquite firm. What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when hard at work, if onetalks at all;—your real workmen, I suppose, hold their tongues; but wegentlemen labourers if we get hold of a word—Miss Fairfax said somethingabout conjecturing. There, it is done. I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs.Bates,) of restoring your spectacles, healed for the present.”He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a little fromthe latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged Miss Fairfax, who was stillsitting at it, to play something more.“If you are very kind,” said he, “it will be one of thewaltzes we danced last night;—let me live them over again. You did notenjoy them as I did; you appeared tired the whole time. I believe you were gladwe danced no longer; but I would have given worlds—all the worlds oneever has to give—for another half-hour.”She played.“What felicity it is to hear a tune again which has made onehappy!—If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth.”She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played something else.He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte, and turning to Emma, said,“Here is something quite new to me. Do you knowit?—Cramer.—And here are a new set of Irish melodies. That, fromsuch a quarter, one might expect. This was all sent with the instrument. Verythoughtful of Colonel Campbell, was not it?—He knew Miss Fairfax couldhave no music here. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shewsit to have been so thoroughly from the heart. Nothing hastily done; nothingincomplete. True affection only could have prompted it.”Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused; and whenon glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the remains of a smile,when she saw that with all the deep blush of consciousness, there had been asmile of secret delight, she had less scruple in the amusement, and much lesscompunction with respect to her.—This amiable, upright, perfect JaneFairfax was apparently cherishing very reprehensible feelings.He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.—Emmatook the opportunity of whispering,“You speak too plain. She must understand you.”“I hope she does. I would have her understand me. I am not in the leastashamed of my meaning.”“But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up theidea.”“I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. I have now akey to all her odd looks and ways. Leave shame to her. If she does wrong, sheought to feel it.”“She is not entirely without it, I think.”“I do not see much sign of it. She is playing Robin Adairat this moment—his favourite.”Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr. Knightleyon horse-back not far off.“Mr. Knightley I declare!—I must speak to him if possible, just tothank him. I will not open the window here; it would give you all cold; but Ican go into my mother’s room you know. I dare say he will come in when heknows who is here. Quite delightful to have you all meet so!—Our littleroom so honoured!”She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening thecasement there, immediately called Mr. Knightley’s attention, and everysyllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others, as if ithad passed within the same apartment.“How d’ ye do?—how d’ye do?—Very well, I thankyou. So obliged to you for the carriage last night. We were just in time; mymother just ready for us. Pray come in; do come in. You will find some friendshere.”So began Miss Bates; and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard in histurn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,“How is your niece, Miss Bates?—I want to inquire after you all,but particularly your niece. How is Miss Fairfax?—I hope she caught nocold last night. How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss Fairfax is.”And Miss Bates was obliged to give a direct answer before he would hear her inany thing else. The listeners were amused; and Mrs. Weston gave Emma a look ofparticular meaning. But Emma still shook her head in steady scepticism.“So obliged to you!—so very much obliged to you for thecarriage,” resumed Miss Bates.He cut her short with,“I am going to Kingston. Can I do any thing for you?”“Oh! dear, Kingston—are you?—Mrs. Cole was saying the otherday she wanted something from Kingston.”“Mrs. Cole has servants to send. Can I do any thing foryou?”“No, I thank you. But do come in. Who do you think is here?—MissWoodhouse and Miss Smith; so kind as to call to hear the new pianoforte. Do putup your horse at the Crown, and come in.”“Well,” said he, in a deliberating manner, “for five minutes,perhaps.”“And here is Mrs. Weston and Mr. Frank Churchill too!—Quitedelightful; so many friends!”“No, not now, I thank you. I could not stay two minutes. I must get on toKingston as fast as I can.”“Oh! do come in. They will be so very happy to see you.”“No, no; your room is full enough. I will call another day, and hear thepianoforte.”“Well, I am so sorry!—Oh! Mr. Knightley, what a delightful partylast night; how extremely pleasant.—Did you ever see suchdancing?—Was not it delightful?—Miss Woodhouse and Mr. FrankChurchill; I never saw any thing equal to it.”“Oh! very delightful indeed; I can say nothing less, for I suppose MissWoodhouse and Mr. Frank Churchill are hearing every thing that passes. And(raising his voice still more) I do not see why Miss Fairfax should not bementioned too. I think Miss Fairfax dances very well; and Mrs. Weston is thevery best country-dance player, without exception, in England. Now, if yourfriends have any gratitude, they will say something pretty loud about you andme in return; but I cannot stay to hear it.”“Oh! Mr. Knightley, one moment more; something of consequence—soshocked!—Jane and I are both so shocked about the apples!”“What is the matter now?”“To think of your sending us all your store apples. You said you had agreat many, and now you have not one left. We really are so shocked! Mrs.Hodges may well be angry. William Larkins mentioned it here. You should nothave done it, indeed you should not. Ah! he is off. He never can bear to bethanked. But I thought he would have staid now, and it would have been a pitynot to have mentioned.... Well, (returning to the room,) I have not been ableto succeed. Mr. Knightley cannot stop. He is going to Kingston. He asked me ifhe could do any thing....”“Yes,” said Jane, “we heard his kind offers, we heard everything.”“Oh! yes, my dear, I dare say you might, because you know, the door wasopen, and the window was open, and Mr. Knightley spoke loud. You must haveheard every thing to be sure. ‘Can I do any thing for you atKingston?’ said he; so I just mentioned.... Oh! Miss Woodhouse, must yoube going?—You seem but just come—so very obliging of you.”Emma found it really time to be at home; the visit had already lasted long; andon examining watches, so much of the morning was perceived to be gone, thatMrs. Weston and her companion taking leave also, could allow themselves only towalk with the two young ladies to Hartfield gates, before they set off forRandalls.CHAPTER XIIt may be possible to do without dancing entirely. Instances have been known ofyoung people passing many, many months successively, without being at any ballof any description, and no material injury accrue either to body ormind;—but when a beginning is made—when the felicities of rapidmotion have once been, though slightly, felt—it must be a very heavy setthat does not ask for more.Frank Churchill had danced once at Highbury, and longed to dance again; and thelast half-hour of an evening which Mr. Woodhouse was persuaded to spend withhis daughter at Randalls, was passed by the two young people in schemes on thesubject. Frank’s was the first idea; and his the greatest zeal inpursuing it; for the lady was the best judge of the difficulties, and the mostsolicitous for accommodation and appearance. But still she had inclinationenough for shewing people again how delightfully Mr. Frank Churchill and MissWoodhouse danced—for doing that in which she need not blush to compareherself with Jane Fairfax—and even for simple dancing itself, without anyof the wicked aids of vanity—to assist him first in pacing out the roomthey were in to see what it could be made to hold—and then in taking thedimensions of the other parlour, in the hope of discovering, in spite of allthat Mr. Weston could say of their exactly equal size, that it was a little thelargest.His first proposition and request, that the dance begun at Mr. Cole’sshould be finished there—that the same party should be collected, and thesame musician engaged, met with the readiest acquiescence. Mr. Weston enteredinto the idea with thorough enjoyment, and Mrs. Weston most willingly undertookto play as long as they could wish to dance; and the interesting employment hadfollowed, of reckoning up exactly who there would be, and portioning out theindispensable division of space to every couple.“You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax, will be three, and the two MissCoxes five,” had been repeated many times over. “And there will bethe two Gilberts, young Cox, my father, and myself, besides Mr. Knightley. Yes,that will be quite enough for pleasure. You and Miss Smith, and Miss Fairfax,will be three, and the two Miss Coxes five; and for five couple there will beplenty of room.”But soon it came to be on one side,“But will there be good room for five couple?—I really do not thinkthere will.”On another,“And after all, five couple are not enough to make it worth while tostand up. Five couple are nothing, when one thinks seriously about it. It willnot do to invite five couple. It can be allowable only as the thought ofthe moment.”Somebody said that Miss Gilbert was expected at her brother’s, andmust be invited with the rest. Somebody else believed Mrs. Gilbert wouldhave danced the other evening, if she had been asked. A word was put in for asecond young Cox; and at last, Mr. Weston naming one family of cousins who mustbe included, and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out, itbecame a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten, and a veryinteresting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of.The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. “Might not theyuse both rooms, and dance across the passage?” It seemed the best scheme;and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a better. Emma said itwould be awkward; Mrs. Weston was in distress about the supper; and Mr.Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score of health. It made him so veryunhappy, indeed, that it could not be persevered in.“Oh! no,” said he; “it would be the extreme of imprudence. Icould not bear it for Emma!—Emma is not strong. She would catch adreadful cold. So would poor little Harriet. So you would all. Mrs. Weston, youwould be quite laid up; do not let them talk of such a wild thing. Pray do notlet them talk of it. That young man (speaking lower) is very thoughtless. Donot tell his father, but that young man is not quite the thing. He has beenopening the doors very often this evening, and keeping them open veryinconsiderately. He does not think of the draught. I do not mean to set youagainst him, but indeed he is not quite the thing!”Mrs. Weston was sorry for such a charge. She knew the importance of it, andsaid every thing in her power to do it away. Every door was now closed, thepassage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing only in the room theywere in resorted to again; and with such good-will on Frank Churchill’spart, that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barelysufficient for five couple, was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough forten.“We were too magnificent,” said he. “We allowed unnecessaryroom. Ten couple may stand here very well.”Emma demurred. “It would be a crowd—a sad crowd; and what could beworse than dancing without space to turn in?”“Very true,” he gravely replied; “it was very bad.” Butstill he went on measuring, and still he ended with,“I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple.”“No, no,” said she, “you are quite unreasonable. It would bedreadful to be standing so close! Nothing can be farther from pleasure than tobe dancing in a crowd—and a crowd in a little room!”“There is no denying it,” he replied. “I agree with youexactly. A crowd in a little room—Miss Woodhouse, you have the art ofgiving pictures in a few words. Exquisite, quite exquisite!—Still,however, having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up. Itwould be a disappointment to my father—and altogether—I do not knowthat—I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here verywell.”Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little self-willed, andthat he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of dancing with her; but shetook the compliment, and forgave the rest. Had she intended ever tomarry him, it might have been worth while to pause and consider, and tryto understand the value of his preference, and the character of his temper; butfor all the purposes of their acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered the roomwith such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of the scheme. Itsoon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” he almost immediately began, “yourinclination for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by theterrors of my father’s little rooms. I bring a new proposal on thesubject:—a thought of my father’s, which waits only yourapprobation to be acted upon. May I hope for the honour of your hand for thetwo first dances of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls,but at the Crown Inn?”“The Crown!”“Yes; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you cannot,my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him there. Betteraccommodations, he can promise them, and not a less grateful welcome than atRandalls. It is his own idea. Mrs. Weston sees no objection to it, provided youare satisfied. This is what we all feel. Oh! you were perfectly right! Tencouple, in either of the Randalls rooms, would have beeninsufferable!—Dreadful!—I felt how right you were the whole time,but was too anxious for securing any thing to like to yield. Isnot it a good exchange?—You consent—I hope you consent?”“It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and Mrs.Weston do not. I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for myself,shall be most happy—It seems the only improvement that could be. Papa, doyou not think it an excellent improvement?”She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully comprehended; andthen, being quite new, farther representations were necessary to make itacceptable.“No; he thought it very far from an improvement—a very badplan—much worse than the other. A room at an inn was always damp anddangerous; never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. If they must dance,they had better dance at Randalls. He had never been in the room at the Crownin his life—did not know the people who kept it by sight.—Oh!no—a very bad plan. They would catch worse colds at the Crown thananywhere.”“I was going to observe, sir,” said Frank Churchill, “thatone of the great recommendations of this change would be the very little dangerof any body’s catching cold—so much less danger at the Crown thanat Randalls! Mr. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, but nobodyelse could.”“Sir,” said Mr. Woodhouse, rather warmly, “you are very muchmistaken if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. Mr. Perry isextremely concerned when any of us are ill. But I do not understand how theroom at the Crown can be safer for you than your father’s house.”“From the very circumstance of its being larger, sir. We shall have nooccasion to open the windows at all—not once the whole evening; and it isthat dreadful habit of opening the windows, letting in cold air upon heatedbodies, which (as you well know, sir) does the mischief.”“Open the windows!—but surely, Mr. Churchill, nobody would think ofopening the windows at Randalls. Nobody could be so imprudent! I never heard ofsuch a thing. Dancing with open windows!—I am sure, neither your fathernor Mrs. Weston (poor Miss Taylor that was) would suffer it.”“Ah! sir—but a thoughtless young person will sometimes step behinda window-curtain, and throw up a sash, without its being suspected. I haveoften known it done myself.”“Have you indeed, sir?—Bless me! I never could have supposed it.But I live out of the world, and am often astonished at what I hear. However,this does make a difference; and, perhaps, when we come to talk itover—but these sort of things require a good deal of consideration. Onecannot resolve upon them in a hurry. If Mr. and Mrs. Weston will be so obligingas to call here one morning, we may talk it over, and see what can bedone.”“But, unfortunately, sir, my time is so limited—”“Oh!” interrupted Emma, “there will be plenty of time fortalking every thing over. There is no hurry at all. If it can be contrived tobe at the Crown, papa, it will be very convenient for the horses. They will beso near their own stable.”“So they will, my dear. That is a great thing. Not that James evercomplains; but it is right to spare our horses when we can. If I could be sureof the rooms being thoroughly aired—but is Mrs. Stokes to be trusted? Idoubt it. I do not know her, even by sight.”“I can answer for every thing of that nature, sir, because it will beunder Mrs. Weston’s care. Mrs. Weston undertakes to direct thewhole.”“There, papa!—Now you must be satisfied—Our own dear Mrs.Weston, who is carefulness itself. Do not you remember what Mr. Perry said, somany years ago, when I had the measles? ‘If Miss Taylorundertakes to wrap Miss Emma up, you need not have any fears, sir.’ Howoften have I heard you speak of it as such a compliment to her!”“Aye, very true. Mr. Perry did say so. I shall never forget it. Poorlittle Emma! You were very bad with the measles; that is, you would have beenvery bad, but for Perry’s great attention. He came four times a day for aweek. He said, from the first, it was a very good sort—which was ourgreat comfort; but the measles are a dreadful complaint. I hope whenever poorIsabella’s little ones have the measles, she will send for Perry.”“My father and Mrs. Weston are at the Crown at this moment,” saidFrank Churchill, “examining the capabilities of the house. I left themthere and came on to Hartfield, impatient for your opinion, and hoping youmight be persuaded to join them and give your advice on the spot. I was desiredto say so from both. It would be the greatest pleasure to them, if you couldallow me to attend you there. They can do nothing satisfactorily withoutyou.”Emma was most happy to be called to such a council; and her father, engaging tothink it all over while she was gone, the two young people set off togetherwithout delay for the Crown. There were Mr. and Mrs. Weston; delighted to seeher and receive her approbation, very busy and very happy in their differentway; she, in some little distress; and he, finding every thing perfect.“Emma,” said she, “this paper is worse than I expected. Look!in places you see it is dreadfully dirty; and the wainscot is more yellow andforlorn than any thing I could have imagined.”“My dear, you are too particular,” said her husband. “Whatdoes all that signify? You will see nothing of it by candlelight. It will be asclean as Randalls by candlelight. We never see any thing of it on ourclub-nights.”The ladies here probably exchanged looks which meant, “Men never knowwhen things are dirty or not;” and the gentlemen perhaps thought each tohimself, “Women will have their little nonsenses and needlesscares.”One perplexity, however, arose, which the gentlemen did not disdain. Itregarded a supper-room. At the time of the ballroom’s being built,suppers had not been in question; and a small card-room adjoining, was the onlyaddition. What was to be done? This card-room would be wanted as a card-roomnow; or, if cards were conveniently voted unnecessary by their four selves,still was it not too small for any comfortable supper? Another room of muchbetter size might be secured for the purpose; but it was at the other end ofthe house, and a long awkward passage must be gone through to get at it. Thismade a difficulty. Mrs. Weston was afraid of draughts for the young people inthat passage; and neither Emma nor the gentlemen could tolerate the prospect ofbeing miserably crowded at supper.Mrs. Weston proposed having no regular supper; merely sandwiches, &c., setout in the little room; but that was scouted as a wretched suggestion. Aprivate dance, without sitting down to supper, was pronounced an infamous fraudupon the rights of men and women; and Mrs. Weston must not speak of it again.She then took another line of expediency, and looking into the doubtful room,observed,“I do not think it is so very small. We shall not be many, youknow.”And Mr. Weston at the same time, walking briskly with long steps through thepassage, was calling out,“You talk a great deal of the length of this passage, my dear. It is amere nothing after all; and not the least draught from the stairs.”“I wish,” said Mrs. Weston, “one could know which arrangementour guests in general would like best. To do what would be most generallypleasing must be our object—if one could but tell what that wouldbe.”“Yes, very true,” cried Frank, “very true. You want yourneighbours’ opinions. I do not wonder at you. If one could ascertain whatthe chief of them—the Coles, for instance. They are not far off. Shall Icall upon them? Or Miss Bates? She is still nearer.—And I do not knowwhether Miss Bates is not as likely to understand the inclinations of the restof the people as any body. I think we do want a larger council. Suppose I goand invite Miss Bates to join us?”“Well—if you please,” said Mrs. Weston rather hesitating,“if you think she will be of any use.”“You will get nothing to the purpose from Miss Bates,” said Emma.“She will be all delight and gratitude, but she will tell you nothing.She will not even listen to your questions. I see no advantage in consultingMiss Bates.”“But she is so amusing, so extremely amusing! I am very fond of hearingMiss Bates talk. And I need not bring the whole family, you know.”Here Mr. Weston joined them, and on hearing what was proposed, gave it hisdecided approbation.“Aye, do, Frank.—Go and fetch Miss Bates, and let us end the matterat once. She will enjoy the scheme, I am sure; and I do not know a propererperson for shewing us how to do away difficulties. Fetch Miss Bates. We aregrowing a little too nice. She is a standing lesson of how to be happy. Butfetch them both. Invite them both.”“Both sir! Can the old lady?”...“The old lady! No, the young lady, to be sure. I shall think you a greatblockhead, Frank, if you bring the aunt without the niece.”“Oh! I beg your pardon, sir. I did not immediately recollect. Undoubtedlyif you wish it, I will endeavour to persuade them both.” And away he ran.Long before he reappeared, attending the short, neat, brisk-moving aunt, andher elegant niece,—Mrs. Weston, like a sweet-tempered woman and a goodwife, had examined the passage again, and found the evils of it much less thanshe had supposed before—indeed very trifling; and here ended thedifficulties of decision. All the rest, in speculation at least, was perfectlysmooth. All the minor arrangements of table and chair, lights and music, teaand supper, made themselves; or were left as mere trifles to be settled at anytime between Mrs. Weston and Mrs. Stokes.—Every body invited, wascertainly to come; Frank had already written to Enscombe to propose staying afew days beyond his fortnight, which could not possibly be refused. And adelightful dance it was to be.Most cordially, when Miss Bates arrived, did she agree that it must. As acounsellor she was not wanted; but as an approver, (a much safer character,)she was truly welcome. Her approbation, at once general and minute, warm andincessant, could not but please; and for another half-hour they were allwalking to and fro, between the different rooms, some suggesting, someattending, and all in happy enjoyment of the future. The party did not break upwithout Emma’s being positively secured for the two first dances by thehero of the evening, nor without her overhearing Mr. Weston whisper to hiswife, “He has asked her, my dear. That’s right. I knew hewould!”CHAPTER XIIOne thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completelysatisfactory to Emma—its being fixed for a day within the granted term ofFrank Churchill’s stay in Surry; for, in spite of Mr. Weston’sconfidence, she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills mightnot allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight. But this was notjudged feasible. The preparations must take their time, nothing could beproperly ready till the third week were entered on, and for a few days theymust be planning, proceeding and hoping in uncertainty—at therisk—in her opinion, the great risk, of its being all in vain.Enscombe however was gracious, gracious in fact, if not in word. His wish ofstaying longer evidently did not please; but it was not opposed. All was safeand prosperous; and as the removal of one solicitude generally makes way foranother, Emma, being now certain of her ball, began to adopt as the nextvexation Mr. Knightley’s provoking indifference about it. Either becausehe did not dance himself, or because the plan had been formed without his beingconsulted, he seemed resolved that it should not interest him, determinedagainst its exciting any present curiosity, or affording him any futureamusement. To her voluntary communications Emma could get no more approvingreply, than,“Very well. If the Westons think it worth while to be at all this troublefor a few hours of noisy entertainment, I have nothing to say against it, butthat they shall not chuse pleasures for me.—Oh! yes, I must be there; Icould not refuse; and I will keep as much awake as I can; but I would rather beat home, looking over William Larkins’s week’s account; muchrather, I confess.—Pleasure in seeing dancing!—not I,indeed—I never look at it—I do not know who does.—Finedancing, I believe, like virtue, must be its own reward. Those who are standingby are usually thinking of something very different.”This Emma felt was aimed at her; and it made her quite angry. It was not incompliment to Jane Fairfax however that he was so indifferent, or so indignant;he was not guided by her feelings in reprobating the ball, forshe enjoyed the thought of it to an extraordinary degree. It made heranimated—open hearted—she voluntarily said;—“Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I hope nothing may happen to prevent the ball. Whata disappointment it would be! I do look forward to it, I own, with verygreat pleasure.”It was not to oblige Jane Fairfax therefore that he would have preferred thesociety of William Larkins. No!—she was more and more convinced that Mrs.Weston was quite mistaken in that surmise. There was a great deal of friendlyand of compassionate attachment on his side—but no love.Alas! there was soon no leisure for quarrelling with Mr. Knightley. Two days ofjoyful security were immediately followed by the over-throw of every thing. Aletter arrived from Mr. Churchill to urge his nephew’s instant return.Mrs. Churchill was unwell—far too unwell to do without him; she had beenin a very suffering state (so said her husband) when writing to her nephew twodays before, though from her usual unwillingness to give pain, and constanthabit of never thinking of herself, she had not mentioned it; but now she wastoo ill to trifle, and must entreat him to set off for Enscombe without delay.The substance of this letter was forwarded to Emma, in a note from Mrs. Weston,instantly. As to his going, it was inevitable. He must be gone within a fewhours, though without feeling any real alarm for his aunt, to lessen hisrepugnance. He knew her illnesses; they never occurred but for her ownconvenience.Mrs. Weston added, “that he could only allow himself time to hurry toHighbury, after breakfast, and take leave of the few friends there whom hecould suppose to feel any interest in him; and that he might be expected atHartfield very soon.”This wretched note was the finale of Emma’s breakfast. When once it hadbeen read, there was no doing any thing, but lament and exclaim. The loss ofthe ball—the loss of the young man—and all that the young man mightbe feeling!—It was too wretched!—Such a delightful evening as itwould have been!—Every body so happy! and she and her partner thehappiest!—“I said it would be so,” was the only consolation.Her father’s feelings were quite distinct. He thought principally of Mrs.Churchill’s illness, and wanted to know how she was treated; and as forthe ball, it was shocking to have dear Emma disappointed; but they would all besafer at home.Emma was ready for her visitor some time before he appeared; but if thisreflected at all upon his impatience, his sorrowful look and total want ofspirits when he did come might redeem him. He felt the going away almost toomuch to speak of it. His dejection was most evident. He sat really lost inthought for the first few minutes; and when rousing himself, it was only tosay,“Of all horrid things, leave-taking is the worst.”“But you will come again,” said Emma. “This will not be youronly visit to Randalls.”“Ah!—(shaking his head)—the uncertainty of when I may be ableto return!—I shall try for it with a zeal!—It will be the object ofall my thoughts and cares!—and if my uncle and aunt go to town thisspring—but I am afraid—they did not stir last spring—I amafraid it is a custom gone for ever.”“Our poor ball must be quite given up.”“Ah! that ball!—why did we wait for any thing?—why not seizethe pleasure at once?—How often is happiness destroyed by preparation,foolish preparation!—You told us it would be so.—Oh! MissWoodhouse, why are you always so right?”“Indeed, I am very sorry to be right in this instance. I would muchrather have been merry than wise.”“If I can come again, we are still to have our ball. My father depends onit. Do not forget your engagement.”Emma looked graciously.“Such a fortnight as it has been!” he continued; “every daymore precious and more delightful than the day before!—every day makingme less fit to bear any other place. Happy those, who can remain atHighbury!”“As you do us such ample justice now,” said Emma, laughing,“I will venture to ask, whether you did not come a little doubtfully atfirst? Do not we rather surpass your expectations? I am sure we do. I am sureyou did not much expect to like us. You would not have been so long in coming,if you had had a pleasant idea of Highbury.”He laughed rather consciously; and though denying the sentiment, Emma wasconvinced that it had been so.“And you must be off this very morning?”“Yes; my father is to join me here: we shall walk back together, and Imust be off immediately. I am almost afraid that every moment will bringhim.”“Not five minutes to spare even for your friends Miss Fairfax and MissBates? How unlucky! Miss Bates’s powerful, argumentative mind might havestrengthened yours.”“Yes—I have called there; passing the door, I thought itbetter. It was a right thing to do. I went in for three minutes, and wasdetained by Miss Bates’s being absent. She was out; and I felt itimpossible not to wait till she came in. She is a woman that one may, that onemust laugh at; but that one would not wish to slight. It was better topay my visit, then”—He hesitated, got up, walked to a window.“In short,” said he, “perhaps, Miss Woodhouse—I thinkyou can hardly be quite without suspicion”—He looked at her, as if wanting to read her thoughts. She hardly knew what tosay. It seemed like the forerunner of something absolutely serious, which shedid not wish. Forcing herself to speak, therefore, in the hope of putting itby, she calmly said,“You are quite in the right; it was most natural to pay your visit,then”—He was silent. She believed he was looking at her; probably reflecting on whatshe had said, and trying to understand the manner. She heard him sigh. It wasnatural for him to feel that he had cause to sigh. He could not believeher to be encouraging him. A few awkward moments passed, and he sat down again;and in a more determined manner said,“It was something to feel that all the rest of my time might be given toHartfield. My regard for Hartfield is most warm”—He stopt again, rose again, and seemed quite embarrassed.—He was more inlove with her than Emma had supposed; and who can say how it might have ended,if his father had not made his appearance? Mr. Woodhouse soon followed; and thenecessity of exertion made him composed.A very few minutes more, however, completed the present trial. Mr. Weston,always alert when business was to be done, and as incapable of procrastinatingany evil that was inevitable, as of foreseeing any that was doubtful, said,“It was time to go;” and the young man, though he might and didsigh, could not but agree, to take leave.“I shall hear about you all,” said he; “that is my chiefconsolation. I shall hear of every thing that is going on among you. I haveengaged Mrs. Weston to correspond with me. She has been so kind as to promiseit. Oh! the blessing of a female correspondent, when one is really interestedin the absent!—she will tell me every thing. In her letters I shall be atdear Highbury again.”A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest “Good-bye,”closed the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short hadbeen the notice—short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so sorryto part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from his absenceas to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it too much.It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost every day since his arrival.Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the last twoweeks—indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of seeing him whichevery morning had brought, the assurance of his attentions, his liveliness, hismanners! It had been a very happy fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinkingfrom it into the common course of Hartfield days. To complete every otherrecommendation, he had almost told her that he loved her. What strength,or what constancy of affection he might be subject to, was another point; butat present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration, aconscious preference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all the rest,made her think that she must be a little in love with him, in spite ofevery previous determination against it.“I certainly must,” said she. “This sensation oflistlessness, weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employmyself, this feeling of every thing’s being dull and insipid about thehouse!— I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the worldif I were not—for a few weeks at least. Well! evil to some is always goodto others. I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball, if not for FrankChurchill; but Mr. Knightley will be happy. He may spend the evening with hisdear William Larkins now if he likes.”Mr. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness. He could not say thathe was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would have contradictedhim if he had; but he said, and very steadily, that he was sorry for thedisappointment of the others, and with considerable kindness added,“You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really outof luck; you are very much out of luck!”It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honest regret inthis woeful change; but when they did meet, her composure was odious. She hadbeen particularly unwell, however, suffering from headache to a degree, whichmade her aunt declare, that had the ball taken place, she did not think Janecould have attended it; and it was charity to impute some of her unbecomingindifference to the languor of ill-health.CHAPTER XIIIEmma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love. Her ideas onlyvaried as to the how much. At first, she thought it was a good deal; andafterwards, but little. She had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchilltalked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr. and Mrs.Weston; she was very often thinking of him, and quite impatient for a letter,that she might know how he was, how were his spirits, how was his aunt, andwhat was the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring. But, on theother hand, she could not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the firstmorning, to be less disposed for employment than usual; she was still busy andcheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have faults;and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat drawing orworking, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress and close of theirattachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and inventing elegant letters; theconclusion of every imaginary declaration on his side was that sherefused him. Their affection was always to subside intofriendship. Every thing tender and charming was to mark their parting; butstill they were to part. When she became sensible of this, it struck her thatshe could not be very much in love; for in spite of her previous and fixeddetermination never to quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachmentcertainly must produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her ownfeelings.“I do not find myself making any use of the word sacrifice,”said she.—“In not one of all my clever replies, my delicatenegatives, is there any allusion to making a sacrifice. I do suspect that he isnot really necessary to my happiness. So much the better. I certainly will notpersuade myself to feel more than I do. I am quite enough in love. I should besorry to be more.”Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his feelings.“He is undoubtedly very much in love—every thing denotesit—very much in love indeed!—and when he comes again, if hisaffection continue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.—It wouldbe most inexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up. Not thatI imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. No, if he hadbelieved me at all to share his feelings, he would not have been so wretched.Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks and language at partingwould have been different.—Still, however, I must be on my guard. This isin the supposition of his attachment continuing what it now is; but I do notknow that I expect it will; I do not look upon him to be quite the sort ofman—I do not altogether build upon his steadiness or constancy.—Hisfeelings are warm, but I can imagine them rather changeable.—Everyconsideration of the subject, in short, makes me thankful that my happiness isnot more deeply involved.—I shall do very well again after a littlewhile—and then, it will be a good thing over; for they say every body isin love once in their lives, and I shall have been let off easily.”When his letter to Mrs. Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and sheread it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at first shakeher head over her own sensations, and think she had undervalued their strength.It was a long, well-written letter, giving the particulars of his journey andof his feelings, expressing all the affection, gratitude, and respect which wasnatural and honourable, and describing every thing exterior and local thatcould be supposed attractive, with spirit and precision. No suspiciousflourishes now of apology or concern; it was the language of real feelingtowards Mrs. Weston; and the transition from Highbury to Enscombe, the contrastbetween the places in some of the first blessings of social life was justenough touched on to shew how keenly it was felt, and how much more might havebeen said but for the restraints of propriety.—The charm of her own namewas not wanting. Miss Woodhouse appeared more than once, andnever without a something of pleasing connexion, either a compliment to hertaste, or a remembrance of what she had said; and in the very last time of itsmeeting her eye, unadorned as it was by any such broad wreath of gallantry, sheyet could discern the effect of her influence and acknowledge the greatestcompliment perhaps of all conveyed. Compressed into the very lowest vacantcorner were these words—“I had not a spare moment on Tuesday, asyou know, for Miss Woodhouse’s beautiful little friend. Pray make myexcuses and adieus to her.” This, Emma could not doubt, was all forherself. Harriet was remembered only from being her friend. Hisinformation and prospects as to Enscombe were neither worse nor better than hadbeen anticipated; Mrs. Churchill was recovering, and he dared not yet, even inhis own imagination, fix a time for coming to Randalls again.Gratifying, however, and stimulative as was the letter in the material part,its sentiments, she yet found, when it was folded up and returned to Mrs.Weston, that it had not added any lasting warmth, that she could still dowithout the writer, and that he must learn to do without her. Her intentionswere unchanged. Her resolution of refusal only grew more interesting by theaddition of a scheme for his subsequent consolation and happiness. Hisrecollection of Harriet, and the words which clothed it, the “beautifullittle friend,” suggested to her the idea of Harriet’s succeedingher in his affections. Was it impossible?—No.—Harriet undoubtedlywas greatly his inferior in understanding; but he had been very much struckwith the loveliness of her face and the warm simplicity of her manner; and allthe probabilities of circumstance and connexion were in her favour.—ForHarriet, it would be advantageous and delightful indeed.“I must not dwell upon it,” said she.—“I must not thinkof it. I know the danger of indulging such speculations. But stranger thingshave happened; and when we cease to care for each other as we do now, it willbe the means of confirming us in that sort of true disinterested friendshipwhich I can already look forward to with pleasure.”It was well to have a comfort in store on Harriet’s behalf, though itmight be wise to let the fancy touch it seldom; for evil in that quarter was athand. As Frank Churchill’s arrival had succeeded Mr. Elton’sengagement in the conversation of Highbury, as the latest interest had entirelyborne down the first, so now upon Frank Churchill’s disappearance, Mr.Elton’s concerns were assuming the most irresistible form.—Hiswedding-day was named. He would soon be among them again; Mr. Elton and hisbride. There was hardly time to talk over the first letter from Enscombe before“Mr. Elton and his bride” was in every body’s mouth, andFrank Churchill was forgotten. Emma grew sick at the sound. She had had threeweeks of happy exemption from Mr. Elton; and Harriet’s mind, she had beenwilling to hope, had been lately gaining strength. With Mr. Weston’s ballin view at least, there had been a great deal of insensibility to other things;but it was now too evident that she had not attained such a state of composureas could stand against the actual approach—new carriage, bell-ringing,and all.Poor Harriet was in a flutter of spirits which required all the reasonings andsoothings and attentions of every kind that Emma could give. Emma felt that shecould not do too much for her, that Harriet had a right to all her ingenuityand all her patience; but it was heavy work to be for ever convincing withoutproducing any effect, for ever agreed to, without being able to make theiropinions the same. Harriet listened submissively, and said “it was verytrue—it was just as Miss Woodhouse described—it was not worth whileto think about them—and she would not think about them any longer”but no change of subject could avail, and the next half-hour saw her as anxiousand restless about the Eltons as before. At last Emma attacked her on anotherground.“Your allowing yourself to be so occupied and so unhappy about Mr.Elton’s marrying, Harriet, is the strongest reproach you can makeme. You could not give me a greater reproof for the mistake I fell into.It was all my doing, I know. I have not forgotten it, I assureyou.—Deceived myself, I did very miserably deceive you—and it willbe a painful reflection to me for ever. Do not imagine me in danger offorgetting it.”Harriet felt this too much to utter more than a few words of eager exclamation.Emma continued,“I have not said, exert yourself Harriet for my sake; think less, talkless of Mr. Elton for my sake; because for your own sake rather, I would wishit to be done, for the sake of what is more important than my comfort, a habitof self-command in you, a consideration of what is your duty, an attention topropriety, an endeavour to avoid the suspicions of others, to save your healthand credit, and restore your tranquillity. These are the motives which I havebeen pressing on you. They are very important—and sorry I am that youcannot feel them sufficiently to act upon them. My being saved from pain is avery secondary consideration. I want you to save yourself from greater pain.Perhaps I may sometimes have felt that Harriet would not forget what wasdue—or rather what would be kind by me.”This appeal to her affections did more than all the rest. The idea of wantinggratitude and consideration for Miss Woodhouse, whom she really lovedextremely, made her wretched for a while, and when the violence of grief wascomforted away, still remained powerful enough to prompt to what was right andsupport her in it very tolerably.“You, who have been the best friend I ever had in my life—Wantgratitude to you!—Nobody is equal to you!—I care for nobody as I dofor you!—Oh! Miss Woodhouse, how ungrateful I have been!”Such expressions, assisted as they were by every thing that look and mannercould do, made Emma feel that she had never loved Harriet so well, nor valuedher affection so highly before.“There is no charm equal to tenderness of heart,” said sheafterwards to herself. “There is nothing to be compared to it. Warmth andtenderness of heart, with an affectionate, open manner, will beat all theclearness of head in the world, for attraction, I am sure it will. It istenderness of heart which makes my dear father so generally beloved—whichgives Isabella all her popularity.—I have it not—but I know how toprize and respect it.—Harriet is my superior in all the charm and all thefelicity it gives. Dear Harriet!—I would not change you for theclearest-headed, longest-sighted, best-judging female breathing. Oh! thecoldness of a Jane Fairfax!—Harriet is worth a hundred such—And fora wife—a sensible man’s wife—it is invaluable. I mention nonames; but happy the man who changes Emma for Harriet!”CHAPTER XIVMrs. Elton was first seen at church: but though devotion might be interrupted,curiosity could not be satisfied by a bride in a pew, and it must be left forthe visits in form which were then to be paid, to settle whether she were verypretty indeed, or only rather pretty, or not pretty at all.Emma had feelings, less of curiosity than of pride or propriety, to make herresolve on not being the last to pay her respects; and she made a point ofHarriet’s going with her, that the worst of the business might be gonethrough as soon as possible.She could not enter the house again, could not be in the same room to which shehad with such vain artifice retreated three months ago, to lace up her boot,without recollecting. A thousand vexatious thoughts would recur.Compliments, charades, and horrible blunders; and it was not to be supposedthat poor Harriet should not be recollecting too; but she behaved very well,and was only rather pale and silent. The visit was of course short; and therewas so much embarrassment and occupation of mind to shorten it, that Emma wouldnot allow herself entirely to form an opinion of the lady, and on no account togive one, beyond the nothing-meaning terms of being “elegantly dressed,and very pleasing.”She did not really like her. She would not be in a hurry to find fault, but shesuspected that there was no elegance;—ease, but not elegance.— Shewas almost sure that for a young woman, a stranger, a bride, there was too muchease. Her person was rather good; her face not unpretty; but neither feature,nor air, nor voice, nor manner, were elegant. Emma thought at least it wouldturn out so.As for Mr. Elton, his manners did not appear—but no, she would not permita hasty or a witty word from herself about his manners. It was an awkwardceremony at any time to be receiving wedding visits, and a man had need be allgrace to acquit himself well through it. The woman was better off; she mighthave the assistance of fine clothes, and the privilege of bashfulness, but theman had only his own good sense to depend on; and when she considered howpeculiarly unlucky poor Mr. Elton was in being in the same room at once withthe woman he had just married, the woman he had wanted to marry, and the womanwhom he had been expected to marry, she must allow him to have the right tolook as little wise, and to be as much affectedly, and as little really easy ascould be.“Well, Miss Woodhouse,” said Harriet, when they had quitted thehouse, and after waiting in vain for her friend to begin; “Well, MissWoodhouse, (with a gentle sigh,) what do you think of her?—Is not shevery charming?”There was a little hesitation in Emma’s answer.“Oh! yes—very—a very pleasing young woman.”“I think her beautiful, quite beautiful.”“Very nicely dressed, indeed; a remarkably elegant gown.”“I am not at all surprized that he should have fallen in love.”“Oh! no—there is nothing to surprize one at all.—A prettyfortune; and she came in his way.”“I dare say,” returned Harriet, sighing again, “I dare sayshe was very much attached to him.”“Perhaps she might; but it is not every man’s fate to marry thewoman who loves him best. Miss Hawkins perhaps wanted a home, and thought thisthe best offer she was likely to have.”“Yes,” said Harriet earnestly, “and well she might, nobodycould ever have a better. Well, I wish them happy with all my heart. And now,Miss Woodhouse, I do not think I shall mind seeing them again. He is just assuperior as ever;—but being married, you know, it is quite a differentthing. No, indeed, Miss Woodhouse, you need not be afraid; I can sit and admirehim now without any great misery. To know that he has not thrown himself away,is such a comfort!—She does seem a charming young woman, just what hedeserves. Happy creature! He called her ‘Augusta.’ Howdelightful!”When the visit was returned, Emma made up her mind. She could then see more andjudge better. From Harriet’s happening not to be at Hartfield, and herfather’s being present to engage Mr. Elton, she had a quarter of an hourof the lady’s conversation to herself, and could composedly attend toher; and the quarter of an hour quite convinced her that Mrs. Elton was a vainwoman, extremely well satisfied with herself, and thinking much of her ownimportance; that she meant to shine and be very superior, but with mannerswhich had been formed in a bad school, pert and familiar; that all her notionswere drawn from one set of people, and one style of living; that if not foolishshe was ignorant, and that her society would certainly do Mr. Elton no good.Harriet would have been a better match. If not wise or refined herself, shewould have connected him with those who were; but Miss Hawkins, it might befairly supposed from her easy conceit, had been the best of her own set. Therich brother-in-law near Bristol was the pride of the alliance, and his placeand his carriages were the pride of him.The very first subject after being seated was Maple Grove, “My brotherMr. Suckling’s seat;”—a comparison of Hartfield to MapleGrove. The grounds of Hartfield were small, but neat and pretty; and the housewas modern and well-built. Mrs. Elton seemed most favourably impressed by thesize of the room, the entrance, and all that she could see or imagine.“Very like Maple Grove indeed!—She was quite struck by thelikeness!—That room was the very shape and size of the morning-room atMaple Grove; her sister’s favourite room.”—Mr. Elton wasappealed to.—“Was not it astonishingly like?—She could reallyalmost fancy herself at Maple Grove.”“And the staircase—You know, as I came in, I observed how very likethe staircase was; placed exactly in the same part of the house. I really couldnot help exclaiming! I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, it is very delightful to me,to be reminded of a place I am so extremely partial to as Maple Grove. I havespent so many happy months there! (with a little sigh of sentiment). A charmingplace, undoubtedly. Every body who sees it is struck by its beauty; but to me,it has been quite a home. Whenever you are transplanted, like me, MissWoodhouse, you will understand how very delightful it is to meet with any thingat all like what one has left behind. I always say this is quite one of theevils of matrimony.”Emma made as slight a reply as she could; but it was fully sufficient for Mrs.Elton, who only wanted to be talking herself.“So extremely like Maple Grove! And it is not merely the house—thegrounds, I assure you, as far as I could observe, are strikingly like. Thelaurels at Maple Grove are in the same profusion as here, and stand very muchin the same way—just across the lawn; and I had a glimpse of a fine largetree, with a bench round it, which put me so exactly in mind! My brother andsister will be enchanted with this place. People who have extensive groundsthemselves are always pleased with any thing in the same style.”Emma doubted the truth of this sentiment. She had a great idea that people whohad extensive grounds themselves cared very little for the extensive grounds ofany body else; but it was not worth while to attack an error so double-dyed,and therefore only said in reply,“When you have seen more of this country, I am afraid you will think youhave overrated Hartfield. Surry is full of beauties.”“Oh! yes, I am quite aware of that. It is the garden of England, youknow. Surry is the garden of England.”“Yes; but we must not rest our claims on that distinction. Many counties,I believe, are called the garden of England, as well as Surry.”“No, I fancy not,” replied Mrs. Elton, with a most satisfied smile.“I never heard any county but Surry called so.”Emma was silenced.“My brother and sister have promised us a visit in the spring, or summerat farthest,” continued Mrs. Elton; “and that will be our time forexploring. While they are with us, we shall explore a great deal, I dare say.They will have their barouche-landau, of course, which holds four perfectly;and therefore, without saying any thing of our carriage, we should beable to explore the different beauties extremely well. They would hardly comein their chaise, I think, at that season of the year. Indeed, when the timedraws on, I shall decidedly recommend their bringing the barouche-landau; itwill be so very much preferable. When people come into a beautiful country ofthis sort, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one naturally wishes them to see as muchas possible; and Mr. Suckling is extremely fond of exploring. We explored toKing’s-Weston twice last summer, in that way, most delightfully, justafter their first having the barouche-landau. You have many parties of thatkind here, I suppose, Miss Woodhouse, every summer?”“No; not immediately here. We are rather out of distance of the verystriking beauties which attract the sort of parties you speak of; and we are avery quiet set of people, I believe; more disposed to stay at home than engagein schemes of pleasure.”“Ah! there is nothing like staying at home for real comfort. Nobody canbe more devoted to home than I am. I was quite a proverb for it at Maple Grove.Many a time has Selina said, when she has been going to Bristol, ‘Ireally cannot get this girl to move from the house. I absolutely must go in bymyself, though I hate being stuck up in the barouche-landau without acompanion; but Augusta, I believe, with her own good-will, would never stirbeyond the park paling.’ Many a time has she said so; and yet I am noadvocate for entire seclusion. I think, on the contrary, when people shutthemselves up entirely from society, it is a very bad thing; and that it ismuch more advisable to mix in the world in a proper degree, without living init either too much or too little. I perfectly understand your situation,however, Miss Woodhouse—(looking towards Mr. Woodhouse), Yourfather’s state of health must be a great drawback. Why does not he tryBath?—Indeed he should. Let me recommend Bath to you. I assure you I haveno doubt of its doing Mr. Woodhouse good.”“My father tried it more than once, formerly; but without receiving anybenefit; and Mr. Perry, whose name, I dare say, is not unknown to you, does notconceive it would be at all more likely to be useful now.”“Ah! that’s a great pity; for I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, wherethe waters do agree, it is quite wonderful the relief they give. In my Bathlife, I have seen such instances of it! And it is so cheerful a place, that itcould not fail of being of use to Mr. Woodhouse’s spirits, which, Iunderstand, are sometimes much depressed. And as to its recommendations toyou, I fancy I need not take much pains to dwell on them. The advantagesof Bath to the young are pretty generally understood. It would be a charmingintroduction for you, who have lived so secluded a life; and I couldimmediately secure you some of the best society in the place. A line from mewould bring you a little host of acquaintance; and my particular friend, Mrs.Partridge, the lady I have always resided with when in Bath, would be mosthappy to shew you any attentions, and would be the very person for you to gointo public with.”It was as much as Emma could bear, without being impolite. The idea of herbeing indebted to Mrs. Elton for what was called anintroduction—of her going into public under the auspices of afriend of Mrs. Elton’s—probably some vulgar, dashing widow, who,with the help of a boarder, just made a shift to live!—The dignity ofMiss Woodhouse, of Hartfield, was sunk indeed!She restrained herself, however, from any of the reproofs she could have given,and only thanked Mrs. Elton coolly; “but their going to Bath was quiteout of the question; and she was not perfectly convinced that the place mightsuit her better than her father.” And then, to prevent farther outrageand indignation, changed the subject directly.“I do not ask whether you are musical, Mrs. Elton. Upon these occasions,a lady’s character generally precedes her; and Highbury has long knownthat you are a superior performer.”“Oh! no, indeed; I must protest against any such idea. A superiorperformer!—very far from it, I assure you. Consider from how partial aquarter your information came. I am doatingly fond of music—passionatelyfond;—and my friends say I am not entirely devoid of taste; but as to anything else, upon my honour my performance is mediocre to the lastdegree. You, Miss Woodhouse, I well know, play delightfully. I assure you ithas been the greatest satisfaction, comfort, and delight to me, to hear what amusical society I am got into. I absolutely cannot do without music. It is anecessary of life to me; and having always been used to a very musical society,both at Maple Grove and in Bath, it would have been a most serious sacrifice. Ihonestly said as much to Mr. E. when he was speaking of my future home, andexpressing his fears lest the retirement of it should be disagreeable; and theinferiority of the house too—knowing what I had been accustomedto—of course he was not wholly without apprehension. When he was speakingof it in that way, I honestly said that the world I could giveup—parties, balls, plays—for I had no fear of retirement. Blessedwith so many resources within myself, the world was not necessary to me.I could do very well without it. To those who had no resources it was adifferent thing; but my resources made me quite independent. And as tosmaller-sized rooms than I had been used to, I really could not give it athought. I hoped I was perfectly equal to any sacrifice of that description.Certainly I had been accustomed to every luxury at Maple Grove; but I didassure him that two carriages were not necessary to my happiness, nor werespacious apartments. ‘But,’ said I, ‘to be quite honest, I donot think I can live without something of a musical society. I condition fornothing else; but without music, life would be a blank to me.’”“We cannot suppose,” said Emma, smiling, “that Mr. Eltonwould hesitate to assure you of there being a very musical society inHighbury; and I hope you will not find he has outstepped the truth more thanmay be pardoned, in consideration of the motive.”“No, indeed, I have no doubts at all on that head. I am delighted to findmyself in such a circle. I hope we shall have many sweet little concertstogether. I think, Miss Woodhouse, you and I must establish a musical club, andhave regular weekly meetings at your house, or ours. Will not it be a goodplan? If we exert ourselves, I think we shall not be long in want ofallies. Something of that nature would be particularly desirable for me,as an inducement to keep me in practice; for married women, youknow—there is a sad story against them, in general. They are but too aptto give up music.”“But you, who are so extremely fond of it—there can be no danger,surely?”“I should hope not; but really when I look around among my acquaintance,I tremble. Selina has entirely given up music—never touches theinstrument—though she played sweetly. And the same may be said of Mrs.Jeffereys—Clara Partridge, that was—and of the two Milmans, nowMrs. Bird and Mrs. James Cooper; and of more than I can enumerate. Upon my wordit is enough to put one in a fright. I used to be quite angry with Selina; butreally I begin now to comprehend that a married woman has many things to callher attention. I believe I was half an hour this morning shut up with myhousekeeper.”“But every thing of that kind,” said Emma, “will soon be inso regular a train—”“Well,” said Mrs. Elton, laughing, “we shall see.”Emma, finding her so determined upon neglecting her music, had nothing more tosay; and, after a moment’s pause, Mrs. Elton chose another subject.“We have been calling at Randalls,” said she, “and found themboth at home; and very pleasant people they seem to be. I like them extremely.Mr. Weston seems an excellent creature—quite a first-rate favourite withme already, I assure you. And she appears so truly good—there issomething so motherly and kind-hearted about her, that it wins upon onedirectly. She was your governess, I think?”Emma was almost too much astonished to answer; but Mrs. Elton hardly waited forthe affirmative before she went on.“Having understood as much, I was rather astonished to find her so verylady-like! But she is really quite the gentlewoman.”“Mrs. Weston’s manners,” said Emma, “were alwaysparticularly good. Their propriety, simplicity, and elegance, would make themthe safest model for any young woman.”“And who do you think came in while we were there?”Emma was quite at a loss. The tone implied some old acquaintance—and howcould she possibly guess?“Knightley!” continued Mrs. Elton; “Knightleyhimself!—Was not it lucky?—for, not being within when he called theother day, I had never seen him before; and of course, as so particular afriend of Mr. E.’s, I had a great curiosity. ‘My friendKnightley’ had been so often mentioned, that I was really impatient tosee him; and I must do my caro sposo the justice to say that he need not beashamed of his friend. Knightley is quite the gentleman. I like him very much.Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man.”Happily, it was now time to be gone. They were off; and Emma could breathe.“Insufferable woman!” was her immediate exclamation. “Worsethan I had supposed. Absolutely insufferable! Knightley!—I could not havebelieved it. Knightley!—never seen him in her life before, and call himKnightley!—and discover that he is a gentleman! A little upstart, vulgarbeing, with her Mr. E., and her caro sposo, and her resources,and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery. Actually to discoverthat Mr. Knightley is a gentleman! I doubt whether he will return thecompliment, and discover her to be a lady. I could not have believed it! And topropose that she and I should unite to form a musical club! One would fancy wewere bosom friends! And Mrs. Weston!—Astonished that the person who hadbrought me up should be a gentlewoman! Worse and worse. I never met with herequal. Much beyond my hopes. Harriet is disgraced by any comparison. Oh! whatwould Frank Churchill say to her, if he were here? How angry and how divertedhe would be! Ah! there I am—thinking of him directly. Always the firstperson to be thought of! How I catch myself out! Frank Churchill comes asregularly into my mind!”—All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time her father hadarranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons’ departure, and wasready to speak, she was very tolerably capable of attending.“Well, my dear,” he deliberately began, “considering we neversaw her before, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say shewas very much pleased with you. She speaks a little too quick. A littlequickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. But I believe I amnice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like you and poor MissTaylor. However, she seems a very obliging, pretty-behaved young lady, and nodoubt will make him a very good wife. Though I think he had better not havemarried. I made the best excuses I could for not having been able to wait onhim and Mrs. Elton on this happy occasion; I said that I hoped I shouldin the course of the summer. But I ought to have gone before. Not to wait upona bride is very remiss. Ah! it shews what a sad invalid I am! But I do not likethe corner into Vicarage Lane.”“I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr. Elton knowsyou.”“Yes: but a young lady—a bride—I ought to have paid myrespects to her if possible. It was being very deficient.”“But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore whyshould you be so anxious to pay your respects to a bride? It ought to beno recommendation to you. It is encouraging people to marry if you makeso much of them.”“No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would alwayswish to pay every proper attention to a lady—and a bride, especially, isnever to be neglected. More is avowedly due to her. A bride, you know,my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be who they may.”“Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know whatis. And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction to suchvanity-baits for poor young ladies.”“My dear, you do not understand me. This is a matter of mere commonpoliteness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with any encouragement topeople to marry.”Emma had done. Her father was growing nervous, and could not understandher. Her mind returned to Mrs. Elton’s offences, and long, verylong, did they occupy her.CHAPTER XVEmma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill opinionof Mrs. Elton. Her observation had been pretty correct. Such as Mrs. Eltonappeared to her on this second interview, such she appeared whenever they metagain,—self-important, presuming, familiar, ignorant, and ill-bred. Shehad a little beauty and a little accomplishment, but so little judgment thatshe thought herself coming with superior knowledge of the world, to enliven andimprove a country neighbourhood; and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such aplace in society as Mrs. Elton’s consequence only could surpass.There was no reason to suppose Mr. Elton thought at all differently from hiswife. He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud. He had the air ofcongratulating himself on having brought such a woman to Highbury, as not evenMiss Woodhouse could equal; and the greater part of her new acquaintance,disposed to commend, or not in the habit of judging, following the lead of MissBates’s good-will, or taking it for granted that the bride must be asclever and as agreeable as she professed herself, were very well satisfied; sothat Mrs. Elton’s praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought todo, unimpeded by Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her first contributionand talked with a good grace of her being “very pleasant and veryelegantly dressed.”In one respect Mrs. Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at first. Herfeelings altered towards Emma.—Offended, probably, by the littleencouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew back in herturn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and though the effect wasagreeable, the ill-will which produced it was necessarily increasingEmma’s dislike. Her manners, too—and Mr. Elton’s, wereunpleasant towards Harriet. They were sneering and negligent. Emma hoped itmust rapidly work Harriet’s cure; but the sensations which could promptsuch behaviour sunk them both very much.—It was not to be doubted thatpoor Harriet’s attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve, andher own share in the story, under a colouring the least favourable to her andthe most soothing to him, had in all likelihood been given also. She was, ofcourse, the object of their joint dislike.—When they had nothing else tosay, it must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the enmitywhich they dared not shew in open disrespect to her, found a broader vent incontemptuous treatment of Harriet.Mrs. Elton took a great fancy to Jane Fairfax; and from the first. Not merelywhen a state of warfare with one young lady might be supposed to recommend theother, but from the very first; and she was not satisfied with expressing anatural and reasonable admiration—but without solicitation, or plea, orprivilege, she must be wanting to assist and befriend her.—Before Emmahad forfeited her confidence, and about the third time of their meeting, sheheard all Mrs. Elton’s knight-errantry on the subject.—“Jane Fairfax is absolutely charming, Miss Woodhouse.—I quite raveabout Jane Fairfax.—A sweet, interesting creature. So mild andladylike—and with such talents!—I assure you I think she has veryextraordinary talents. I do not scruple to say that she plays extremely well. Iknow enough of music to speak decidedly on that point. Oh! she is absolutelycharming! You will laugh at my warmth—but, upon my word, I talk ofnothing but Jane Fairfax.—And her situation is so calculated to affectone!—Miss Woodhouse, we must exert ourselves and endeavour to dosomething for her. We must bring her forward. Such talent as hers must not besuffered to remain unknown.—I dare say you have heard those charminglines of the poet,‘Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,    ‘And waste its fragrance on the desert air.’We must not allow them to be verified in sweet Jane Fairfax.”“I cannot think there is any danger of it,” was Emma’s calmanswer—“and when you are better acquainted with MissFairfax’s situation and understand what her home has been, with Coloneland Mrs. Campbell, I have no idea that you will suppose her talents can beunknown.”“Oh! but dear Miss Woodhouse, she is now in such retirement, suchobscurity, so thrown away.—Whatever advantages she may have enjoyed withthe Campbells are so palpably at an end! And I think she feels it. I am sureshe does. She is very timid and silent. One can see that she feels the want ofencouragement. I like her the better for it. I must confess it is arecommendation to me. I am a great advocate for timidity—and I am sureone does not often meet with it.—But in those who are at all inferior, itis extremely prepossessing. Oh! I assure you, Jane Fairfax is a very delightfulcharacter, and interests me more than I can express.”“You appear to feel a great deal—but I am not aware how you or anyof Miss Fairfax’s acquaintance here, any of those who have known herlonger than yourself, can shew her any other attention than”—“My dear Miss Woodhouse, a vast deal may be done by those who dare toact. You and I need not be afraid. If we set the example, many willfollow it as far as they can; though all have not our situations. Wehave carriages to fetch and convey her home, and we live in a stylewhich could not make the addition of Jane Fairfax, at any time, the leastinconvenient.—I should be extremely displeased if Wright were to send usup such a dinner, as could make me regret having asked more than JaneFairfax to partake of it. I have no idea of that sort of thing. It is notlikely that I should, considering what I have been used to. My greatestdanger, perhaps, in housekeeping, may be quite the other way, in doing toomuch, and being too careless of expense. Maple Grove will probably be my modelmore than it ought to be—for we do not at all affect to equal my brother,Mr. Suckling, in income.—However, my resolution is taken as to noticingJane Fairfax.—I shall certainly have her very often at my house, shallintroduce her wherever I can, shall have musical parties to draw out hertalents, and shall be constantly on the watch for an eligible situation. Myacquaintance is so very extensive, that I have little doubt of hearing ofsomething to suit her shortly.—I shall introduce her, of course, veryparticularly to my brother and sister when they come to us. I am sure they willlike her extremely; and when she gets a little acquainted with them, her fearswill completely wear off, for there really is nothing in the manners of eitherbut what is highly conciliating.—I shall have her very often indeed whilethey are with me, and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her in thebarouche-landau in some of our exploring parties.”“Poor Jane Fairfax!”—thought Emma.—“You have notdeserved this. You may have done wrong with regard to Mr. Dixon, but this is apunishment beyond what you can have merited!—The kindness and protectionof Mrs. Elton!—‘Jane Fairfax and Jane Fairfax.’ Heavens! Letme not suppose that she dares go about, Emma Woodhouse-ing me!—But uponmy honour, there seems no limits to the licentiousness of that woman’stongue!”Emma had not to listen to such paradings again—to any so exclusivelyaddressed to herself—so disgustingly decorated with a “dear MissWoodhouse.” The change on Mrs. Elton’s side soon afterwardsappeared, and she was left in peace—neither forced to be the veryparticular friend of Mrs. Elton, nor, under Mrs. Elton’s guidance, thevery active patroness of Jane Fairfax, and only sharing with others in ageneral way, in knowing what was felt, what was meditated, what was done.She looked on with some amusement.—Miss Bates’s gratitude for Mrs.Elton’s attentions to Jane was in the first style of guileless simplicityand warmth. She was quite one of her worthies—the most amiable, affable,delightful woman—just as accomplished and condescending as Mrs. Eltonmeant to be considered. Emma’s only surprize was that Jane Fairfax shouldaccept those attentions and tolerate Mrs. Elton as she seemed to do. She heardof her walking with the Eltons, sitting with the Eltons, spending a day withthe Eltons! This was astonishing!—She could not have believed it possiblethat the taste or the pride of Miss Fairfax could endure such society andfriendship as the Vicarage had to offer.“She is a riddle, quite a riddle!” said she.—“To chuseto remain here month after month, under privations of every sort! And now tochuse the mortification of Mrs. Elton’s notice and the penury of herconversation, rather than return to the superior companions who have alwaysloved her with such real, generous affection.”Jane had come to Highbury professedly for three months; the Campbells were goneto Ireland for three months; but now the Campbells had promised their daughterto stay at least till Midsummer, and fresh invitations had arrived for her tojoin them there. According to Miss Bates—it all came from her—Mrs.Dixon had written most pressingly. Would Jane but go, means were to be found,servants sent, friends contrived—no travelling difficulty allowed toexist; but still she had declined it!“She must have some motive, more powerful than appears, for refusing thisinvitation,” was Emma’s conclusion. “She must be under somesort of penance, inflicted either by the Campbells or herself. There is greatfear, great caution, great resolution somewhere.—She is not to bewith the Dixons. The decree is issued by somebody. But why must sheconsent to be with the Eltons?—Here is quite a separate puzzle.”Upon her speaking her wonder aloud on that part of the subject, before the fewwho knew her opinion of Mrs. Elton, Mrs. Weston ventured this apology for Jane.“We cannot suppose that she has any great enjoyment at the Vicarage, mydear Emma—but it is better than being always at home. Her aunt is a goodcreature, but, as a constant companion, must be very tiresome. We must considerwhat Miss Fairfax quits, before we condemn her taste for what she goesto.”“You are right, Mrs. Weston,” said Mr. Knightley warmly,“Miss Fairfax is as capable as any of us of forming a just opinion ofMrs. Elton. Could she have chosen with whom to associate, she would not havechosen her. But (with a reproachful smile at Emma) she receives attentions fromMrs. Elton, which nobody else pays her.”Emma felt that Mrs. Weston was giving her a momentary glance; and she washerself struck by his warmth. With a faint blush, she presently replied,“Such attentions as Mrs. Elton’s, I should have imagined, wouldrather disgust than gratify Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton’s invitations Ishould have imagined any thing but inviting.”“I should not wonder,” said Mrs. Weston, “if Miss Fairfaxwere to have been drawn on beyond her own inclination, by her aunt’seagerness in accepting Mrs. Elton’s civilities for her. Poor Miss Batesmay very likely have committed her niece and hurried her into a greaterappearance of intimacy than her own good sense would have dictated, in spite ofthe very natural wish of a little change.”Both felt rather anxious to hear him speak again; and after a few minutessilence, he said,“Another thing must be taken into consideration too—Mrs. Elton doesnot talk to Miss Fairfax as she speaks of her. We all know thedifference between the pronouns he or she and thou, the plainest spoken amongstus; we all feel the influence of a something beyond common civility in ourpersonal intercourse with each other—a something more early implanted. Wecannot give any body the disagreeable hints that we may have been very full ofthe hour before. We feel things differently. And besides the operation of this,as a general principle, you may be sure that Miss Fairfax awes Mrs. Elton byher superiority both of mind and manner; and that, face to face, Mrs. Eltontreats her with all the respect which she has a claim to. Such a woman as JaneFairfax probably never fell in Mrs. Elton’s way before—and nodegree of vanity can prevent her acknowledging her own comparative littlenessin action, if not in consciousness.”“I know how highly you think of Jane Fairfax,” said Emma. LittleHenry was in her thoughts, and a mixture of alarm and delicacy made herirresolute what else to say.“Yes,” he replied, “any body may know how highly I think ofher.”“And yet,” said Emma, beginning hastily and with an arch look, butsoon stopping—it was better, however, to know the worst at once—shehurried on—“And yet, perhaps, you may hardly be aware yourself howhighly it is. The extent of your admiration may take you by surprize some dayor other.”Mr. Knightley was hard at work upon the lower buttons of his thick leathergaiters, and either the exertion of getting them together, or some other cause,brought the colour into his face, as he answered,“Oh! are you there?—But you are miserably behindhand. Mr. Cole gaveme a hint of it six weeks ago.”He stopped.—Emma felt her foot pressed by Mrs. Weston, and did notherself know what to think. In a moment he went on—“That will never be, however, I can assure you. Miss Fairfax, I dare say,would not have me if I were to ask her—and I am very sure I shall neverask her.”Emma returned her friend’s pressure with interest; and was pleased enoughto exclaim,“You are not vain, Mr. Knightley. I will say that for you.”He seemed hardly to hear her; he was thoughtful—and in a manner whichshewed him not pleased, soon afterwards said,“So you have been settling that I should marry Jane Fairfax?”“No indeed I have not. You have scolded me too much for match-making, forme to presume to take such a liberty with you. What I said just now, meantnothing. One says those sort of things, of course, without any idea of aserious meaning. Oh! no, upon my word I have not the smallest wish for yourmarrying Jane Fairfax or Jane any body. You would not come in and sit with usin this comfortable way, if you were married.”Mr. Knightley was thoughtful again. The result of his reverie was, “No,Emma, I do not think the extent of my admiration for her will ever take me bysurprize.—I never had a thought of her in that way, I assure you.”And soon afterwards, “Jane Fairfax is a very charming youngwoman—but not even Jane Fairfax is perfect. She has a fault. She has notthe open temper which a man would wish for in a wife.”Emma could not but rejoice to hear that she had a fault. “Well,”said she, “and you soon silenced Mr. Cole, I suppose?”“Yes, very soon. He gave me a quiet hint; I told him he was mistaken; heasked my pardon and said no more. Cole does not want to be wiser or wittierthan his neighbours.”“In that respect how unlike dear Mrs. Elton, who wants to be wiser andwittier than all the world! I wonder how she speaks of the Coles—what shecalls them! How can she find any appellation for them, deep enough in familiarvulgarity? She calls you, Knightley—what can she do for Mr. Cole? And soI am not to be surprized that Jane Fairfax accepts her civilities and consentsto be with her. Mrs. Weston, your argument weighs most with me. I can much morereadily enter into the temptation of getting away from Miss Bates, than I canbelieve in the triumph of Miss Fairfax’s mind over Mrs. Elton. I have nofaith in Mrs. Elton’s acknowledging herself the inferior in thought,word, or deed; or in her being under any restraint beyond her own scanty ruleof good-breeding. I cannot imagine that she will not be continually insultingher visitor with praise, encouragement, and offers of service; that she willnot be continually detailing her magnificent intentions, from the procuring hera permanent situation to the including her in those delightful exploringparties which are to take place in the barouche-landau.”“Jane Fairfax has feeling,” said Mr. Knightley—“I donot accuse her of want of feeling. Her sensibilities, I suspect, arestrong—and her temper excellent in its power of forbearance, patience,self-control; but it wants openness. She is reserved, more reserved, I think,than she used to be—And I love an open temper. No—till Cole alludedto my supposed attachment, it had never entered my head. I saw Jane Fairfax andconversed with her, with admiration and pleasure always—but with nothought beyond.”“Well, Mrs. Weston,” said Emma triumphantly when he left them,“what do you say now to Mr. Knightley’s marrying JaneFairfax?”“Why, really, dear Emma, I say that he is so very much occupied by theidea of not being in love with her, that I should not wonder if it wereto end in his being so at last. Do not beat me.”CHAPTER XVIEvery body in and about Highbury who had ever visited Mr. Elton, was disposedto pay him attention on his marriage. Dinner-parties and evening-parties weremade for him and his lady; and invitations flowed in so fast that she had soonthe pleasure of apprehending they were never to have a disengaged day.“I see how it is,” said she. “I see what a life I am to leadamong you. Upon my word we shall be absolutely dissipated. We really seem quitethe fashion. If this is living in the country, it is nothing very formidable.From Monday next to Saturday, I assure you we have not a disengagedday!—A woman with fewer resources than I have, need not have been at aloss.”No invitation came amiss to her. Her Bath habits made evening-parties perfectlynatural to her, and Maple Grove had given her a taste for dinners. She was alittle shocked at the want of two drawing rooms, at the poor attempt atrout-cakes, and there being no ice in the Highbury card-parties. Mrs. Bates,Mrs. Perry, Mrs. Goddard and others, were a good deal behind-hand in knowledgeof the world, but she would soon shew them how every thing ought to bearranged. In the course of the spring she must return their civilities by onevery superior party—in which her card-tables should be set out with theirseparate candles and unbroken packs in the true style—and more waitersengaged for the evening than their own establishment could furnish, to carryround the refreshments at exactly the proper hour, and in the proper order.Emma, in the meanwhile, could not be satisfied without a dinner at Hartfieldfor the Eltons. They must not do less than others, or she should be exposed toodious suspicions, and imagined capable of pitiful resentment. A dinner theremust be. After Emma had talked about it for ten minutes, Mr. Woodhouse felt nounwillingness, and only made the usual stipulation of not sitting at the bottomof the table himself, with the usual regular difficulty of deciding who shoulddo it for him.The persons to be invited, required little thought. Besides the Eltons, it mustbe the Westons and Mr. Knightley; so far it was all of course—and it washardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make theeighth:—but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction, and onmany accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet’s begging to beallowed to decline it. “She would rather not be in his company more thanshe could help. She was not yet quite able to see him and his charming happywife together, without feeling uncomfortable. If Miss Woodhouse would not bedispleased, she would rather stay at home.” It was precisely what Emmawould have wished, had she deemed it possible enough for wishing. She wasdelighted with the fortitude of her little friend—for fortitude she knewit was in her to give up being in company and stay at home; and she could nowinvite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth, JaneFairfax.— Since her last conversation with Mrs. Weston and Mr. Knightley,she was more conscience-stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had oftenbeen.—Mr. Knightley’s words dwelt with her. He had said that JaneFairfax received attentions from Mrs. Elton which nobody else paid her.“This is very true,” said she, “at least as far as relates tome, which was all that was meant—and it is very shameful.—Of thesame age—and always knowing her—I ought to have been more herfriend.—She will never like me now. I have neglected her too long. But Iwill shew her greater attention than I have done.”Every invitation was successful. They were all disengaged and allhappy.—The preparatory interest of this dinner, however, was not yetover. A circumstance rather unlucky occurred. The two eldest little Knightleyswere engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some weeks in thespring, and their papa now proposed bringing them, and staying one whole day atHartfield—which one day would be the very day of this party.—Hisprofessional engagements did not allow of his being put off, but both fatherand daughter were disturbed by its happening so. Mr. Woodhouse considered eightpersons at dinner together as the utmost that his nerves could bear—andhere would be a ninth—and Emma apprehended that it would be a ninth verymuch out of humour at not being able to come even to Hartfield for forty-eighthours without falling in with a dinner-party.She comforted her father better than she could comfort herself, by representingthat though he certainly would make them nine, yet he always said so little,that the increase of noise would be very immaterial. She thought it in realitya sad exchange for herself, to have him with his grave looks and reluctantconversation opposed to her instead of his brother.The event was more favourable to Mr. Woodhouse than to Emma. John Knightleycame; but Mr. Weston was unexpectedly summoned to town and must be absent onthe very day. He might be able to join them in the evening, but certainly notto dinner. Mr. Woodhouse was quite at ease; and the seeing him so, with thearrival of the little boys and the philosophic composure of her brother onhearing his fate, removed the chief of even Emma’s vexation.The day came, the party were punctually assembled, and Mr. John Knightleyseemed early to devote himself to the business of being agreeable. Instead ofdrawing his brother off to a window while they waited for dinner, he wastalking to Miss Fairfax. Mrs. Elton, as elegant as lace and pearls could makeher, he looked at in silence—wanting only to observe enough forIsabella’s information—but Miss Fairfax was an old acquaintance anda quiet girl, and he could talk to her. He had met her before breakfast as hewas returning from a walk with his little boys, when it had been just beginningto rain. It was natural to have some civil hopes on the subject, and he said,“I hope you did not venture far, Miss Fairfax, this morning, or I am sureyou must have been wet.—We scarcely got home in time. I hope you turneddirectly.”“I went only to the post-office,” said she, “and reached homebefore the rain was much. It is my daily errand. I always fetch the letterswhen I am here. It saves trouble, and is a something to get me out. A walkbefore breakfast does me good.”“Not a walk in the rain, I should imagine.”“No, but it did not absolutely rain when I set out.”Mr. John Knightley smiled, and replied,“That is to say, you chose to have your walk, for you were not six yardsfrom your own door when I had the pleasure of meeting you; and Henry and Johnhad seen more drops than they could count long before. The post-office has agreat charm at one period of our lives. When you have lived to my age, you willbegin to think letters are never worth going through the rain for.”There was a little blush, and then this answer,“I must not hope to be ever situated as you are, in the midst of everydearest connexion, and therefore I cannot expect that simply growing oldershould make me indifferent about letters.”“Indifferent! Oh! no—I never conceived you could becomeindifferent. Letters are no matter of indifference; they are generally a verypositive curse.”“You are speaking of letters of business; mine are letters offriendship.”“I have often thought them the worst of the two,” replied hecoolly. “Business, you know, may bring money, but friendship hardly everdoes.”“Ah! you are not serious now. I know Mr. John Knightley too well—Iam very sure he understands the value of friendship as well as any body. I caneasily believe that letters are very little to you, much less than to me, butit is not your being ten years older than myself which makes the difference, itis not age, but situation. You have every body dearest to you always at hand,I, probably, never shall again; and therefore till I have outlived all myaffections, a post-office, I think, must always have power to draw me out, inworse weather than to-day.”“When I talked of your being altered by time, by the progress ofyears,” said John Knightley, “I meant to imply the change ofsituation which time usually brings. I consider one as including the other.Time will generally lessen the interest of every attachment not within thedaily circle—but that is not the change I had in view for you. As an oldfriend, you will allow me to hope, Miss Fairfax, that ten years hence you mayhave as many concentrated objects as I have.”It was kindly said, and very far from giving offence. A pleasant “thankyou” seemed meant to laugh it off, but a blush, a quivering lip, a tearin the eye, shewed that it was felt beyond a laugh. Her attention was nowclaimed by Mr. Woodhouse, who being, according to his custom on such occasions,making the circle of his guests, and paying his particular compliments to theladies, was ending with her—and with all his mildest urbanity, said,“I am very sorry to hear, Miss Fairfax, of your being out this morning inthe rain. Young ladies should take care of themselves.—Young ladies aredelicate plants. They should take care of their health and their complexion. Mydear, did you change your stockings?”“Yes, sir, I did indeed; and I am very much obliged by your kindsolicitude about me.”“My dear Miss Fairfax, young ladies are very sure to be caredfor.—I hope your good grand-mama and aunt are well. They are some of myvery old friends. I wish my health allowed me to be a better neighbour. You dous a great deal of honour to-day, I am sure. My daughter and I are both highlysensible of your goodness, and have the greatest satisfaction in seeing you atHartfield.”The kind-hearted, polite old man might then sit down and feel that he had donehis duty, and made every fair lady welcome and easy.By this time, the walk in the rain had reached Mrs. Elton, and herremonstrances now opened upon Jane.“My dear Jane, what is this I hear?—Going to the post-office in therain!—This must not be, I assure you.—You sad girl, how could youdo such a thing?—It is a sign I was not there to take care of you.”Jane very patiently assured her that she had not caught any cold.“Oh! do not tell me. You really are a very sad girl, and do notknow how to take care of yourself.—To the post-office indeed! Mrs.Weston, did you ever hear the like? You and I must positively exert ourauthority.”“My advice,” said Mrs. Weston kindly and persuasively, “Icertainly do feel tempted to give. Miss Fairfax, you must not run suchrisks.—Liable as you have been to severe colds, indeed you ought to beparticularly careful, especially at this time of year. The spring I alwaysthink requires more than common care. Better wait an hour or two, or even halfa day for your letters, than run the risk of bringing on your cough again. Nowdo not you feel that you had? Yes, I am sure you are much too reasonable. Youlook as if you would not do such a thing again.”“Oh! she shall not do such a thing again,” eagerlyrejoined Mrs. Elton. “We will not allow her to do such a thingagain:”—and nodding significantly—“there must be somearrangement made, there must indeed. I shall speak to Mr. E. The man whofetches our letters every morning (one of our men, I forget his name) shallinquire for yours too and bring them to you. That will obviate all difficultiesyou know; and from us I really think, my dear Jane, you can have noscruple to accept such an accommodation.”“You are extremely kind,” said Jane; “but I cannot give up myearly walk. I am advised to be out of doors as much as I can, I must walksomewhere, and the post-office is an object; and upon my word, I have scarcelyever had a bad morning before.”“My dear Jane, say no more about it. The thing is determined, that is(laughing affectedly) as far as I can presume to determine any thing withoutthe concurrence of my lord and master. You know, Mrs. Weston, you and I must becautious how we express ourselves. But I do flatter myself, my dear Jane, thatmy influence is not entirely worn out. If I meet with no insuperabledifficulties therefore, consider that point as settled.”“Excuse me,” said Jane earnestly, “I cannot by any meansconsent to such an arrangement, so needlessly troublesome to your servant. Ifthe errand were not a pleasure to me, it could be done, as it always is when Iam not here, by my grandmama’s.”“Oh! my dear; but so much as Patty has to do!—And it is a kindnessto employ our men.”Jane looked as if she did not mean to be conquered; but instead of answering,she began speaking again to Mr. John Knightley.“The post-office is a wonderful establishment!” saidshe.—“The regularity and despatch of it! If one thinks of all thatit has to do, and all that it does so well, it is really astonishing!”“It is certainly very well regulated.”“So seldom that any negligence or blunder appears! So seldom that aletter, among the thousands that are constantly passing about the kingdom, iseven carried wrong—and not one in a million, I suppose, actually lost!And when one considers the variety of hands, and of bad hands too, that are tobe deciphered, it increases the wonder.”“The clerks grow expert from habit.—They must begin with somequickness of sight and hand, and exercise improves them. If you want anyfarther explanation,” continued he, smiling, “they are paid for it.That is the key to a great deal of capacity. The public pays and must be servedwell.”The varieties of handwriting were farther talked of, and the usual observationsmade.“I have heard it asserted,” said John Knightley, “that thesame sort of handwriting often prevails in a family; and where the same masterteaches, it is natural enough. But for that reason, I should imagine thelikeness must be chiefly confined to the females, for boys have very littleteaching after an early age, and scramble into any hand they can get. Isabellaand Emma, I think, do write very much alike. I have not always known theirwriting apart.”“Yes,” said his brother hesitatingly, “there is a likeness. Iknow what you mean—but Emma’s hand is the strongest.”“Isabella and Emma both write beautifully,” said Mr. Woodhouse;“and always did. And so does poor Mrs. Weston”—with half asigh and half a smile at her.“I never saw any gentleman’s handwriting”—Emma began,looking also at Mrs. Weston; but stopped, on perceiving that Mrs. Weston wasattending to some one else—and the pause gave her time to reflect,“Now, how am I going to introduce him?—Am I unequal to speaking hisname at once before all these people? Is it necessary for me to use anyroundabout phrase?—Your Yorkshire friend—your correspondent inYorkshire;—that would be the way, I suppose, if I were verybad.—No, I can pronounce his name without the smallest distress. Icertainly get better and better.—Now for it.”Mrs. Weston was disengaged and Emma began again—“Mr. FrankChurchill writes one of the best gentleman’s hands I ever saw.”“I do not admire it,” said Mr. Knightley. “It is toosmall—wants strength. It is like a woman’s writing.”This was not submitted to by either lady. They vindicated him against the baseaspersion. “No, it by no means wanted strength—it was not a largehand, but very clear and certainly strong. Had not Mrs. Weston any letter abouther to produce?” No, she had heard from him very lately, but havinganswered the letter, had put it away.“If we were in the other room,” said Emma, “if I had mywriting-desk, I am sure I could produce a specimen. I have a note ofhis.—Do not you remember, Mrs. Weston, employing him to write for you oneday?”“He chose to say he was employed”—“Well, well, I have that note; and can shew it after dinner to convinceMr. Knightley.”“Oh! when a gallant young man, like Mr. Frank Churchill,” said Mr.Knightley dryly, “writes to a fair lady like Miss Woodhouse, he will, ofcourse, put forth his best.”Dinner was on table.—Mrs. Elton, before she could be spoken to, wasready; and before Mr. Woodhouse had reached her with his request to be allowedto hand her into the dining-parlour, was saying—“Must I go first? I really am ashamed of always leading the way.”Jane’s solicitude about fetching her own letters had not escaped Emma.She had heard and seen it all; and felt some curiosity to know whether the wetwalk of this morning had produced any. She suspected that it had; thatit would not have been so resolutely encountered but in full expectation ofhearing from some one very dear, and that it had not been in vain. She thoughtthere was an air of greater happiness than usual—a glow both ofcomplexion and spirits.She could have made an inquiry or two, as to the expedition and the expense ofthe Irish mails;—it was at her tongue’s end—but sheabstained. She was quite determined not to utter a word that should hurt JaneFairfax’s feelings; and they followed the other ladies out of the room,arm in arm, with an appearance of good-will highly becoming to the beauty andgrace of each.CHAPTER XVIIWhen the ladies returned to the drawing-room after dinner, Emma found it hardlypossible to prevent their making two distinct parties;—with so muchperseverance in judging and behaving ill did Mrs. Elton engross Jane Fairfaxand slight herself. She and Mrs. Weston were obliged to be almost always eithertalking together or silent together. Mrs. Elton left them no choice. If Janerepressed her for a little time, she soon began again; and though much thatpassed between them was in a half-whisper, especially on Mrs. Elton’sside, there was no avoiding a knowledge of their principal subjects: Thepost-office—catching cold—fetching letters—and friendship,were long under discussion; and to them succeeded one, which must be at leastequally unpleasant to Jane—inquiries whether she had yet heard of anysituation likely to suit her, and professions of Mrs. Elton’s meditatedactivity.“Here is April come!” said she, “I get quite anxious aboutyou. June will soon be here.”“But I have never fixed on June or any other month—merely lookedforward to the summer in general.”“But have you really heard of nothing?”“I have not even made any inquiry; I do not wish to make any yet.”“Oh! my dear, we cannot begin too early; you are not aware of thedifficulty of procuring exactly the desirable thing.”“I not aware!” said Jane, shaking her head; “dear Mrs. Elton,who can have thought of it as I have done?”“But you have not seen so much of the world as I have. You do not knowhow many candidates there always are for the first situations. I saw avast deal of that in the neighbourhood round Maple Grove. A cousin of Mr.Suckling, Mrs. Bragge, had such an infinity of applications; every body wasanxious to be in her family, for she moves in the first circle. Wax-candles inthe schoolroom! You may imagine how desirable! Of all houses in the kingdomMrs. Bragge’s is the one I would most wish to see you in.”“Colonel and Mrs. Campbell are to be in town again by midsummer,”said Jane. “I must spend some time with them; I am sure they will wantit;—afterwards I may probably be glad to dispose of myself. But I wouldnot wish you to take the trouble of making any inquiries at present.”“Trouble! aye, I know your scruples. You are afraid of giving me trouble;but I assure you, my dear Jane, the Campbells can hardly be more interestedabout you than I am. I shall write to Mrs. Partridge in a day or two, and shallgive her a strict charge to be on the look-out for any thing eligible.”“Thank you, but I would rather you did not mention the subject to her;till the time draws nearer, I do not wish to be giving any body trouble.”“But, my dear child, the time is drawing near; here is April, and June,or say even July, is very near, with such business to accomplish before us.Your inexperience really amuses me! A situation such as you deserve, and yourfriends would require for you, is no everyday occurrence, is not obtained at amoment’s notice; indeed, indeed, we must begin inquiring directly.”“Excuse me, ma’am, but this is by no means my intention; I make noinquiry myself, and should be sorry to have any made by my friends. When I amquite determined as to the time, I am not at all afraid of being longunemployed. There are places in town, offices, where inquiry would soon producesomething—Offices for the sale—not quite of human flesh—butof human intellect.”“Oh! my dear, human flesh! You quite shock me; if you mean a fling at theslave-trade, I assure you Mr. Suckling was always rather a friend to theabolition.”“I did not mean, I was not thinking of the slave-trade,” repliedJane; “governess-trade, I assure you, was all that I had in view; widelydifferent certainly as to the guilt of those who carry it on; but as to thegreater misery of the victims, I do not know where it lies. But I only mean tosay that there are advertising offices, and that by applying to them I shouldhave no doubt of very soon meeting with something that would do.”“Something that would do!” repeated Mrs. Elton. “Aye,that may suit your humble ideas of yourself;—I know what a modestcreature you are; but it will not satisfy your friends to have you taking upwith any thing that may offer, any inferior, commonplace situation, in a familynot moving in a certain circle, or able to command the elegancies oflife.”“You are very obliging; but as to all that, I am very indifferent; itwould be no object to me to be with the rich; my mortifications, I think, wouldonly be the greater; I should suffer more from comparison. A gentleman’sfamily is all that I should condition for.”“I know you, I know you; you would take up with any thing; but I shall bea little more nice, and I am sure the good Campbells will be quite on my side;with your superior talents, you have a right to move in the first circle. Yourmusical knowledge alone would entitle you to name your own terms, have as manyrooms as you like, and mix in the family as much as you chose;—thatis—I do not know—if you knew the harp, you might do all that, I amvery sure; but you sing as well as play;—yes, I really believe you might,even without the harp, stipulate for what you chose;—and you must andshall be delightfully, honourably and comfortably settled before the Campbellsor I have any rest.”“You may well class the delight, the honour, and the comfort of such asituation together,” said Jane, “they are pretty sure to be equal;however, I am very serious in not wishing any thing to be attempted at presentfor me. I am exceedingly obliged to you, Mrs. Elton, I am obliged to any bodywho feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishing nothing to be done till thesummer. For two or three months longer I shall remain where I am, and as Iam.”“And I am quite serious too, I assure you,” replied Mrs. Eltongaily, “in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friendsto watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us.”In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till Mr.Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change of object, and Emmaheard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane,“Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!—Only think ofhis gallantry in coming away before the other men!—what a dear creaturehe is;—I assure you I like him excessively. I admire all that quaint,old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease; modernease often disgusts me. But this good old Mr. Woodhouse, I wish you had heardhis gallant speeches to me at dinner. Oh! I assure you I began to think my carosposo would be absolutely jealous. I fancy I am rather a favourite; he tooknotice of my gown. How do you like it?—Selina’schoice—handsome, I think, but I do not know whether it is notover-trimmed; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of beingover-trimmed—quite a horror of finery. I must put on a few ornaments now,because it is expected of me. A bride, you know, must appear like a bride, butmy natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple style of dress is soinfinitely preferable to finery. But I am quite in the minority, I believe; fewpeople seem to value simplicity of dress,—show and finery are everything. I have some notion of putting such a trimming as this to my white andsilver poplin. Do you think it will look well?”The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr. Westonmade his appearance among them. He had returned to a late dinner, and walked toHartfield as soon as it was over. He had been too much expected by the bestjudges, for surprize—but there was great joy. Mr. Woodhouse was almost asglad to see him now, as he would have been sorry to see him before. JohnKnightley only was in mute astonishment.—That a man who might have spenthis evening quietly at home after a day of business in London, should set offagain, and walk half a mile to another man’s house, for the sake of beingin mixed company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civilityand the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply. A man whohad been in motion since eight o’clock in the morning, and might now havebeen still, who had been long talking, and might have been silent, who had beenin more than one crowd, and might have been alone!—Such a man, to quitthe tranquillity and independence of his own fireside, and on the evening of acold sleety April day rush out again into the world!—Could he by a touchof his finger have instantly taken back his wife, there would have been amotive; but his coming would probably prolong rather than break up the party.John Knightley looked at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, andsaid, “I could not have believed it even of him.”Mr. Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he wasexciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all the right of beingprincipal talker, which a day spent anywhere from home confers, was makinghimself agreeable among the rest; and having satisfied the inquiries of hiswife as to his dinner, convincing her that none of all her careful directionsto the servants had been forgotten, and spread abroad what public news he hadheard, was proceeding to a family communication, which, though principallyaddressed to Mrs. Weston, he had not the smallest doubt of being highlyinteresting to every body in the room. He gave her a letter, it was from Frank,and to herself; he had met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty ofopening it.“Read it, read it,” said he, “it will give you pleasure; onlya few lines—will not take you long; read it to Emma.”The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talking to themthe whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible to every body.“Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think. Well, what do you sayto it?—I always told you he would be here again soon, did notI?—Anne, my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not believeme?—In town next week, you see—at the latest, I dare say; forshe is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be done;most likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her illness, allnothing of course. But it is an excellent thing to have Frank among us again,so near as town. They will stay a good while when they do come, and he will behalf his time with us. This is precisely what I wanted. Well, pretty good news,is not it? Have you finished it? Has Emma read it all? Put it up, put it up; wewill have a good talk about it some other time, but it will not do now. I shallonly just mention the circumstance to the others in a common way.”Mrs. Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion. Her looks and wordshad nothing to restrain them. She was happy, she knew she was happy, and knewshe ought to be happy. Her congratulations were warm and open; but Emma couldnot speak so fluently. She was a little occupied in weighing her ownfeelings, and trying to understand the degree of her agitation, which sherather thought was considerable.Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative to wantothers to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say, and soon movedaway to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial communication of whatthe whole room must have overheard already.It was well that he took every body’s joy for granted, or he might nothave thought either Mr. Woodhouse or Mr. Knightley particularly delighted. Theywere the first entitled, after Mrs. Weston and Emma, to be madehappy;—from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax, but she was sodeep in conversation with John Knightley, that it would have been too positivean interruption; and finding himself close to Mrs. Elton, and her attentiondisengaged, he necessarily began on the subject with her.CHAPTER XVIII“I hope I shall soon have the pleasure of introducing my son toyou,” said Mr. Weston.Mrs. Elton, very willing to suppose a particular compliment intended her bysuch a hope, smiled most graciously.“You have heard of a certain Frank Churchill, I presume,” hecontinued—“and know him to be my son, though he does not bear myname.”“Oh! yes, and I shall be very happy in his acquaintance. I am sure Mr.Elton will lose no time in calling on him; and we shall both have greatpleasure in seeing him at the Vicarage.”“You are very obliging.—Frank will be extremely happy, I amsure.— He is to be in town next week, if not sooner. We have notice of itin a letter to-day. I met the letters in my way this morning, and seeing myson’s hand, presumed to open it—though it was not directed tome—it was to Mrs. Weston. She is his principal correspondent, I assureyou. I hardly ever get a letter.”“And so you absolutely opened what was directed to her! Oh! Mr.Weston—(laughing affectedly) I must protest against that.—A mostdangerous precedent indeed!—I beg you will not let your neighbours followyour example.—Upon my word, if this is what I am to expect, we marriedwomen must begin to exert ourselves!—Oh! Mr. Weston, I could not havebelieved it of you!”“Aye, we men are sad fellows. You must take care of yourself, Mrs.Elton.—This letter tells us—it is a short letter—written in ahurry, merely to give us notice—it tells us that they are all coming upto town directly, on Mrs. Churchill’s account—she has not been wellthe whole winter, and thinks Enscombe too cold for her—so they are all tomove southward without loss of time.”“Indeed!—from Yorkshire, I think. Enscombe is in Yorkshire?”“Yes, they are about one hundred and ninety miles from London, aconsiderable journey.”“Yes, upon my word, very considerable. Sixty-five miles farther than fromMaple Grove to London. But what is distance, Mr. Weston, to people of largefortune?—You would be amazed to hear how my brother, Mr. Suckling,sometimes flies about. You will hardly believe me—but twice in one weekhe and Mr. Bragge went to London and back again with four horses.”“The evil of the distance from Enscombe,” said Mr. Weston,“is, that Mrs. Churchill, as we understand, has notbeen able to leave the sofa for a week together. In Frank’s last lettershe complained, he said, of being too weak to get into her conservatory withouthaving both his arm and his uncle’s! This, you know, speaks a greatdegree of weakness—but now she is so impatient to be in town, that shemeans to sleep only two nights on the road.—So Frank writes word.Certainly, delicate ladies have very extraordinary constitutions, Mrs. Elton.You must grant me that.”“No, indeed, I shall grant you nothing. I always take the part of my ownsex. I do indeed. I give you notice—You will find me a formidableantagonist on that point. I always stand up for women—and I assure you,if you knew how Selina feels with respect to sleeping at an inn, you would notwonder at Mrs. Churchill’s making incredible exertions to avoid it.Selina says it is quite horror to her—and I believe I have caught alittle of her nicety. She always travels with her own sheets; an excellentprecaution. Does Mrs. Churchill do the same?”“Depend upon it, Mrs. Churchill does every thing that any other fine ladyever did. Mrs. Churchill will not be second to any lady in the landfor”—Mrs. Elton eagerly interposed with,“Oh! Mr. Weston, do not mistake me. Selina is no fine lady, I assure you.Do not run away with such an idea.”“Is not she? Then she is no rule for Mrs. Churchill, who is as thorough afine lady as any body ever beheld.”Mrs. Elton began to think she had been wrong in disclaiming so warmly. It wasby no means her object to have it believed that her sister was not afine lady; perhaps there was want of spirit in the pretence of it;—andshe was considering in what way she had best retract, when Mr. Weston went on.“Mrs. Churchill is not much in my good graces, as you maysuspect—but this is quite between ourselves. She is very fond of Frank,and therefore I would not speak ill of her. Besides, she is out of health now;but that indeed, by her own account, she has always been. I would notsay so to every body, Mrs. Elton, but I have not much faith in Mrs.Churchill’s illness.”“If she is really ill, why not go to Bath, Mr. Weston?—To Bath, orto Clifton?” “She has taken it into her head that Enscombe is toocold for her. The fact is, I suppose, that she is tired of Enscombe. She hasnow been a longer time stationary there, than she ever was before, and shebegins to want change. It is a retired place. A fine place, but veryretired.”“Aye—like Maple Grove, I dare say. Nothing can stand more retiredfrom the road than Maple Grove. Such an immense plantation all round it! Youseem shut out from every thing—in the most complete retirement.—AndMrs. Churchill probably has not health or spirits like Selina to enjoy thatsort of seclusion. Or, perhaps she may not have resources enough in herself tobe qualified for a country life. I always say a woman cannot have too manyresources—and I feel very thankful that I have so many myself as to bequite independent of society.”“Frank was here in February for a fortnight.”“So I remember to have heard. He will find an addition to thesociety of Highbury when he comes again; that is, if I may presume to callmyself an addition. But perhaps he may never have heard of there being such acreature in the world.”This was too loud a call for a compliment to be passed by, and Mr. Weston, witha very good grace, immediately exclaimed,“My dear madam! Nobody but yourself could imagine such a thing possible.Not heard of you!—I believe Mrs. Weston’s letters lately have beenfull of very little else than Mrs. Elton.”He had done his duty and could return to his son.“When Frank left us,” continued he, “it was quite uncertainwhen we might see him again, which makes this day’s news doubly welcome.It has been completely unexpected. That is, I always had a strongpersuasion he would be here again soon, I was sure something favourable wouldturn up—but nobody believed me. He and Mrs. Weston were both dreadfullydesponding. ‘How could he contrive to come? And how could it be supposedthat his uncle and aunt would spare him again?’ and so forth—Ialways felt that something would happen in our favour; and so it has, you see.I have observed, Mrs. Elton, in the course of my life, that if things are goinguntowardly one month, they are sure to mend the next.”“Very true, Mr. Weston, perfectly true. It is just what I used to say toa certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship, when, because thingsdid not go quite right, did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited hisfeelings, he was apt to be in despair, and exclaim that he was sure at thisrate it would be May before Hymen’s saffron robe would be put onfor us. Oh! the pains I have been at to dispel those gloomy ideas and give himcheerfuller views! The carriage—we had disappointments about thecarriage;—one morning, I remember, he came to me quite in despair.”She was stopped by a slight fit of coughing, and Mr. Weston instantly seizedthe opportunity of going on.“You were mentioning May. May is the very month which Mrs. Churchill isordered, or has ordered herself, to spend in some warmer place thanEnscombe—in short, to spend in London; so that we have the agreeableprospect of frequent visits from Frank the whole spring—precisely theseason of the year which one should have chosen for it: days almost at thelongest; weather genial and pleasant, always inviting one out, and never toohot for exercise. When he was here before, we made the best of it; but therewas a good deal of wet, damp, cheerless weather; there always is in February,you know, and we could not do half that we intended. Now will be the time. Thiswill be complete enjoyment; and I do not know, Mrs. Elton, whether theuncertainty of our meetings, the sort of constant expectation there will be ofhis coming in to-day or to-morrow, and at any hour, may not be more friendly tohappiness than having him actually in the house. I think it is so. I think itis the state of mind which gives most spirit and delight. I hope you will bepleased with my son; but you must not expect a prodigy. He is generally thoughta fine young man, but do not expect a prodigy. Mrs. Weston’s partialityfor him is very great, and, as you may suppose, most gratifying to me. Shethinks nobody equal to him.”“And I assure you, Mr. Weston, I have very little doubt that my opinionwill be decidedly in his favour. I have heard so much in praise of Mr. FrankChurchill.—At the same time it is fair to observe, that I am one of thosewho always judge for themselves, and are by no means implicitly guided byothers. I give you notice that as I find your son, so I shall judge ofhim.—I am no flatterer.”Mr. Weston was musing.“I hope,” said he presently, “I have not been severe uponpoor Mrs. Churchill. If she is ill I should be sorry to do her injustice; butthere are some traits in her character which make it difficult for me to speakof her with the forbearance I could wish. You cannot be ignorant, Mrs. Elton,of my connexion with the family, nor of the treatment I have met with; and,between ourselves, the whole blame of it is to be laid to her. She was theinstigator. Frank’s mother would never have been slighted as she was butfor her. Mr. Churchill has pride; but his pride is nothing to his wife’s:his is a quiet, indolent, gentlemanlike sort of pride that would harm nobody,and only make himself a little helpless and tiresome; but her pride isarrogance and insolence! And what inclines one less to bear, she has no fairpretence of family or blood. She was nobody when he married her, barely thedaughter of a gentleman; but ever since her being turned into a Churchill shehas out-Churchill’d them all in high and mighty claims: but in herself, Iassure you, she is an upstart.”“Only think! well, that must be infinitely provoking! I have quite ahorror of upstarts. Maple Grove has given me a thorough disgust to people ofthat sort; for there is a family in that neighbourhood who are such anannoyance to my brother and sister from the airs they give themselves! Yourdescription of Mrs. Churchill made me think of them directly. People of thename of Tupman, very lately settled there, and encumbered with many lowconnexions, but giving themselves immense airs, and expecting to be on afooting with the old established families. A year and a half is the very utmostthat they can have lived at West Hall; and how they got their fortune nobodyknows. They came from Birmingham, which is not a place to promise much, youknow, Mr. Weston. One has not great hopes from Birmingham. I always say thereis something direful in the sound: but nothing more is positively known of theTupmans, though a good many things I assure you are suspected; and yet by theirmanners they evidently think themselves equal even to my brother, Mr. Suckling,who happens to be one of their nearest neighbours. It is infinitely too bad.Mr. Suckling, who has been eleven years a resident at Maple Grove, and whosefather had it before him—I believe, at least—I am almost sure thatold Mr. Suckling had completed the purchase before his death.”They were interrupted. Tea was carrying round, and Mr. Weston, having said allthat he wanted, soon took the opportunity of walking away.After tea, Mr. and Mrs. Weston, and Mr. Elton sat down with Mr. Woodhouse tocards. The remaining five were left to their own powers, and Emma doubted theirgetting on very well; for Mr. Knightley seemed little disposed forconversation; Mrs. Elton was wanting notice, which nobody had inclination topay, and she was herself in a worry of spirits which would have made her preferbeing silent.Mr. John Knightley proved more talkative than his brother. He was to leave themearly the next day; and he soon began with—“Well, Emma, I do not believe I have any thing more to say about theboys; but you have your sister’s letter, and every thing is down at fulllength there we may be sure. My charge would be much more concise thanher’s, and probably not much in the same spirit; all that I have torecommend being comprised in, do not spoil them, and do not physic them.”“I rather hope to satisfy you both,” said Emma, “for I shalldo all in my power to make them happy, which will be enough for Isabella; andhappiness must preclude false indulgence and physic.”“And if you find them troublesome, you must send them home again.”“That is very likely. You think so, do not you?”“I hope I am aware that they may be too noisy for your father—oreven may be some encumbrance to you, if your visiting engagements continue toincrease as much as they have done lately.”“Increase!”“Certainly; you must be sensible that the last half-year has made a greatdifference in your way of life.”“Difference! No indeed I am not.”“There can be no doubt of your being much more engaged with company thanyou used to be. Witness this very time. Here am I come down for only one day,and you are engaged with a dinner-party!—When did it happen before, orany thing like it? Your neighbourhood is increasing, and you mix more with it.A little while ago, every letter to Isabella brought an account of freshgaieties; dinners at Mr. Cole’s, or balls at the Crown. The differencewhich Randalls, Randalls alone makes in your goings-on, is very great.”“Yes,” said his brother quickly, “it is Randalls that does itall.”“Very well—and as Randalls, I suppose, is not likely to have lessinfluence than heretofore, it strikes me as a possible thing, Emma, that Henryand John may be sometimes in the way. And if they are, I only beg you to sendthem home.”“No,” cried Mr. Knightley, “that need not be the consequence.Let them be sent to Donwell. I shall certainly be at leisure.”“Upon my word,” exclaimed Emma, “you amuse me! I should liketo know how many of all my numerous engagements take place without your beingof the party; and why I am to be supposed in danger of wanting leisure toattend to the little boys. These amazing engagements of mine—what havethey been? Dining once with the Coles—and having a ball talked of, whichnever took place. I can understand you—(nodding at Mr. JohnKnightley)—your good fortune in meeting with so many of your friends atonce here, delights you too much to pass unnoticed. But you, (turning to Mr.Knightley,) who know how very, very seldom I am ever two hours from Hartfield,why you should foresee such a series of dissipation for me, I cannot imagine.And as to my dear little boys, I must say, that if Aunt Emma has not time forthem, I do not think they would fare much better with Uncle Knightley, who isabsent from home about five hours where she is absent one—and who, whenhe is at home, is either reading to himself or settling his accounts.”Mr. Knightley seemed to be trying not to smile; and succeeded withoutdifficulty, upon Mrs. Elton’s beginning to talk to him.VOLUME IIICHAPTER IA very little quiet reflection was enough to satisfy Emma as to the nature ofher agitation on hearing this news of Frank Churchill. She was soon convincedthat it was not for herself she was feeling at all apprehensive or embarrassed;it was for him. Her own attachment had really subsided into a mere nothing; itwas not worth thinking of;—but if he, who had undoubtedly been always somuch the most in love of the two, were to be returning with the same warmth ofsentiment which he had taken away, it would be very distressing. If aseparation of two months should not have cooled him, there were dangers andevils before her:—caution for him and for herself would be necessary. Shedid not mean to have her own affections entangled again, and it would beincumbent on her to avoid any encouragement of his.She wished she might be able to keep him from an absolute declaration. Thatwould be so very painful a conclusion of their present acquaintance! and yet,she could not help rather anticipating something decisive. She felt as if thespring would not pass without bringing a crisis, an event, a something to alterher present composed and tranquil state.It was not very long, though rather longer than Mr. Weston had foreseen, beforeshe had the power of forming some opinion of Frank Churchill’s feelings.The Enscombe family were not in town quite so soon as had been imagined, but hewas at Highbury very soon afterwards. He rode down for a couple of hours; hecould not yet do more; but as he came from Randalls immediately to Hartfield,she could then exercise all her quick observation, and speedily determine howhe was influenced, and how she must act. They met with the utmost friendliness.There could be no doubt of his great pleasure in seeing her. But she had analmost instant doubt of his caring for her as he had done, of his feeling thesame tenderness in the same degree. She watched him well. It was a clear thinghe was less in love than he had been. Absence, with the conviction probably ofher indifference, had produced this very natural and very desirable effect.He was in high spirits; as ready to talk and laugh as ever, and seemeddelighted to speak of his former visit, and recur to old stories: and he wasnot without agitation. It was not in his calmness that she read his comparativeindifference. He was not calm; his spirits were evidently fluttered; there wasrestlessness about him. Lively as he was, it seemed a liveliness that did notsatisfy himself; but what decided her belief on the subject, was his stayingonly a quarter of an hour, and hurrying away to make other calls in Highbury.“He had seen a group of old acquaintance in the street as hepassed—he had not stopped, he would not stop for more than aword—but he had the vanity to think they would be disappointed if he didnot call, and much as he wished to stay longer at Hartfield, he must hurryoff.” She had no doubt as to his being less in love—but neither hisagitated spirits, nor his hurrying away, seemed like a perfect cure; and shewas rather inclined to think it implied a dread of her returning power, and adiscreet resolution of not trusting himself with her long.This was the only visit from Frank Churchill in the course of ten days. He wasoften hoping, intending to come—but was always prevented. His aunt couldnot bear to have him leave her. Such was his own account at Randall’s. Ifhe were quite sincere, if he really tried to come, it was to be inferred thatMrs. Churchill’s removal to London had been of no service to the wilfulor nervous part of her disorder. That she was really ill was very certain; hehad declared himself convinced of it, at Randalls. Though much might be fancy,he could not doubt, when he looked back, that she was in a weaker state ofhealth than she had been half a year ago. He did not believe it to proceed fromany thing that care and medicine might not remove, or at least that she mightnot have many years of existence before her; but he could not be prevailed on,by all his father’s doubts, to say that her complaints were merelyimaginary, or that she was as strong as ever.It soon appeared that London was not the place for her. She could not endureits noise. Her nerves were under continual irritation and suffering; and by theten days’ end, her nephew’s letter to Randalls communicated achange of plan. They were going to remove immediately to Richmond. Mrs.Churchill had been recommended to the medical skill of an eminent person there,and had otherwise a fancy for the place. A ready-furnished house in a favouritespot was engaged, and much benefit expected from the change.Emma heard that Frank wrote in the highest spirits of this arrangement, andseemed most fully to appreciate the blessing of having two months before him ofsuch near neighbourhood to many dear friends—for the house was taken forMay and June. She was told that now he wrote with the greatest confidence ofbeing often with them, almost as often as he could even wish.Emma saw how Mr. Weston understood these joyous prospects. He was consideringher as the source of all the happiness they offered. She hoped it was not so.Two months must bring it to the proof.Mr. Weston’s own happiness was indisputable. He was quite delighted. Itwas the very circumstance he could have wished for. Now, it would be reallyhaving Frank in their neighbourhood. What were nine miles to a youngman?—An hour’s ride. He would be always coming over. The differencein that respect of Richmond and London was enough to make the whole differenceof seeing him always and seeing him never. Sixteen miles—nay,eighteen—it must be full eighteen to Manchester-street—was aserious obstacle. Were he ever able to get away, the day would be spent incoming and returning. There was no comfort in having him in London; he might aswell be at Enscombe; but Richmond was the very distance for easy intercourse.Better than nearer!One good thing was immediately brought to a certainty by thisremoval,—the ball at the Crown. It had not been forgotten before, but ithad been soon acknowledged vain to attempt to fix a day. Now, however, it wasabsolutely to be; every preparation was resumed, and very soon after theChurchills had removed to Richmond, a few lines from Frank, to say that hisaunt felt already much better for the change, and that he had no doubt of beingable to join them for twenty-four hours at any given time, induced them to nameas early a day as possible.Mr. Weston’s ball was to be a real thing. A very few to-morrows stoodbetween the young people of Highbury and happiness.Mr. Woodhouse was resigned. The time of year lightened the evil to him. May wasbetter for every thing than February. Mrs. Bates was engaged to spend theevening at Hartfield, James had due notice, and he sanguinely hoped thatneither dear little Henry nor dear little John would have any thing the matterwith them, while dear Emma were gone.CHAPTER IINo misfortune occurred, again to prevent the ball. The day approached, the dayarrived; and after a morning of some anxious watching, Frank Churchill, in allthe certainty of his own self, reached Randalls before dinner, and every thingwas safe.No second meeting had there yet been between him and Emma. The room at theCrown was to witness it;—but it would be better than a common meeting ina crowd. Mr. Weston had been so very earnest in his entreaties for her arrivingthere as soon as possible after themselves, for the purpose of taking heropinion as to the propriety and comfort of the rooms before any other personscame, that she could not refuse him, and must therefore spend some quietinterval in the young man’s company. She was to convey Harriet, and theydrove to the Crown in good time, the Randalls party just sufficiently beforethem.Frank Churchill seemed to have been on the watch; and though he did not saymuch, his eyes declared that he meant to have a delightful evening. They allwalked about together, to see that every thing was as it should be; and withina few minutes were joined by the contents of another carriage, which Emma couldnot hear the sound of at first, without great surprize. “So unreasonablyearly!” she was going to exclaim; but she presently found that it was afamily of old friends, who were coming, like herself, by particular desire, tohelp Mr. Weston’s judgment; and they were so very closely followed byanother carriage of cousins, who had been entreated to come early with the samedistinguishing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if half thecompany might soon be collected together for the purpose of preparatoryinspection.Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr. Westondepended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a man who had somany intimates and confidantes, was not the very first distinction in the scaleof vanity. She liked his open manners, but a little less of open-heartednesswould have made him a higher character.—General benevolence, but notgeneral friendship, made a man what he ought to be.—She could fancy sucha man. The whole party walked about, and looked, and praised again; and then,having nothing else to do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, toobserve in their various modes, till other subjects were started, that, thoughMay, a fire in the evening was still very pleasant.Emma found that it was not Mr. Weston’s fault that the number of privycouncillors was not yet larger. They had stopped at Mrs. Bates’s door tooffer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be brought bythe Eltons.Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness, whichshewed a mind not at ease. He was looking about, he was going to the door, hewas watching for the sound of other carriages,—impatient to begin, orafraid of being always near her.Mrs. Elton was spoken of. “I think she must be here soon,” said he.“I have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have heard so much of her.It cannot be long, I think, before she comes.”A carriage was heard. He was on the move immediately; but coming back, said,“I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her. I have never seeneither Mr. or Mrs. Elton. I have no business to put myself forward.”Mr. and Mrs. Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprieties passed.“But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!” said Mr. Weston, looking about.“We thought you were to bring them.”The mistake had been slight. The carriage was sent for them now. Emma longed toknow what Frank’s first opinion of Mrs. Elton might be; how he wasaffected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles of graciousness.He was immediately qualifying himself to form an opinion, by giving her veryproper attention, after the introduction had passed.In a few minutes the carriage returned.—Somebody talked ofrain.—“I will see that there are umbrellas, sir,” said Frankto his father: “Miss Bates must not be forgotten:” and away hewent. Mr. Weston was following; but Mrs. Elton detained him, to gratify him byher opinion of his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young manhimself, though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.“A very fine young man indeed, Mr. Weston. You know I candidly told you Ishould form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am extremely pleasedwith him.—You may believe me. I never compliment. I think him a veryhandsome young man, and his manners are precisely what I like andapprove—so truly the gentleman, without the least conceit or puppyism.You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies—quite a horror of them.They were never tolerated at Maple Grove. Neither Mr. Suckling nor me had everany patience with them; and we used sometimes to say very cutting things!Selina, who is mild almost to a fault, bore with them much better.”While she talked of his son, Mr. Weston’s attention was chained; but whenshe got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were ladies just arrivingto be attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.Mrs. Elton turned to Mrs. Weston. “I have no doubt of its being ourcarriage with Miss Bates and Jane. Our coachman and horses are so extremelyexpeditious!—I believe we drive faster than any body.—What apleasure it is to send one’s carriage for a friend!—I understandyou were so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite unnecessary.You may be very sure I shall always take care of them.”Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked into theroom; and Mrs. Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs. Weston’sto receive them. Her gestures and movements might be understood by any one wholooked on like Emma; but her words, every body’s words, were soon lostunder the incessant flow of Miss Bates, who came in talking, and had notfinished her speech under many minutes after her being admitted into the circleat the fire. As the door opened she was heard,“So very obliging of you!—No rain at all. Nothing to signify. I donot care for myself. Quite thick shoes. And Jane declares—Well!—(assoon as she was within the door) Well! This is brilliant indeed!—This isadmirable!—Excellently contrived, upon my word. Nothing wanting. Couldnot have imagined it.—So well lighted up!—Jane, Jane,look!—did you ever see any thing? Oh! Mr. Weston, you must really havehad Aladdin’s lamp. Good Mrs. Stokes would not know her own room again. Isaw her as I came in; she was standing in the entrance. ‘Oh! Mrs.Stokes,’ said I—but I had not time for more.” She was now metby Mrs. Weston.—“Very well, I thank you, ma’am. I hope youare quite well. Very happy to hear it. So afraid you might have aheadache!—seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much trouble youmust have. Delighted to hear it indeed. Ah! dear Mrs. Elton, so obliged to youfor the carriage!—excellent time. Jane and I quite ready. Did not keepthe horses a moment. Most comfortable carriage.—Oh! and I am sure ourthanks are due to you, Mrs. Weston, on that score. Mrs. Elton had most kindlysent Jane a note, or we should have been.—But two such offers in oneday!—Never were such neighbours. I said to my mother, ‘Upon myword, ma’am—.’ Thank you, my mother is remarkably well. Goneto Mr. Woodhouse’s. I made her take her shawl—for the evenings arenot warm—her large new shawl— Mrs. Dixon’swedding-present.—So kind of her to think of my mother! Bought atWeymouth, you know—Mr. Dixon’s choice. There were three others,Jane says, which they hesitated about some time. Colonel Campbell ratherpreferred an olive. My dear Jane, are you sure you did not wet yourfeet?—It was but a drop or two, but I am so afraid:—but Mr. FrankChurchill was so extremely—and there was a mat to step upon—I shallnever forget his extreme politeness.—Oh! Mr. Frank Churchill, I must tellyou my mother’s spectacles have never been in fault since; the rivetnever came out again. My mother often talks of your good-nature. Does not she,Jane?—Do not we often talk of Mr. Frank Churchill?—Ah! here’sMiss Woodhouse.—Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do you do?—Very well Ithank you, quite well. This is meeting quite in fairy-land!—Such atransformation!—Must not compliment, I know (eyeing Emma mostcomplacently)—that would be rude—but upon my word, Miss Woodhouse,you do look—how do you like Jane’s hair?—You are ajudge.—She did it all herself. Quite wonderful how she does herhair!—No hairdresser from London I think could.—Ah! Dr. Hughes Ideclare—and Mrs. Hughes. Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs. Hughes for amoment.—How do you do? How do you do?—Very well, I thank you. Thisis delightful, is not it?—Where’s dear Mr. Richard?—Oh! therehe is. Don’t disturb him. Much better employed talking to the youngladies. How do you do, Mr. Richard?—I saw you the other day as you rodethrough the town—Mrs. Otway, I protest!—and good Mr. Otway, andMiss Otway and Miss Caroline.—Such a host of friends!—and Mr.George and Mr. Arthur!—How do you do? How do you all do?—Quitewell, I am much obliged to you. Never better.—Don’t I hear anothercarriage?—Who can this be?—very likely the worthy Coles.—Uponmy word, this is charming to be standing about among such friends! And such anoble fire!—I am quite roasted. No coffee, I thank you, forme—never take coffee.—A little tea if you please, sir, by andbye,—no hurry—Oh! here it comes. Every thing so good!”Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss Bates wasquiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the discourse of Mrs. Eltonand Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little way behind her.—He wasthoughtful. Whether he were overhearing too, she could not determine. After agood many compliments to Jane on her dress and look, compliments very quietlyand properly taken, Mrs. Elton was evidently wanting to be complimentedherself—and it was, “How do you like my gown?—How do you likemy trimming?—How has Wright done my hair?”—with many otherrelative questions, all answered with patient politeness. Mrs. Elton then said,“Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do—but upon suchan occasion as this, when every body’s eyes are so much upon me, and incompliment to the Westons—who I have no doubt are giving this ballchiefly to do me honour—I would not wish to be inferior to others. And Isee very few pearls in the room except mine.—So Frank Churchill is acapital dancer, I understand.—We shall see if our styles suit.—Afine young man certainly is Frank Churchill. I like him very well.”At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not butimagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hearmore;—and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till anothersuspension brought Mrs. Elton’s tones again distinctly forward.—Mr.Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,“Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?—Iwas this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient fortidings of us.”“Jane!”—repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize anddispleasure.—“That is easy—but Miss Fairfax does notdisapprove it, I suppose.”“How do you like Mrs. Elton?” said Emma in a whisper.“Not at all.”“You are ungrateful.”“Ungrateful!—What do you mean?” Then changing from a frown toa smile—“No, do not tell me—I do not want to know what youmean.—Where is my father?—When are we to begin dancing?”Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour. He walked off tofind his father, but was quickly back again with both Mr. and Mrs. Weston. Hehad met with them in a little perplexity, which must be laid before Emma. Ithad just occurred to Mrs. Weston that Mrs. Elton must be asked to begin theball; that she would expect it; which interfered with all their wishes ofgiving Emma that distinction.—Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.“And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?” said Mr.Weston. “She will think Frank ought to ask her.”Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and boastedhimself an engaged man, which his father looked his most perfect approbationof—and it then appeared that Mrs. Weston was wanting him to dancewith Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business was to help to persuade himinto it, which was done pretty soon.—Mr. Weston and Mrs. Elton led theway, Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Woodhouse followed. Emma must submit to standsecond to Mrs. Elton, though she had always considered the ball as peculiarlyfor her. It was almost enough to make her think of marrying. Mrs. Elton hadundoubtedly the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely gratified; forthough she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill, she could not lose bythe change. Mr. Weston might be his son’s superior.—In spite ofthis little rub, however, Emma was smiling with enjoyment, delighted to see therespectable length of the set as it was forming, and to feel that she had somany hours of unusual festivity before her.—She was more disturbed by Mr.Knightley’s not dancing than by any thing else.—There he was, amongthe standers-by, where he ought not to be; he ought to be dancing,—notclassing himself with the husbands, and fathers, and whist-players, who werepretending to feel an interest in the dance till their rubbers were madeup,—so young as he looked!—He could not have appeared to greateradvantage perhaps anywhere, than where he had placed himself. His tall, firm,upright figure, among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderlymen, was such as Emma felt must draw every body’s eyes; and, exceptingher own partner, there was not one among the whole row of young men who couldbe compared with him.—He moved a few steps nearer, and those few stepswere enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner, with what natural grace, hemust have danced, would he but take the trouble.—Whenever she caught hiseye, she forced him to smile; but in general he was looking grave. She wishedhe could love a ballroom better, and could like Frank Churchillbetter.—He seemed often observing her. She must not flatter herself thathe thought of her dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she didnot feel afraid. There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner.They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers. That Frank Churchillthought less of her than he had done, was indubitable.The ball proceeded pleasantly. The anxious cares, the incessant attentions ofMrs. Weston, were not thrown away. Every body seemed happy; and the praise ofbeing a delightful ball, which is seldom bestowed till after a ball has ceasedto be, was repeatedly given in the very beginning of the existence of this. Ofvery important, very recordable events, it was not more productive than suchmeetings usually are. There was one, however, which Emma thought somethingof.—The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had nopartner;—the only young lady sitting down;—and so equal had beenhitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one disengaged wasthe wonder!—But Emma’s wonder lessened soon afterwards, on seeingMr. Elton sauntering about. He would not ask Harriet to dance if it werepossible to be avoided: she was sure he would not—and she was expectinghim every moment to escape into the card-room.Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to the part of the room where thesitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in front of them, asif to shew his liberty, and his resolution of maintaining it. He did not omitbeing sometimes directly before Miss Smith, or speaking to those who were closeto her.—Emma saw it. She was not yet dancing; she was working her way upfrom the bottom, and had therefore leisure to look around, and by only turningher head a little she saw it all. When she was half-way up the set, the wholegroup were exactly behind her, and she would no longer allow her eyes to watch;but Mr. Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a dialogue whichjust then took place between him and Mrs. Weston; and she perceived that hiswife, who was standing immediately above her, was not only listening also, buteven encouraging him by significant glances.—The kind-hearted, gentleMrs. Weston had left her seat to join him and say, “Do not you dance, Mr.Elton?” to which his prompt reply was, “Most readily, Mrs. Weston,if you will dance with me.”“Me!—oh! no—I would get you a better partner than myself. Iam no dancer.”“If Mrs. Gilbert wishes to dance,” said he, “I shall havegreat pleasure, I am sure—for, though beginning to feel myself rather anold married man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very greatpleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs. Gilbert.”“Mrs. Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young ladydisengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing—Miss Smith.”“Miss Smith!—oh!—I had not observed.—You are extremelyobliging—and if I were not an old married man.—But my dancing daysare over, Mrs. Weston. You will excuse me. Any thing else I should be mosthappy to do, at your command—but my dancing days are over.”Mrs. Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize andmortification she must be returning to her seat. This was Mr. Elton! theamiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Elton.—She looked round for a moment; hehad joined Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and was arranging himself forsettled conversation, while smiles of high glee passed between him and hiswife.She would not look again. Her heart was in a glow, and she feared her facemight be as hot.In another moment a happier sight caught her;—Mr. Knightley leadingHarriet to the set!—Never had she been more surprized, seldom moredelighted, than at that instant. She was all pleasure and gratitude, both forHarriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him; and though too distant forspeech, her countenance said much, as soon as she could catch his eye again.His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good; andHarriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been for the cruelstate of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment and very high senseof the distinction which her happy features announced. It was not thrown awayon her, she bounded higher than ever, flew farther down the middle, and was ina continual course of smiles.Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted) veryfoolish. She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife, though growingvery like her;—she spoke some of her feelings, by observingaudibly to her partner,“Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!—Verygood-natured, I declare.”Supper was announced. The move began; and Miss Bates might be heard from thatmoment, without interruption, till her being seated at table and taking up herspoon.“Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you?—Here is your tippet. Mrs.Weston begs you to put on your tippet. She says she is afraid there will bedraughts in the passage, though every thing has been done—One door nailedup—Quantities of matting—My dear Jane, indeed you must. Mr.Churchill, oh! you are too obliging! How well you put it on!—sogratified! Excellent dancing indeed!—Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I saidI should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody missedme.—I set off without saying a word, just as I told you. Grandmama wasquite well, had a charming evening with Mr. Woodhouse, a vast deal of chat, andbackgammon.—Tea was made downstairs, biscuits and baked apples and winebefore she came away: amazing luck in some of her throws: and she inquired agreat deal about you, how you were amused, and who were your partners.‘Oh!’ said I, ‘I shall not forestall Jane; I left her dancingwith Mr. George Otway; she will love to tell you all about it herselfto-morrow: her first partner was Mr. Elton, I do not know who will ask hernext, perhaps Mr. William Cox.’ My dear sir, you are tooobliging.—Is there nobody you would not rather?—I am not helpless.Sir, you are most kind. Upon my word, Jane on one arm, and me on theother!—Stop, stop, let us stand a little back, Mrs. Elton is going; dearMrs. Elton, how elegant she looks!—Beautiful lace!—Now we allfollow in her train. Quite the queen of the evening!—Well, here we are atthe passage. Two steps, Jane, take care of the two steps. Oh! no, there is butone. Well, I was persuaded there were two. How very odd! I was convinced therewere two, and there is but one. I never saw any thing equal to the comfort andstyle—Candles everywhere.—I was telling you of your grandmama,Jane,—There was a little disappointment.—The baked apples andbiscuits, excellent in their way, you know; but there was a delicate fricasseeof sweetbread and some asparagus brought in at first, and good Mr. Woodhouse,not thinking the asparagus quite boiled enough, sent it all out again. Nowthere is nothing grandmama loves better than sweetbread and asparagus—soshe was rather disappointed, but we agreed we would not speak of it to anybody, for fear of its getting round to dear Miss Woodhouse, who would be sovery much concerned!—Well, this is brilliant! I am all amazement! couldnot have supposed any thing!—Such elegance and profusion!—I haveseen nothing like it since—Well, where shall we sit? where shall we sit?Anywhere, so that Jane is not in a draught. Where I sit is of noconsequence. Oh! do you recommend this side?—Well, I am sure, Mr.Churchill—only it seems too good—but just as you please. What youdirect in this house cannot be wrong. Dear Jane, how shall we ever recollecthalf the dishes for grandmama? Soup too! Bless me! I should not be helped sosoon, but it smells most excellent, and I cannot help beginning.”Emma had no opportunity of speaking to Mr. Knightley till after supper; but,when they were all in the ballroom again, her eyes invited him irresistibly tocome to her and be thanked. He was warm in his reprobation of Mr. Elton’sconduct; it had been unpardonable rudeness; and Mrs. Elton’s looks alsoreceived the due share of censure.“They aimed at wounding more than Harriet,” said he. “Emma,why is it that they are your enemies?”He looked with smiling penetration; and, on receiving no answer, added,“She ought not to be angry with you, I suspect, whatever he maybe.—To that surmise, you say nothing, of course; but confess, Emma, thatyou did want him to marry Harriet.”“I did,” replied Emma, “and they cannot forgive me.”He shook his head; but there was a smile of indulgence with it, and he onlysaid,“I shall not scold you. I leave you to your own reflections.”“Can you trust me with such flatterers?—Does my vain spirit evertell me I am wrong?”“Not your vain spirit, but your serious spirit.—If one leads youwrong, I am sure the other tells you of it.”“I do own myself to have been completely mistaken in Mr. Elton. There isa littleness about him which you discovered, and which I did not: and I wasfully convinced of his being in love with Harriet. It was through a series ofstrange blunders!”“And, in return for your acknowledging so much, I will do you the justiceto say, that you would have chosen for him better than he has chosen forhimself.—Harriet Smith has some first-rate qualities, which Mrs. Elton istotally without. An unpretending, single-minded, artless girl—infinitelyto be preferred by any man of sense and taste to such a woman as Mrs. Elton. Ifound Harriet more conversable than I expected.”Emma was extremely gratified.—They were interrupted by the bustle of Mr.Weston calling on every body to begin dancing again.“Come Miss Woodhouse, Miss Otway, Miss Fairfax, what are you alldoing?—Come Emma, set your companions the example. Every body is lazy!Every body is asleep!”“I am ready,” said Emma, “whenever I am wanted.”“Whom are you going to dance with?” asked Mr. Knightley.She hesitated a moment, and then replied, “With you, if you will askme.”“Will you?” said he, offering his hand.“Indeed I will. You have shewn that you can dance, and you know we arenot really so much brother and sister as to make it at all improper.”“Brother and sister! no, indeed.”CHAPTER IIIThis little explanation with Mr. Knightley gave Emma considerable pleasure. Itwas one of the agreeable recollections of the ball, which she walked about thelawn the next morning to enjoy.—She was extremely glad that they had cometo so good an understanding respecting the Eltons, and that their opinions ofboth husband and wife were so much alike; and his praise of Harriet, hisconcession in her favour, was peculiarly gratifying. The impertinence of theEltons, which for a few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening,had been the occasion of some of its highest satisfactions; and she lookedforward to another happy result—the cure of Harriet’sinfatuation.—From Harriet’s manner of speaking of the circumstancebefore they quitted the ballroom, she had strong hopes. It seemed as if hereyes were suddenly opened, and she were enabled to see that Mr. Elton was notthe superior creature she had believed him. The fever was over, and Emma couldharbour little fear of the pulse being quickened again by injurious courtesy.She depended on the evil feelings of the Eltons for supplying all thediscipline of pointed neglect that could be farther requisite.—Harrietrational, Frank Churchill not too much in love, and Mr. Knightley not wantingto quarrel with her, how very happy a summer must be before her!She was not to see Frank Churchill this morning. He had told her that he couldnot allow himself the pleasure of stopping at Hartfield, as he was to be athome by the middle of the day. She did not regret it.Having arranged all these matters, looked them through, and put them all torights, she was just turning to the house with spirits freshened up for thedemands of the two little boys, as well as of their grandpapa, when the greatiron sweep-gate opened, and two persons entered whom she had never lessexpected to see together—Frank Churchill, with Harriet leaning on hisarm—actually Harriet!—A moment sufficed to convince her thatsomething extraordinary had happened. Harriet looked white and frightened, andhe was trying to cheer her.—The iron gates and the front-door were nottwenty yards asunder;—they were all three soon in the hall, and Harrietimmediately sinking into a chair fainted away.A young lady who faints, must be recovered; questions must be answered, andsurprizes be explained. Such events are very interesting, but the suspense ofthem cannot last long. A few minutes made Emma acquainted with the whole.Miss Smith, and Miss Bickerton, another parlour boarder at Mrs.Goddard’s, who had been also at the ball, had walked out together, andtaken a road, the Richmond road, which, though apparently public enough forsafety, had led them into alarm.—About half a mile beyond Highbury,making a sudden turn, and deeply shaded by elms on each side, it became for aconsiderable stretch very retired; and when the young ladies had advanced someway into it, they had suddenly perceived at a small distance before them, on abroader patch of greensward by the side, a party of gipsies. A child on thewatch, came towards them to beg; and Miss Bickerton, excessively frightened,gave a great scream, and calling on Harriet to follow her, ran up a steep bank,cleared a slight hedge at the top, and made the best of her way by a short cutback to Highbury. But poor Harriet could not follow. She had suffered very muchfrom cramp after dancing, and her first attempt to mount the bank brought onsuch a return of it as made her absolutely powerless—and in this state,and exceedingly terrified, she had been obliged to remain.How the trampers might have behaved, had the young ladies been more courageous,must be doubtful; but such an invitation for attack could not be resisted; andHarriet was soon assailed by half a dozen children, headed by a stout woman anda great boy, all clamorous, and impertinent in look, though not absolutely inword.—More and more frightened, she immediately promised them money, andtaking out her purse, gave them a shilling, and begged them not to want more,or to use her ill.—She was then able to walk, though but slowly, and wasmoving away—but her terror and her purse were too tempting, and she wasfollowed, or rather surrounded, by the whole gang, demanding more.In this state Frank Churchill had found her, she trembling and conditioning,they loud and insolent. By a most fortunate chance his leaving Highbury hadbeen delayed so as to bring him to her assistance at this critical moment. Thepleasantness of the morning had induced him to walk forward, and leave hishorses to meet him by another road, a mile or two beyond Highbury—andhappening to have borrowed a pair of scissors the night before of Miss Bates,and to have forgotten to restore them, he had been obliged to stop at her door,and go in for a few minutes: he was therefore later than he had intended; andbeing on foot, was unseen by the whole party till almost close to them. Theterror which the woman and boy had been creating in Harriet was then their ownportion. He had left them completely frightened; and Harriet eagerly clingingto him, and hardly able to speak, had just strength enough to reach Hartfield,before her spirits were quite overcome. It was his idea to bring her toHartfield: he had thought of no other place.This was the amount of the whole story,—of his communication and ofHarriet’s as soon as she had recovered her senses and speech.—Hedared not stay longer than to see her well; these several delays left him notanother minute to lose; and Emma engaging to give assurance of her safety toMrs. Goddard, and notice of there being such a set of people in theneighbourhood to Mr. Knightley, he set off, with all the grateful blessingsthat she could utter for her friend and herself.Such an adventure as this,—a fine young man and a lovely young womanthrown together in such a way, could hardly fail of suggesting certain ideas tothe coldest heart and the steadiest brain. So Emma thought, at least. Could alinguist, could a grammarian, could even a mathematician have seen what shedid, have witnessed their appearance together, and heard their history of it,without feeling that circumstances had been at work to make them peculiarlyinteresting to each other?—How much more must an imaginist, like herself,be on fire with speculation and foresight!—especially with such agroundwork of anticipation as her mind had already made.It was a very extraordinary thing! Nothing of the sort had ever occurred beforeto any young ladies in the place, within her memory; no rencontre, no alarm ofthe kind;—and now it had happened to the very person, and at the veryhour, when the other very person was chancing to pass by to rescueher!—It certainly was very extraordinary!—And knowing, as she did,the favourable state of mind of each at this period, it struck her the more. Hewas wishing to get the better of his attachment to herself, she just recoveringfrom her mania for Mr. Elton. It seemed as if every thing united to promise themost interesting consequences. It was not possible that the occurrence shouldnot be strongly recommending each to the other.In the few minutes’ conversation which she had yet had with him, whileHarriet had been partially insensible, he had spoken of her terror, hernaïveté, her fervour as she seized and clung to his arm, with a sensibilityamused and delighted; and just at last, after Harriet’s own account hadbeen given, he had expressed his indignation at the abominable folly of MissBickerton in the warmest terms. Every thing was to take its natural course,however, neither impelled nor assisted. She would not stir a step, nor drop ahint. No, she had had enough of interference. There could be no harm in ascheme, a mere passive scheme. It was no more than a wish. Beyond it she wouldon no account proceed.Emma’s first resolution was to keep her father from the knowledge of whathad passed,—aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: but shesoon felt that concealment must be impossible. Within half an hour it was knownall over Highbury. It was the very event to engage those who talk most, theyoung and the low; and all the youth and servants in the place were soon in thehappiness of frightful news. The last night’s ball seemed lost in thegipsies. Poor Mr. Woodhouse trembled as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen,would scarcely be satisfied without their promising never to go beyond theshrubbery again. It was some comfort to him that many inquiries after himselfand Miss Woodhouse (for his neighbours knew that he loved to be inquiredafter), as well as Miss Smith, were coming in during the rest of the day; andhe had the pleasure of returning for answer, that they were all veryindifferent—which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly well,and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with. She had anunhappy state of health in general for the child of such a man, for she hardlyknew what indisposition was; and if he did not invent illnesses for her, shecould make no figure in a message.The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took themselvesoff in a hurry. The young ladies of Highbury might have walked again in safetybefore their panic began, and the whole history dwindled soon into a matter oflittle importance but to Emma and her nephews:—in her imagination itmaintained its ground, and Henry and John were still asking every day for thestory of Harriet and the gipsies, and still tenaciously setting her right ifshe varied in the slightest particular from the original recital.CHAPTER IVA very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came one morningto Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down and hesitating,thus began:“Miss Woodhouse—if you are at leisure—I have something that Ishould like to tell you—a sort of confession to make—and then, youknow, it will be over.”Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak. There was aseriousness in Harriet’s manner which prepared her, quite as much as herwords, for something more than ordinary.“It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish,” she continued,“to have no reserves with you on this subject. As I am happily quite analtered creature in one respect, it is very fit that you shouldhave the satisfaction of knowing it. I do not want to say more than isnecessary—I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done, and Idare say you understand me.”“Yes,” said Emma, “I hope I do.”“How I could so long a time be fancying myself!...” cried Harriet,warmly. “It seems like madness! I can see nothing at all extraordinary inhim now.—I do not care whether I meet him or not—except that of thetwo I had rather not see him—and indeed I would go any distance round toavoid him—but I do not envy his wife in the least; I neither admire hernor envy her, as I have done: she is very charming, I dare say, and all that,but I think her very ill-tempered and disagreeable—I shall never forgether look the other night!—However, I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, I wishher no evil.—No, let them be ever so happy together, it will not give meanother moment’s pang: and to convince you that I have been speakingtruth, I am now going to destroy—what I ought to have destroyed longago—what I ought never to have kept—I know that very well (blushingas she spoke).—However, now I will destroy it all—and it is myparticular wish to do it in your presence, that you may see how rational I amgrown. Cannot you guess what this parcel holds?” said she, with aconscious look.“Not the least in the world.—Did he ever give you any thing?”“No—I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I havevalued very much.”She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words Mostprecious treasures on the top. Her curiosity was greatly excited.Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience. Withinabundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which Harrietopened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but, excepting the cotton,Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister.“Now,” said Harriet, “you must recollect.”“No, indeed I do not.”“Dear me! I should not have thought it possible you could forget whatpassed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last times weever met in it!—It was but a very few days before I had my sorethroat—just before Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley came—I think thevery evening.—Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your newpenknife, and your recommending court-plaister?—But, as you had noneabout you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I took mine outand cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and he cut it smaller,and kept playing some time with what was left, before he gave it back to me.And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help making a treasure of it—soI put it by never to be used, and looked at it now and then as a greattreat.”“My dearest Harriet!” cried Emma, putting her hand before her face,and jumping up, “you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear.Remember it? Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving thisrelic—I knew nothing of that till this moment—but the cutting thefinger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had none aboutme!—Oh! my sins, my sins!—And I had plenty all the while in mypocket!—One of my senseless tricks!—I deserve to be under acontinual blush all the rest of my life.—Well—(sitting downagain)—go on—what else?”“And had you really some at hand yourself? I am sure I never suspectedit, you did it so naturally.”“And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for hissake!” said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling dividedbetween wonder and amusement. And secretly she added to herself, “Lordbless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a piece ofcourt-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about! I never was equalto this.”“Here,” resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, “here issomething still more valuable, I mean that has been morevaluable, because this is what did really once belong to him, which thecourt-plaister never did.”Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure. It was the end of an oldpencil,—the part without any lead.“This was really his,” said Harriet.—“Do not youremember one morning?—no, I dare say you do not. But one morning—Iforget exactly the day—but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday beforethat evening, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book;it was about spruce-beer. Mr. Knightley had been telling him something aboutbrewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took out hispencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and it would notdo, so you lent him another, and this was left upon the table as good fornothing. But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I dared, caught it up, andnever parted with it again from that moment.”“I do remember it,” cried Emma; “I perfectly rememberit.—Talking about spruce-beer.—Oh! yes—Mr. Knightley and Iboth saying we liked it, and Mr. Elton’s seeming resolved to learn tolike it too. I perfectly remember it.—Stop; Mr. Knightley was standingjust here, was not he? I have an idea he was standing just here.”“Ah! I do not know. I cannot recollect.—It is very odd, but Icannot recollect.—Mr. Elton was sitting here, I remember, much aboutwhere I am now.”—“Well, go on.”“Oh! that’s all. I have nothing more to shew you, or tosay—except that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and Iwish you to see me do it.”“My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness intreasuring up these things?”“Yes, simpleton as I was!—but I am quite ashamed of it now, andwish I could forget as easily as I can burn them. It was very wrong of me, youknow, to keep any remembrances, after he was married. I knew it was—buthad not resolution enough to part with them.”“But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?—I havenot a word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might beuseful.”“I shall be happier to burn it,” replied Harriet. “It has adisagreeable look to me. I must get rid of every thing.—There it goes,and there is an end, thank Heaven! of Mr. Elton.”“And when,” thought Emma, “will there be a beginning of Mr.Churchill?”She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was already made,and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had told no fortune,might be proved to have made Harriet’s.—About a fortnight after thealarm, they came to a sufficient explanation, and quite undesignedly. Emma wasnot thinking of it at the moment, which made the information she received morevaluable. She merely said, in the course of some trivial chat, “Well,Harriet, whenever you marry I would advise you to do so and so”—andthought no more of it, till after a minute’s silence she heard Harrietsay in a very serious tone, “I shall never marry.”Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after a moment’sdebate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, replied,“Never marry!—This is a new resolution.”“It is one that I shall never change, however.”After another short hesitation, “I hope it does not proceed from—Ihope it is not in compliment to Mr. Elton?”“Mr. Elton indeed!” cried Harriet indignantly.—“Oh!no”—and Emma could just catch the words, “so superior to Mr.Elton!”She then took a longer time for consideration. Should she proceed nofarther?—should she let it pass, and seem to suspectnothing?—Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did; orperhaps if she were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking herto hear too much; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had been,such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances, she was perfectlyresolved.—She believed it would be wiser for her to say and know at once,all that she meant to say and know. Plain dealing was always best. She hadpreviously determined how far she would proceed, on any application of thesort; and it would be safer for both, to have the judicious law of her ownbrain laid down with speed.—She was decided, and thus spoke—“Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. Yourresolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results from an ideathat the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly your superior insituation to think of you. Is not it so?”“Oh! Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption tosuppose— Indeed I am not so mad.—But it is a pleasure to me toadmire him at a distance—and to think of his infinite superiority to allthe rest of the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which are soproper, in me especially.”“I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet. The service he rendered youwas enough to warm your heart.”“Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!—The veryrecollection of it, and all that I felt at the time—when I saw himcoming—his noble look—and my wretchedness before. Such a change! Inone moment such a change! From perfect misery to perfect happiness!”“It is very natural. It is natural, and it is honourable.—Yes,honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.—But that it willbe a fortunate preference is more than I can promise. I do not advise you togive way to it, Harriet. I do not by any means engage for its being returned.Consider what you are about. Perhaps it will be wisest in you to check yourfeelings while you can: at any rate do not let them carry you far, unless youare persuaded of his liking you. Be observant of him. Let his behaviour be theguide of your sensations. I give you this caution now, because I shall neverspeak to you again on the subject. I am determined against all interference.Henceforward I know nothing of the matter. Let no name ever pass our lips. Wewere very wrong before; we will be cautious now.—He is your superior, nodoubt, and there do seem objections and obstacles of a very serious nature; butyet, Harriet, more wonderful things have taken place, there have been matchesof greater disparity. But take care of yourself. I would not have you toosanguine; though, however it may end, be assured your raising your thoughts tohim, is a mark of good taste which I shall always know how tovalue.”Harriet kissed her hand in silent and submissive gratitude. Emma was verydecided in thinking such an attachment no bad thing for her friend. Itstendency would be to raise and refine her mind—and it must be saving herfrom the danger of degradation.CHAPTER VIn this state of schemes, and hopes, and connivance, June opened uponHartfield. To Highbury in general it brought no material change. The Eltonswere still talking of a visit from the Sucklings, and of the use to be made oftheir barouche-landau; and Jane Fairfax was still at her grandmother’s;and as the return of the Campbells from Ireland was again delayed, and August,instead of Midsummer, fixed for it, she was likely to remain there full twomonths longer, provided at least she were able to defeat Mrs. Elton’sactivity in her service, and save herself from being hurried into a delightfulsituation against her will.Mr. Knightley, who, for some reason best known to himself, had certainly takenan early dislike to Frank Churchill, was only growing to dislike him more. Hebegan to suspect him of some double dealing in his pursuit of Emma. That Emmawas his object appeared indisputable. Every thing declared it; his ownattentions, his father’s hints, his mother-in-law’s guardedsilence; it was all in unison; words, conduct, discretion, and indiscretion,told the same story. But while so many were devoting him to Emma, and Emmaherself making him over to Harriet, Mr. Knightley began to suspect him of someinclination to trifle with Jane Fairfax. He could not understand it; but therewere symptoms of intelligence between them—he thought so atleast—symptoms of admiration on his side, which, having once observed, hecould not persuade himself to think entirely void of meaning, however he mightwish to escape any of Emma’s errors of imagination. She was notpresent when the suspicion first arose. He was dining with the Randalls family,and Jane, at the Eltons’; and he had seen a look, more than a singlelook, at Miss Fairfax, which, from the admirer of Miss Woodhouse, seemedsomewhat out of place. When he was again in their company, he could not helpremembering what he had seen; nor could he avoid observations which, unless itwere like Cowper and his fire at twilight,“Myself creating what I saw,”brought him yet stronger suspicion of there being a something of privateliking, of private understanding even, between Frank Churchill and Jane.He had walked up one day after dinner, as he very often did, to spend hisevening at Hartfield. Emma and Harriet were going to walk; he joined them; and,on returning, they fell in with a larger party, who, like themselves, judged itwisest to take their exercise early, as the weather threatened rain; Mr. andMrs. Weston and their son, Miss Bates and her niece, who had accidentally met.They all united; and, on reaching Hartfield gates, Emma, who knew it wasexactly the sort of visiting that would be welcome to her father, pressed themall to go in and drink tea with him. The Randalls party agreed to itimmediately; and after a pretty long speech from Miss Bates, which few personslistened to, she also found it possible to accept dear Miss Woodhouse’smost obliging invitation.As they were turning into the grounds, Mr. Perry passed by on horseback. Thegentlemen spoke of his horse.“By the bye,” said Frank Churchill to Mrs. Weston presently,“what became of Mr. Perry’s plan of setting up his carriage?”Mrs. Weston looked surprized, and said, “I did not know that he ever hadany such plan.”“Nay, I had it from you. You wrote me word of it three months ago.”“Me! impossible!”“Indeed you did. I remember it perfectly. You mentioned it as what wascertainly to be very soon. Mrs. Perry had told somebody, and was extremelyhappy about it. It was owing to her persuasion, as she thought his beingout in bad weather did him a great deal of harm. You must remember itnow?”“Upon my word I never heard of it till this moment.”“Never! really, never!—Bless me! how could it be?—Then I musthave dreamt it—but I was completely persuaded—Miss Smith, you walkas if you were tired. You will not be sorry to find yourself at home.”“What is this?—What is this?” cried Mr. Weston, “aboutPerry and a carriage? Is Perry going to set up his carriage, Frank? I am gladhe can afford it. You had it from himself, had you?”“No, sir,” replied his son, laughing, “I seem to have had itfrom nobody.—Very odd!—I really was persuaded of Mrs.Weston’s having mentioned it in one of her letters to Enscombe, manyweeks ago, with all these particulars—but as she declares she never hearda syllable of it before, of course it must have been a dream. I am a greatdreamer. I dream of every body at Highbury when I am away—and when I havegone through my particular friends, then I begin dreaming of Mr. and Mrs.Perry.”“It is odd though,” observed his father, “that you shouldhave had such a regular connected dream about people whom it was not verylikely you should be thinking of at Enscombe. Perry’s setting up hiscarriage! and his wife’s persuading him to it, out of care for hishealth—just what will happen, I have no doubt, some time or other; only alittle premature. What an air of probability sometimes runs through a dream!And at others, what a heap of absurdities it is! Well, Frank, your dreamcertainly shews that Highbury is in your thoughts when you are absent. Emma,you are a great dreamer, I think?”Emma was out of hearing. She had hurried on before her guests to prepare herfather for their appearance, and was beyond the reach of Mr. Weston’shint.“Why, to own the truth,” cried Miss Bates, who had been trying invain to be heard the last two minutes, “if I must speak on this subject,there is no denying that Mr. Frank Churchill might have—I do not mean tosay that he did not dream it—I am sure I have sometimes the oddest dreamsin the world—but if I am questioned about it, I must acknowledge thatthere was such an idea last spring; for Mrs. Perry herself mentioned it to mymother, and the Coles knew of it as well as ourselves—but it was quite asecret, known to nobody else, and only thought of about three days. Mrs. Perrywas very anxious that he should have a carriage, and came to my mother in greatspirits one morning because she thought she had prevailed. Jane, don’tyou remember grandmama’s telling us of it when we got home? I forgetwhere we had been walking to—very likely to Randalls; yes, I think it wasto Randalls. Mrs. Perry was always particularly fond of my mother—indeedI do not know who is not—and she had mentioned it to her in confidence;she had no objection to her telling us, of course, but it was not to go beyond:and, from that day to this, I never mentioned it to a soul that I know of. Atthe same time, I will not positively answer for my having never dropt a hint,because I know I do sometimes pop out a thing before I am aware. I am a talker,you know; I am rather a talker; and now and then I have let a thing escape mewhich I should not. I am not like Jane; I wish I were. I will answer for itshe never betrayed the least thing in the world. Where is she?—Oh!just behind. Perfectly remember Mrs. Perry’s coming.—Extraordinarydream, indeed!”They were entering the hall. Mr. Knightley’s eyes had preceded MissBates’s in a glance at Jane. From Frank Churchill’s face, where hethought he saw confusion suppressed or laughed away, he had involuntarilyturned to hers; but she was indeed behind, and too busy with her shawl. Mr.Weston had walked in. The two other gentlemen waited at the door to let herpass. Mr. Knightley suspected in Frank Churchill the determination of catchingher eye—he seemed watching her intently—in vain, however, if itwere so—Jane passed between them into the hall, and looked at neither.There was no time for farther remark or explanation. The dream must be bornewith, and Mr. Knightley must take his seat with the rest round the large moderncircular table which Emma had introduced at Hartfield, and which none but Emmacould have had power to place there and persuade her father to use, instead ofthe small-sized Pembroke, on which two of his daily meals had, for forty yearsbeen crowded. Tea passed pleasantly, and nobody seemed in a hurry to move.“Miss Woodhouse,” said Frank Churchill, after examining a tablebehind him, which he could reach as he sat, “have your nephews taken awaytheir alphabets—their box of letters? It used to stand here. Where is it?This is a sort of dull-looking evening, that ought to be treated rather aswinter than summer. We had great amusement with those letters one morning. Iwant to puzzle you again.”Emma was pleased with the thought; and producing the box, the table was quicklyscattered over with alphabets, which no one seemed so much disposed to employas their two selves. They were rapidly forming words for each other, or for anybody else who would be puzzled. The quietness of the game made it particularlyeligible for Mr. Woodhouse, who had often been distressed by the more animatedsort, which Mr. Weston had occasionally introduced, and who now sat happilyoccupied in lamenting, with tender melancholy, over the departure of the“poor little boys,” or in fondly pointing out, as he took up anystray letter near him, how beautifully Emma had written it.Frank Churchill placed a word before Miss Fairfax. She gave a slight glanceround the table, and applied herself to it. Frank was next to Emma, Janeopposite to them—and Mr. Knightley so placed as to see them all; and itwas his object to see as much as he could, with as little apparent observation.The word was discovered, and with a faint smile pushed away. If meant to beimmediately mixed with the others, and buried from sight, she should havelooked on the table instead of looking just across, for it was not mixed; andHarriet, eager after every fresh word, and finding out none, directly took itup, and fell to work. She was sitting by Mr. Knightley, and turned to him forhelp. The word was blunder; and as Harriet exultingly proclaimed it,there was a blush on Jane’s cheek which gave it a meaning not otherwiseostensible. Mr. Knightley connected it with the dream; but how it could all be,was beyond his comprehension. How the delicacy, the discretion of his favouritecould have been so lain asleep! He feared there must be some decidedinvolvement. Disingenuousness and double dealing seemed to meet him at everyturn. These letters were but the vehicle for gallantry and trick. It was achild’s play, chosen to conceal a deeper game on Frank Churchill’spart.With great indignation did he continue to observe him; with great alarm anddistrust, to observe also his two blinded companions. He saw a short wordprepared for Emma, and given to her with a look sly and demure. He saw thatEmma had soon made it out, and found it highly entertaining, though it wassomething which she judged it proper to appear to censure; for she said,“Nonsense! for shame!” He heard Frank Churchill next say, with aglance towards Jane, “I will give it to her—shallI?”—and as clearly heard Emma opposing it with eager laughingwarmth. “No, no, you must not; you shall not, indeed.”It was done however. This gallant young man, who seemed to love withoutfeeling, and to recommend himself without complaisance, directly handed overthe word to Miss Fairfax, and with a particular degree of sedate civilityentreated her to study it. Mr. Knightley’s excessive curiosity to knowwhat this word might be, made him seize every possible moment for darting hiseye towards it, and it was not long before he saw it to be Dixon. JaneFairfax’s perception seemed to accompany his; her comprehension wascertainly more equal to the covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of thosefive letters so arranged. She was evidently displeased; looked up, and seeingherself watched, blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and sayingonly, “I did not know that proper names were allowed,” pushed awaythe letters with even an angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by noother word that could be offered. Her face was averted from those who had madethe attack, and turned towards her aunt.“Aye, very true, my dear,” cried the latter, though Jane had notspoken a word—“I was just going to say the same thing. It is timefor us to be going indeed. The evening is closing in, and grandmama will belooking for us. My dear sir, you are too obliging. We really must wish you goodnight.”Jane’s alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt hadpreconceived. She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table; but somany were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr. Knightley thoughthe saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed towards her, andresolutely swept away by her unexamined. She was afterwards looking for hershawl—Frank Churchill was looking also—it was growing dusk, and theroom was in confusion; and how they parted, Mr. Knightley could not tell.He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what he hadseen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his observations, hemust—yes, he certainly must, as a friend—an anxiousfriend—give Emma some hint, ask her some question. He could not see herin a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her. It was his duty.“Pray, Emma,” said he, “may I ask in what lay the greatamusement, the poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax? Isaw the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining tothe one, and so very distressing to the other.”Emma was extremely confused. She could not endure to give him the trueexplanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she was reallyashamed of having ever imparted them.“Oh!” she cried in evident embarrassment, “it all meantnothing; a mere joke among ourselves.”“The joke,” he replied gravely, “seemed confined to you andMr. Churchill.”He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not. She would rather busyherself about any thing than speak. He sat a little while in doubt. A varietyof evils crossed his mind. Interference—fruitless interference.Emma’s confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed to declare heraffection engaged. Yet he would speak. He owed it to her, to risk any thingthat might be involved in an unwelcome interference, rather than her welfare;to encounter any thing, rather than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.“My dear Emma,” said he at last, with earnest kindness, “doyou think you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between thegentleman and lady we have been speaking of?”“Between Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax? Oh! yes,perfectly.—Why do you make a doubt of it?”“Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, orthat she admired him?”“Never, never!” she cried with a most openeagerness—“Never, for the twentieth part of a moment, did such anidea occur to me. And how could it possibly come into your head?”“I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment betweenthem—certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to bepublic.”“Oh! you amuse me excessively. I am delighted to find that you canvouchsafe to let your imagination wander—but it will not do—verysorry to check you in your first essay—but indeed it will not do. Thereis no admiration between them, I do assure you; and the appearances which havecaught you, have arisen from some peculiar circumstances—feelings ratherof a totally different nature—it is impossible exactly toexplain:—there is a good deal of nonsense in it—but the part whichis capable of being communicated, which is sense, is, that they are as far fromany attachment or admiration for one another, as any two beings in the worldcan be. That is, I presume it to be so on her side, and I cananswer for its being so on his. I will answer for the gentleman’sindifference.”She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfaction whichsilenced, Mr. Knightley. She was in gay spirits, and would have prolonged theconversation, wanting to hear the particulars of his suspicions, every lookdescribed, and all the wheres and hows of a circumstance which highlyentertained her: but his gaiety did not meet hers. He found he could not beuseful, and his feelings were too much irritated for talking. That he might notbe irritated into an absolute fever, by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse’stender habits required almost every evening throughout the year, he soonafterwards took a hasty leave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude ofDonwell Abbey.CHAPTER VIAfter being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. and Mrs. Suckling,the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification of hearing thatthey could not possibly come till the autumn. No such importation of noveltiescould enrich their intellectual stores at present. In the daily interchange ofnews, they must be again restricted to the other topics with which for a whilethe Sucklings’ coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs.Churchill, whose health seemed every day to supply a different report, and thesituation of Mrs. Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might eventuallybe as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that of all her neighbourswas by the approach of it.Mrs. Elton was very much disappointed. It was the delay of a great deal ofpleasure and parade. Her introductions and recommendations must all wait, andevery projected party be still only talked of. So she thought atfirst;—but a little consideration convinced her that every thing need notbe put off. Why should not they explore to Box Hill though the Sucklings didnot come? They could go there again with them in the autumn. It was settledthat they should go to Box Hill. That there was to be such a party had beenlong generally known: it had even given the idea of another. Emma had neverbeen to Box Hill; she wished to see what every body found so well worth seeing,and she and Mr. Weston had agreed to chuse some fine morning and drive thither.Two or three more of the chosen only were to be admitted to join them, and itwas to be done in a quiet, unpretending, elegant way, infinitely superior tothe bustle and preparation, the regular eating and drinking, and picnic paradeof the Eltons and the Sucklings.This was so very well understood between them, that Emma could not but feelsome surprise, and a little displeasure, on hearing from Mr. Weston that he hadbeen proposing to Mrs. Elton, as her brother and sister had failed her, thatthe two parties should unite, and go together; and that as Mrs. Elton had veryreadily acceded to it, so it was to be, if she had no objection. Now, as herobjection was nothing but her very great dislike of Mrs. Elton, of which Mr.Weston must already be perfectly aware, it was not worth bringing forwardagain:—it could not be done without a reproof to him, which would begiving pain to his wife; and she found herself therefore obliged to consent toan arrangement which she would have done a great deal to avoid; an arrangementwhich would probably expose her even to the degradation of being said to be ofMrs. Elton’s party! Every feeling was offended; and the forbearance ofher outward submission left a heavy arrear due of secret severity in herreflections on the unmanageable goodwill of Mr. Weston’s temper.“I am glad you approve of what I have done,” said he verycomfortably. “But I thought you would. Such schemes as these are nothingwithout numbers. One cannot have too large a party. A large party secures itsown amusement. And she is a good-natured woman after all. One could not leaveher out.”Emma denied none of it aloud, and agreed to none of it in private.It was now the middle of June, and the weather fine; and Mrs. Elton was growingimpatient to name the day, and settle with Mr. Weston as to pigeon-pies andcold lamb, when a lame carriage-horse threw every thing into sad uncertainty.It might be weeks, it might be only a few days, before the horse were useable;but no preparations could be ventured on, and it was all melancholy stagnation.Mrs. Elton’s resources were inadequate to such an attack.“Is not this most vexatious, Knightley?” shecried.—“And such weather for exploring!—These delays anddisappointments are quite odious. What are we to do?—The year will wearaway at this rate, and nothing done. Before this time last year I assure you wehad had a delightful exploring party from Maple Grove to Kings Weston.”“You had better explore to Donwell,” replied Mr. Knightley.“That may be done without horses. Come, and eat my strawberries. They areripening fast.”If Mr. Knightley did not begin seriously, he was obliged to proceed so, for hisproposal was caught at with delight; and the “Oh! I should like it of allthings,” was not plainer in words than manner. Donwell was famous for itsstrawberry-beds, which seemed a plea for the invitation: but no plea wasnecessary; cabbage-beds would have been enough to tempt the lady, who onlywanted to be going somewhere. She promised him again and again tocome—much oftener than he doubted—and was extremely gratified bysuch a proof of intimacy, such a distinguishing compliment as she chose toconsider it.“You may depend upon me,” said she. “I certainly will come.Name your day, and I will come. You will allow me to bring Jane Fairfax?”“I cannot name a day,” said he, “till I have spoken to someothers whom I would wish to meet you.”“Oh! leave all that to me. Only give me a carte-blanche.—I am LadyPatroness, you know. It is my party. I will bring friends with me.”“I hope you will bring Elton,” said he: “but I will nottrouble you to give any other invitations.”“Oh! now you are looking very sly. But consider—you need not beafraid of delegating power to me. I am no young lady on her preferment.Married women, you know, may be safely authorised. It is my party. Leave it allto me. I will invite your guests.”“No,”—he calmly replied,—“there is but onemarried woman in the world whom I can ever allow to invite what guests shepleases to Donwell, and that one is—”“—Mrs. Weston, I suppose,” interrupted Mrs. Elton, rathermortified.“No—Mrs. Knightley;—and till she is in being, I will managesuch matters myself.”“Ah! you are an odd creature!” she cried, satisfied to have no onepreferred to herself.—“You are a humourist, and may say what youlike. Quite a humourist. Well, I shall bring Jane with me—Jane and heraunt.—The rest I leave to you. I have no objections at all to meeting theHartfield family. Don’t scruple. I know you are attached to them.”“You certainly will meet them if I can prevail; and I shall call on MissBates in my way home.”“That’s quite unnecessary; I see Jane every day:—but as youlike. It is to be a morning scheme, you know, Knightley; quite a simple thing.I shall wear a large bonnet, and bring one of my little baskets hanging on myarm. Here,—probably this basket with pink ribbon. Nothing can be moresimple, you see. And Jane will have such another. There is to be no form orparade—a sort of gipsy party. We are to walk about your gardens, andgather the strawberries ourselves, and sit under trees;—and whatever elseyou may like to provide, it is to be all out of doors—a table spread inthe shade, you know. Every thing as natural and simple as possible. Is not thatyour idea?”“Not quite. My idea of the simple and the natural will be to have thetable spread in the dining-room. The nature and the simplicity of gentlemen andladies, with their servants and furniture, I think is best observed by mealswithin doors. When you are tired of eating strawberries in the garden, thereshall be cold meat in the house.”“Well—as you please; only don’t have a great set out. And, bythe bye, can I or my housekeeper be of any use to you with ouropinion?—Pray be sincere, Knightley. If you wish me to talk to Mrs.Hodges, or to inspect anything—”“I have not the least wish for it, I thank you.”“Well—but if any difficulties should arise, my housekeeper isextremely clever.”“I will answer for it, that mine thinks herself full as clever, and wouldspurn any body’s assistance.”“I wish we had a donkey. The thing would be for us all to come ondonkeys, Jane, Miss Bates, and me—and my caro sposo walking by. I reallymust talk to him about purchasing a donkey. In a country life I conceive it tobe a sort of necessary; for, let a woman have ever so many resources, it is notpossible for her to be always shut up at home;—and very long walks, youknow—in summer there is dust, and in winter there is dirt.”“You will not find either, between Donwell and Highbury. Donwell Lane isnever dusty, and now it is perfectly dry. Come on a donkey, however, if youprefer it. You can borrow Mrs. Cole’s. I would wish every thing to be asmuch to your taste as possible.”“That I am sure you would. Indeed I do you justice, my good friend. Underthat peculiar sort of dry, blunt manner, I know you have the warmest heart. AsI tell Mr. E., you are a thorough humourist.—Yes, believe me, Knightley,I am fully sensible of your attention to me in the whole of this scheme. Youhave hit upon the very thing to please me.”Mr. Knightley had another reason for avoiding a table in the shade. He wishedto persuade Mr. Woodhouse, as well as Emma, to join the party; and he knew thatto have any of them sitting down out of doors to eat would inevitably make himill. Mr. Woodhouse must not, under the specious pretence of a morning drive,and an hour or two spent at Donwell, be tempted away to his misery.He was invited on good faith. No lurking horrors were to upbraid him for hiseasy credulity. He did consent. He had not been at Donwell for two years.“Some very fine morning, he, and Emma, and Harriet, could go very well;and he could sit still with Mrs. Weston, while the dear girls walked about thegardens. He did not suppose they could be damp now, in the middle of the day.He should like to see the old house again exceedingly, and should be very happyto meet Mr. and Mrs. Elton, and any other of his neighbours.—He could notsee any objection at all to his, and Emma’s, and Harriet’s goingthere some very fine morning. He thought it very well done of Mr. Knightley toinvite them—very kind and sensible—much cleverer than diningout.—He was not fond of dining out.”Mr. Knightley was fortunate in every body’s most ready concurrence. Theinvitation was everywhere so well received, that it seemed as if, like Mrs.Elton, they were all taking the scheme as a particular compliment tothemselves.—Emma and Harriet professed very high expectations of pleasurefrom it; and Mr. Weston, unasked, promised to get Frank over to join them, ifpossible; a proof of approbation and gratitude which could have been dispensedwith.—Mr. Knightley was then obliged to say that he should be glad to seehim; and Mr. Weston engaged to lose no time in writing, and spare no argumentsto induce him to come.In the meanwhile the lame horse recovered so fast, that the party to Box Hillwas again under happy consideration; and at last Donwell was settled for oneday, and Box Hill for the next,—the weather appearing exactly right.Under a bright mid-day sun, at almost Midsummer, Mr. Woodhouse was safelyconveyed in his carriage, with one window down, to partake of this al-frescoparty; and in one of the most comfortable rooms in the Abbey, especiallyprepared for him by a fire all the morning, he was happily placed, quite at hisease, ready to talk with pleasure of what had been achieved, and advise everybody to come and sit down, and not to heat themselves.—Mrs. Weston, whoseemed to have walked there on purpose to be tired, and sit all the time withhim, remained, when all the others were invited or persuaded out, his patientlistener and sympathiser.It was so long since Emma had been at the Abbey, that as soon as she wassatisfied of her father’s comfort, she was glad to leave him, and lookaround her; eager to refresh and correct her memory with more particularobservation, more exact understanding of a house and grounds which must ever beso interesting to her and all her family.She felt all the honest pride and complacency which her alliance with thepresent and future proprietor could fairly warrant, as she viewed therespectable size and style of the building, its suitable, becoming,characteristic situation, low and sheltered—its ample gardens stretchingdown to meadows washed by a stream, of which the Abbey, with all the oldneglect of prospect, had scarcely a sight—and its abundance of timber inrows and avenues, which neither fashion nor extravagance had rootedup.—The house was larger than Hartfield, and totally unlike it, coveringa good deal of ground, rambling and irregular, with many comfortable, and oneor two handsome rooms.—It was just what it ought to be, and it lookedwhat it was—and Emma felt an increasing respect for it, as the residenceof a family of such true gentility, untainted in blood andunderstanding.—Some faults of temper John Knightley had; but Isabella hadconnected herself unexceptionably. She had given them neither men, nor names,nor places, that could raise a blush. These were pleasant feelings, and shewalked about and indulged them till it was necessary to do as the others did,and collect round the strawberry-beds.—The whole party were assembled,excepting Frank Churchill, who was expected every moment from Richmond; andMrs. Elton, in all her apparatus of happiness, her large bonnet and her basket,was very ready to lead the way in gathering, accepting, ortalking—strawberries, and only strawberries, could now be thought orspoken of.—“The best fruit in England—every body’sfavourite—always wholesome.—These the finest beds and finestsorts.—Delightful to gather for one’s self—the only way ofreally enjoying them.—Morning decidedly the best time—nevertired—every sort good—hautboy infinitely superior—nocomparison—the others hardly eatable—hautboys veryscarce—Chili preferred—white wood finest flavour of all—priceof strawberries in London—abundance about Bristol—MapleGrove—cultivation—beds when to be renewed—gardeners thinkingexactly different—no general rule—gardeners never to be put out oftheir way—delicious fruit—only too rich to be eaten muchof—inferior to cherries—currants more refreshing—onlyobjection to gathering strawberries the stooping—glaring sun—tiredto death—could bear it no longer—must go and sit in theshade.”Such, for half an hour, was the conversation—interrupted only once byMrs. Weston, who came out, in her solicitude after her son-in-law, to inquireif he were come—and she was a little uneasy.—She had some fears ofhis horse.Seats tolerably in the shade were found; and now Emma was obliged to overhearwhat Mrs. Elton and Jane Fairfax were talking of.—A situation, a mostdesirable situation, was in question. Mrs. Elton had received notice of it thatmorning, and was in raptures. It was not with Mrs. Suckling, it was not withMrs. Bragge, but in felicity and splendour it fell short only of them: it waswith a cousin of Mrs. Bragge, an acquaintance of Mrs. Suckling, a lady known atMaple Grove. Delightful, charming, superior, first circles, spheres, lines,ranks, every thing—and Mrs. Elton was wild to have the offer closed withimmediately.—On her side, all was warmth, energy, and triumph—andshe positively refused to take her friend’s negative, though Miss Fairfaxcontinued to assure her that she would not at present engage in any thing,repeating the same motives which she had been heard to urge before.—StillMrs. Elton insisted on being authorised to write an acquiescence by themorrow’s post.—How Jane could bear it at all, was astonishing toEmma.—She did look vexed, she did speak pointedly—and at last, witha decision of action unusual to her, proposed a removal.—“Shouldnot they walk? Would not Mr. Knightley shew them the gardens—all thegardens?—She wished to see the whole extent.”—The pertinacityof her friend seemed more than she could bear.It was hot; and after walking some time over the gardens in a scattered,dispersed way, scarcely any three together, they insensibly followed oneanother to the delicious shade of a broad short avenue of limes, whichstretching beyond the garden at an equal distance from the river, seemed thefinish of the pleasure grounds.—It led to nothing; nothing but a view atthe end over a low stone wall with high pillars, which seemed intended, intheir erection, to give the appearance of an approach to the house, which neverhad been there. Disputable, however, as might be the taste of such atermination, it was in itself a charming walk, and the view which closed itextremely pretty.—The considerable slope, at nearly the foot of which theAbbey stood, gradually acquired a steeper form beyond its grounds; and at halfa mile distant was a bank of considerable abruptness and grandeur, well clothedwith wood;—and at the bottom of this bank, favourably placed andsheltered, rose the Abbey Mill Farm, with meadows in front, and the rivermaking a close and handsome curve around it.It was a sweet view—sweet to the eye and the mind. English verdure,English culture, English comfort, seen under a sun bright, without beingoppressive.In this walk Emma and Mr. Weston found all the others assembled; and towardsthis view she immediately perceived Mr. Knightley and Harriet distinct from therest, quietly leading the way. Mr. Knightley and Harriet!—It was an oddtête-à-tête; but she was glad to see it.—There had been a time when hewould have scorned her as a companion, and turned from her with littleceremony. Now they seemed in pleasant conversation. There had been a time alsowhen Emma would have been sorry to see Harriet in a spot so favourable for theAbbey Mill Farm; but now she feared it not. It might be safely viewed with allits appendages of prosperity and beauty, its rich pastures, spreading flocks,orchard in blossom, and light column of smoke ascending.—She joined themat the wall, and found them more engaged in talking than in looking around. Hewas giving Harriet information as to modes of agriculture, etc. and Emmareceived a smile which seemed to say, “These are my own concerns. I havea right to talk on such subjects, without being suspected of introducing RobertMartin.”—She did not suspect him. It was too old astory.—Robert Martin had probably ceased to think of Harriet.—Theytook a few turns together along the walk.—The shade was most refreshing,and Emma found it the pleasantest part of the day.The next remove was to the house; they must all go in and eat;—and theywere all seated and busy, and still Frank Churchill did not come. Mrs. Westonlooked, and looked in vain. His father would not own himself uneasy, andlaughed at her fears; but she could not be cured of wishing that he would partwith his black mare. He had expressed himself as to coming, with more thancommon certainty. “His aunt was so much better, that he had not a doubtof getting over to them.”—Mrs. Churchill’s state, however, asmany were ready to remind her, was liable to such sudden variation as mightdisappoint her nephew in the most reasonable dependence—and Mrs. Westonwas at last persuaded to believe, or to say, that it must be by some attack ofMrs. Churchill that he was prevented coming.—Emma looked at Harriet whilethe point was under consideration; she behaved very well, and betrayed noemotion.The cold repast was over, and the party were to go out once more to see whathad not yet been seen, the old Abbey fish-ponds; perhaps get as far as theclover, which was to be begun cutting on the morrow, or, at any rate, have thepleasure of being hot, and growing cool again.—Mr. Woodhouse, who hadalready taken his little round in the highest part of the gardens, where nodamps from the river were imagined even by him, stirred no more; and hisdaughter resolved to remain with him, that Mrs. Weston might be persuaded awayby her husband to the exercise and variety which her spirits seemed to need.Mr. Knightley had done all in his power for Mr. Woodhouse’sentertainment. Books of engravings, drawers of medals, cameos, corals, shells,and every other family collection within his cabinets, had been prepared forhis old friend, to while away the morning; and the kindness had perfectlyanswered. Mr. Woodhouse had been exceedingly well amused. Mrs. Weston had beenshewing them all to him, and now he would shew them all toEmma;—fortunate in having no other resemblance to a child, than in atotal want of taste for what he saw, for he was slow, constant, andmethodical.—Before this second looking over was begun, however, Emmawalked into the hall for the sake of a few moments’ free observation ofthe entrance and ground-plot of the house—and was hardly there, when JaneFairfax appeared, coming quickly in from the garden, and with a look ofescape.—Little expecting to meet Miss Woodhouse so soon, there was astart at first; but Miss Woodhouse was the very person she was in quest of.“Will you be so kind,” said she, “when I am missed, as to saythat I am gone home?—I am going this moment.—My aunt is not awarehow late it is, nor how long we have been absent—but I am sure we shallbe wanted, and I am determined to go directly.—I have said nothing aboutit to any body. It would only be giving trouble and distress. Some are gone tothe ponds, and some to the lime walk. Till they all come in I shall not bemissed; and when they do, will you have the goodness to say that I amgone?”“Certainly, if you wish it;—but you are not going to walk toHighbury alone?”“Yes—what should hurt me?—I walk fast. I shall be at home intwenty minutes.”“But it is too far, indeed it is, to be walking quite alone. Let myfather’s servant go with you.—Let me order the carriage. It can beround in five minutes.”“Thank you, thank you—but on no account.—I would ratherwalk.—And for me to be afraid of walking alone!—I, who mayso soon have to guard others!”She spoke with great agitation; and Emma very feelingly replied, “Thatcan be no reason for your being exposed to danger now. I must order thecarriage. The heat even would be danger.—You are fatigued already.”“I am,”—she answered—“I am fatigued; but it isnot the sort of fatigue—quick walking will refresh me.—MissWoodhouse, we all know at times what it is to be wearied in spirits. Mine, Iconfess, are exhausted. The greatest kindness you can shew me, will be to letme have my own way, and only say that I am gone when it is necessary.”Emma had not another word to oppose. She saw it all; and entering into herfeelings, promoted her quitting the house immediately, and watched her safelyoff with the zeal of a friend. Her parting look was grateful—and herparting words, “Oh! Miss Woodhouse, the comfort of being sometimesalone!”—seemed to burst from an overcharged heart, and to describesomewhat of the continual endurance to be practised by her, even towards someof those who loved her best.“Such a home, indeed! such an aunt!” said Emma, as she turned backinto the hall again. “I do pity you. And the more sensibility you betrayof their just horrors, the more I shall like you.”Jane had not been gone a quarter of an hour, and they had only accomplishedsome views of St. Mark’s Place, Venice, when Frank Churchill entered theroom. Emma had not been thinking of him, she had forgotten to think ofhim—but she was very glad to see him. Mrs. Weston would be at ease. Theblack mare was blameless; they were right who had named Mrs. Churchillas the cause. He had been detained by a temporary increase of illness in her; anervous seizure, which had lasted some hours—and he had quite given upevery thought of coming, till very late;—and had he known how hot a ridehe should have, and how late, with all his hurry, he must be, he believed heshould not have come at all. The heat was excessive; he had never suffered anything like it—almost wished he had staid at home—nothing killed himlike heat—he could bear any degree of cold, etc., but heat wasintolerable—and he sat down, at the greatest possible distance from theslight remains of Mr. Woodhouse’s fire, looking very deplorable.“You will soon be cooler, if you sit still,” said Emma.“As soon as I am cooler I shall go back again. I could very ill bespared—but such a point had been made of my coming! You will all be goingsoon I suppose; the whole party breaking up. I met one as Icame—Madness in such weather!—absolute madness!”Emma listened, and looked, and soon perceived that Frank Churchill’sstate might be best defined by the expressive phrase of being out of humour.Some people were always cross when they were hot. Such might be hisconstitution; and as she knew that eating and drinking were often the cure ofsuch incidental complaints, she recommended his taking some refreshment; hewould find abundance of every thing in the dining-room—and she humanelypointed out the door.“No—he should not eat. He was not hungry; it would only make himhotter.” In two minutes, however, he relented in his own favour; andmuttering something about spruce-beer, walked off. Emma returned all herattention to her father, saying in secret—“I am glad I have done being in love with him. I should not like a manwho is so soon discomposed by a hot morning. Harriet’s sweet easy temperwill not mind it.”He was gone long enough to have had a very comfortable meal, and came back allthe better—grown quite cool—and, with good manners, likehimself—able to draw a chair close to them, take an interest in theiremployment; and regret, in a reasonable way, that he should be so late. He wasnot in his best spirits, but seemed trying to improve them; and, at last, madehimself talk nonsense very agreeably. They were looking over views inSwisserland.“As soon as my aunt gets well, I shall go abroad,” said he.“I shall never be easy till I have seen some of these places. You willhave my sketches, some time or other, to look at—or my tour toread—or my poem. I shall do something to expose myself.”“That may be—but not by sketches in Swisserland. You will never goto Swisserland. Your uncle and aunt will never allow you to leaveEngland.”“They may be induced to go too. A warm climate may be prescribed for her.I have more than half an expectation of our all going abroad. I assure you Ihave. I feel a strong persuasion, this morning, that I shall soon be abroad. Iought to travel. I am tired of doing nothing. I want a change. I am serious,Miss Woodhouse, whatever your penetrating eyes may fancy—I am sick ofEngland—and would leave it to-morrow, if I could.”“You are sick of prosperity and indulgence. Cannot you invent a fewhardships for yourself, and be contented to stay?”“I sick of prosperity and indulgence! You are quite mistaken. I donot look upon myself as either prosperous or indulged. I am thwarted in everything material. I do not consider myself at all a fortunate person.”“You are not quite so miserable, though, as when you first came. Go andeat and drink a little more, and you will do very well. Another slice of coldmeat, another draught of Madeira and water, will make you nearly on a par withthe rest of us.”“No—I shall not stir. I shall sit by you. You are my bestcure.”“We are going to Box Hill to-morrow;—you will join us. It is notSwisserland, but it will be something for a young man so much in want of achange. You will stay, and go with us?”“No, certainly not; I shall go home in the cool of the evening.”“But you may come again in the cool of to-morrow morning.”“No—It will not be worth while. If I come, I shall be cross.”“Then pray stay at Richmond.”“But if I do, I shall be crosser still. I can never bear to think of youall there without me.”“These are difficulties which you must settle for yourself. Chuse yourown degree of crossness. I shall press you no more.”The rest of the party were now returning, and all were soon collected. Withsome there was great joy at the sight of Frank Churchill; others took it verycomposedly; but there was a very general distress and disturbance on MissFairfax’s disappearance being explained. That it was time for every bodyto go, concluded the subject; and with a short final arrangement for the nextday’s scheme, they parted. Frank Churchill’s little inclination toexclude himself increased so much, that his last words to Emma were,“Well;—if you wish me to stay and join the party, Iwill.”She smiled her acceptance; and nothing less than a summons from Richmond was totake him back before the following evening.CHAPTER VIIThey had a very fine day for Box Hill; and all the other outward circumstancesof arrangement, accommodation, and punctuality, were in favour of a pleasantparty. Mr. Weston directed the whole, officiating safely between Hartfield andthe Vicarage, and every body was in good time. Emma and Harriet went together;Miss Bates and her niece, with the Eltons; the gentlemen on horseback. Mrs.Weston remained with Mr. Woodhouse. Nothing was wanting but to be happy whenthey got there. Seven miles were travelled in expectation of enjoyment, andevery body had a burst of admiration on first arriving; but in the generalamount of the day there was deficiency. There was a languor, a want of spirits,a want of union, which could not be got over. They separated too much intoparties. The Eltons walked together; Mr. Knightley took charge of Miss Batesand Jane; and Emma and Harriet belonged to Frank Churchill. And Mr. Westontried, in vain, to make them harmonise better. It seemed at first an accidentaldivision, but it never materially varied. Mr. and Mrs. Elton, indeed, shewed nounwillingness to mix, and be as agreeable as they could; but during the twowhole hours that were spent on the hill, there seemed a principle ofseparation, between the other parties, too strong for any fine prospects, orany cold collation, or any cheerful Mr. Weston, to remove.At first it was downright dulness to Emma. She had never seen Frank Churchillso silent and stupid. He said nothing worth hearing—looked withoutseeing—admired without intelligence—listened without knowing whatshe said. While he was so dull, it was no wonder that Harriet should be dulllikewise; and they were both insufferable.When they all sat down it was better; to her taste a great deal better, forFrank Churchill grew talkative and gay, making her his first object. Everydistinguishing attention that could be paid, was paid to her. To amuse her, andbe agreeable in her eyes, seemed all that he cared for—and Emma, glad tobe enlivened, not sorry to be flattered, was gay and easy too, and gave him allthe friendly encouragement, the admission to be gallant, which she had evergiven in the first and most animating period of their acquaintance; but whichnow, in her own estimation, meant nothing, though in the judgment of mostpeople looking on it must have had such an appearance as no English word butflirtation could very well describe. “Mr. Frank Churchill and MissWoodhouse flirted together excessively.” They were laying themselves opento that very phrase—and to having it sent off in a letter to Maple Groveby one lady, to Ireland by another. Not that Emma was gay and thoughtless fromany real felicity; it was rather because she felt less happy than she hadexpected. She laughed because she was disappointed; and though she liked himfor his attentions, and thought them all, whether in friendship, admiration, orplayfulness, extremely judicious, they were not winning back her heart. Shestill intended him for her friend.“How much I am obliged to you,” said he, “for telling me tocome to-day!—If it had not been for you, I should certainly have lost allthe happiness of this party. I had quite determined to go away again.”“Yes, you were very cross; and I do not know what about, except that youwere too late for the best strawberries. I was a kinder friend than youdeserved. But you were humble. You begged hard to be commanded to come.”“Don’t say I was cross. I was fatigued. The heat overcameme.”“It is hotter to-day.”“Not to my feelings. I am perfectly comfortable to-day.”“You are comfortable because you are under command.”“Your command?—Yes.”“Perhaps I intended you to say so, but I meant self-command. You had,somehow or other, broken bounds yesterday, and run away from your ownmanagement; but to-day you are got back again—and as I cannot be alwayswith you, it is best to believe your temper under your own command rather thanmine.”“It comes to the same thing. I can have no self-command without a motive.You order me, whether you speak or not. And you can be always with me. You arealways with me.”“Dating from three o’clock yesterday. My perpetual influence couldnot begin earlier, or you would not have been so much out of humourbefore.”“Three o’clock yesterday! That is your date. I thought I had seenyou first in February.”“Your gallantry is really unanswerable. But (lowering hervoice)—nobody speaks except ourselves, and it is rather too much to betalking nonsense for the entertainment of seven silent people.”“I say nothing of which I am ashamed,” replied he, with livelyimpudence. “I saw you first in February. Let every body on the Hill hearme if they can. Let my accents swell to Mickleham on one side, and Dorking onthe other. I saw you first in February.” And thenwhispering—“Our companions are excessively stupid. What shall we doto rouse them? Any nonsense will serve. They shall talk. Ladies andgentlemen, I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse (who, wherever she is, presides) tosay, that she desires to know what you are all thinking of?”Some laughed, and answered good-humouredly. Miss Bates said a great deal; Mrs.Elton swelled at the idea of Miss Woodhouse’s presiding; Mr.Knightley’s answer was the most distinct.“Is Miss Woodhouse sure that she would like to hear what we are allthinking of?”“Oh! no, no”—cried Emma, laughing as carelessly as shecould—“Upon no account in the world. It is the very last thing Iwould stand the brunt of just now. Let me hear any thing rather than what youare all thinking of. I will not say quite all. There are one or two, perhaps,(glancing at Mr. Weston and Harriet,) whose thoughts I might not be afraid ofknowing.”“It is a sort of thing,” cried Mrs. Elton emphatically,“which I should not have thought myself privileged to inquireinto. Though, perhaps, as the Chaperon of the party—I neverwas in any circle—exploring parties—young ladies—marriedwomen—”Her mutterings were chiefly to her husband; and he murmured, in reply,“Very true, my love, very true. Exactly so, indeed—quite unheardof—but some ladies say any thing. Better pass it off as a joke. Everybody knows what is due to you.”“It will not do,” whispered Frank to Emma; “they are most ofthem affronted. I will attack them with more address. Ladies andgentlemen—I am ordered by Miss Woodhouse to say, that she waives herright of knowing exactly what you may all be thinking of, and only requiressomething very entertaining from each of you, in a general way. Here are sevenof you, besides myself, (who, she is pleased to say, am very entertainingalready,) and she only demands from each of you either one thing very clever,be it prose or verse, original or repeated—or two things moderatelyclever—or three things very dull indeed, and she engages to laughheartily at them all.”“Oh! very well,” exclaimed Miss Bates, “then I need not beuneasy. ‘Three things very dull indeed.’ That will just do for me,you know. I shall be sure to say three dull things as soon as ever I open mymouth, shan’t I? (looking round with the most good-humoured dependence onevery body’s assent)—Do not you all think I shall?”Emma could not resist.“Ah! ma’am, but there may be a difficulty. Pardon me—but youwill be limited as to number—only three at once.”Miss Bates, deceived by the mock ceremony of her manner, did not immediatelycatch her meaning; but, when it burst on her, it could not anger, though aslight blush shewed that it could pain her.“Ah!—well—to be sure. Yes, I see what she means, (turning toMr. Knightley,) and I will try to hold my tongue. I must make myself verydisagreeable, or she would not have said such a thing to an old friend.”“I like your plan,” cried Mr. Weston. “Agreed, agreed. I willdo my best. I am making a conundrum. How will a conundrum reckon?”“Low, I am afraid, sir, very low,” answered hisson;—“but we shall be indulgent—especially to any one wholeads the way.”“No, no,” said Emma, “it will not reckon low. A conundrum ofMr. Weston’s shall clear him and his next neighbour. Come, sir, pray letme hear it.”“I doubt its being very clever myself,” said Mr. Weston. “Itis too much a matter of fact, but here it is.—What two letters of thealphabet are there, that express perfection?”“What two letters!—express perfection! I am sure I do notknow.”“Ah! you will never guess. You, (to Emma), I am certain, will neverguess.—I will tell you.—M. and A.—Em-ma.—Do youunderstand?”Understanding and gratification came together. It might be a very indifferentpiece of wit, but Emma found a great deal to laugh at and enjoy in it—andso did Frank and Harriet.—It did not seem to touch the rest of the partyequally; some looked very stupid about it, and Mr. Knightley gravely said,“This explains the sort of clever thing that is wanted, and Mr. Westonhas done very well for himself; but he must have knocked up every body else.Perfection should not have come quite so soon.”“Oh! for myself, I protest I must be excused,” said Mrs. Elton;“I really cannot attempt—I am not at all fond of the sort ofthing. I had an acrostic once sent to me upon my own name, which I was not atall pleased with. I knew who it came from. An abominable puppy!—You knowwho I mean (nodding to her husband). These kind of things are very well atChristmas, when one is sitting round the fire; but quite out of place, in myopinion, when one is exploring about the country in summer. Miss Woodhouse mustexcuse me. I am not one of those who have witty things at every body’sservice. I do not pretend to be a wit. I have a great deal of vivacity in myown way, but I really must be allowed to judge when to speak and when to holdmy tongue. Pass us, if you please, Mr. Churchill. Pass Mr. E., Knightley, Jane,and myself. We have nothing clever to say—not one of us.“Yes, yes, pray pass me,” added her husband, with a sort ofsneering consciousness; “I have nothing to say that can entertainMiss Woodhouse, or any other young lady. An old married man—quite goodfor nothing. Shall we walk, Augusta?”“With all my heart. I am really tired of exploring so long on one spot.Come, Jane, take my other arm.”Jane declined it, however, and the husband and wife walked off. “Happycouple!” said Frank Churchill, as soon as they were out ofhearing:—“How well they suit one another!—Verylucky—marrying as they did, upon an acquaintance formed only in a publicplace!—They only knew each other, I think, a few weeks in Bath!Peculiarly lucky!—for as to any real knowledge of a person’sdisposition that Bath, or any public place, can give—it is all nothing;there can be no knowledge. It is only by seeing women in their own homes, amongtheir own set, just as they always are, that you can form any just judgment.Short of that, it is all guess and luck—and will generally be ill-luck.How many a man has committed himself on a short acquaintance, and rued it allthe rest of his life!”Miss Fairfax, who had seldom spoken before, except among her own confederates,spoke now.“Such things do occur, undoubtedly.”—She was stopped by acough. Frank Churchill turned towards her to listen.“You were speaking,” said he, gravely. She recovered her voice.“I was only going to observe, that though such unfortunate circumstancesdo sometimes occur both to men and women, I cannot imagine them to be veryfrequent. A hasty and imprudent attachment may arise—but there isgenerally time to recover from it afterwards. I would be understood to mean,that it can be only weak, irresolute characters, (whose happiness must bealways at the mercy of chance,) who will suffer an unfortunate acquaintance tobe an inconvenience, an oppression for ever.”He made no answer; merely looked, and bowed in submission; and soon afterwardssaid, in a lively tone,“Well, I have so little confidence in my own judgment, that whenever Imarry, I hope some body will chuse my wife for me. Will you? (turning to Emma.)Will you chuse a wife for me?—I am sure I should like any body fixed onby you. You provide for the family, you know, (with a smile at his father).Find some body for me. I am in no hurry. Adopt her, educate her.”“And make her like myself.”“By all means, if you can.”“Very well. I undertake the commission. You shall have a charmingwife.”“She must be very lively, and have hazle eyes. I care for nothing else. Ishall go abroad for a couple of years—and when I return, I shall come toyou for my wife. Remember.”Emma was in no danger of forgetting. It was a commission to touch everyfavourite feeling. Would not Harriet be the very creature described? Hazle eyesexcepted, two years more might make her all that he wished. He might even haveHarriet in his thoughts at the moment; who could say? Referring the educationto her seemed to imply it.“Now, ma’am,” said Jane to her aunt, “shall we joinMrs. Elton?”“If you please, my dear. With all my heart. I am quite ready. I was readyto have gone with her, but this will do just as well. We shall soon overtakeher. There she is—no, that’s somebody else. That’s one of theladies in the Irish car party, not at all like her.—Well, Ideclare—”They walked off, followed in half a minute by Mr. Knightley. Mr. Weston, hisson, Emma, and Harriet, only remained; and the young man’s spirits nowrose to a pitch almost unpleasant. Even Emma grew tired at last of flattery andmerriment, and wished herself rather walking quietly about with any of theothers, or sitting almost alone, and quite unattended to, in tranquilobservation of the beautiful views beneath her. The appearance of the servantslooking out for them to give notice of the carriages was a joyful sight; andeven the bustle of collecting and preparing to depart, and the solicitude ofMrs. Elton to have her carriage first, were gladly endured, in theprospect of the quiet drive home which was to close the very questionableenjoyments of this day of pleasure. Such another scheme, composed of so manyill-assorted people, she hoped never to be betrayed into again.While waiting for the carriage, she found Mr. Knightley by her side. He lookedaround, as if to see that no one were near, and then said,“Emma, I must once more speak to you as I have been used to do: aprivilege rather endured than allowed, perhaps, but I must still use it. Icannot see you acting wrong, without a remonstrance. How could you be sounfeeling to Miss Bates? How could you be so insolent in your wit to a woman ofher character, age, and situation?—Emma, I had not thought itpossible.”Emma recollected, blushed, was sorry, but tried to laugh it off.“Nay, how could I help saying what I did?—Nobody could have helpedit. It was not so very bad. I dare say she did not understand me.”“I assure you she did. She felt your full meaning. She has talked of itsince. I wish you could have heard how she talked of it—with what candourand generosity. I wish you could have heard her honouring your forbearance, inbeing able to pay her such attentions, as she was for ever receiving fromyourself and your father, when her society must be so irksome.”“Oh!” cried Emma, “I know there is not a better creature inthe world: but you must allow, that what is good and what is ridiculous aremost unfortunately blended in her.”“They are blended,” said he, “I acknowledge; and, were sheprosperous, I could allow much for the occasional prevalence of the ridiculousover the good. Were she a woman of fortune, I would leave every harmlessabsurdity to take its chance, I would not quarrel with you for any liberties ofmanner. Were she your equal in situation—but, Emma, consider how far thisis from being the case. She is poor; she has sunk from the comforts she wasborn to; and, if she live to old age, must probably sink more. Her situationshould secure your compassion. It was badly done, indeed! You, whom she hadknown from an infant, whom she had seen grow up from a period when her noticewas an honour, to have you now, in thoughtless spirits, and the pride of themoment, laugh at her, humble her—and before her niece, too—andbefore others, many of whom (certainly some,) would be entirely guidedby your treatment of her.—This is not pleasant to you,Emma—and it is very far from pleasant to me; but I must, I will,—Iwill tell you truths while I can; satisfied with proving myself your friend byvery faithful counsel, and trusting that you will some time or other do megreater justice than you can do now.”While they talked, they were advancing towards the carriage; it was ready; and,before she could speak again, he had handed her in. He had misinterpreted thefeelings which had kept her face averted, and her tongue motionless. They werecombined only of anger against herself, mortification, and deep concern. Shehad not been able to speak; and, on entering the carriage, sunk back for amoment overcome—then reproaching herself for having taken no leave,making no acknowledgment, parting in apparent sullenness, she looked out withvoice and hand eager to shew a difference; but it was just too late. He hadturned away, and the horses were in motion. She continued to look back, but invain; and soon, with what appeared unusual speed, they were half way down thehill, and every thing left far behind. She was vexed beyond what could havebeen expressed—almost beyond what she could conceal. Never had she feltso agitated, mortified, grieved, at any circumstance in her life. She was mostforcibly struck. The truth of this representation there was no denying. Shefelt it at her heart. How could she have been so brutal, so cruel to MissBates! How could she have exposed herself to such ill opinion in any one shevalued! And how suffer him to leave her without saying one word of gratitude,of concurrence, of common kindness!Time did not compose her. As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel itmore. She never had been so depressed. Happily it was not necessary to speak.There was only Harriet, who seemed not in spirits herself, fagged, and verywilling to be silent; and Emma felt the tears running down her cheeks almostall the way home, without being at any trouble to check them, extraordinary asthey were.CHAPTER VIIIThe wretchedness of a scheme to Box Hill was in Emma’s thoughts all theevening. How it might be considered by the rest of the party, she could nottell. They, in their different homes, and their different ways, might belooking back on it with pleasure; but in her view it was a morning morecompletely misspent, more totally bare of rational satisfaction at the time,and more to be abhorred in recollection, than any she had ever passed. A wholeevening of back-gammon with her father, was felicity to it. There,indeed, lay real pleasure, for there she was giving up the sweetest hours ofthe twenty-four to his comfort; and feeling that, unmerited as might be thedegree of his fond affection and confiding esteem, she could not, in hergeneral conduct, be open to any severe reproach. As a daughter, she hoped shewas not without a heart. She hoped no one could have said to her, “Howcould you be so unfeeling to your father?—I must, I will tell you truthswhile I can.” Miss Bates should never again—no, never! Ifattention, in future, could do away the past, she might hope to be forgiven.She had been often remiss, her conscience told her so; remiss, perhaps, more inthought than fact; scornful, ungracious. But it should be so no more. In thewarmth of true contrition, she would call upon her the very next morning, andit should be the beginning, on her side, of a regular, equal, kindlyintercourse.She was just as determined when the morrow came, and went early, that nothingmight prevent her. It was not unlikely, she thought, that she might see Mr.Knightley in her way; or, perhaps, he might come in while she were paying hervisit. She had no objection. She would not be ashamed of the appearance of thepenitence, so justly and truly hers. Her eyes were towards Donwell as shewalked, but she saw him not.“The ladies were all at home.” She had never rejoiced at the soundbefore, nor ever before entered the passage, nor walked up the stairs, with anywish of giving pleasure, but in conferring obligation, or of deriving it,except in subsequent ridicule.There was a bustle on her approach; a good deal of moving and talking. Sheheard Miss Bates’s voice, something was to be done in a hurry; the maidlooked frightened and awkward; hoped she would be pleased to wait a moment, andthen ushered her in too soon. The aunt and niece seemed both escaping into theadjoining room. Jane she had a distinct glimpse of, looking extremely ill; and,before the door had shut them out, she heard Miss Bates saying, “Well, mydear, I shall say you are laid down upon the bed, and I am sure you areill enough.”Poor old Mrs. Bates, civil and humble as usual, looked as if she did not quiteunderstand what was going on.“I am afraid Jane is not very well,” said she, “but I do notknow; they tell me she is well. I dare say my daughter will be herepresently, Miss Woodhouse. I hope you find a chair. I wish Hetty had not gone.I am very little able—Have you a chair, ma’am? Do you sit where youlike? I am sure she will be here presently.”Emma seriously hoped she would. She had a moment’s fear of Miss Bateskeeping away from her. But Miss Bates soon came—“Very happy andobliged”—but Emma’s conscience told her that there was notthe same cheerful volubility as before—less ease of look and manner. Avery friendly inquiry after Miss Fairfax, she hoped, might lead the way to areturn of old feelings. The touch seemed immediate.“Ah! Miss Woodhouse, how kind you are!—I suppose you haveheard—and are come to give us joy. This does not seem much like joy,indeed, in me—(twinkling away a tear or two)—but it will be verytrying for us to part with her, after having had her so long, and she has adreadful headache just now, writing all the morning:—such long letters,you know, to be written to Colonel Campbell, and Mrs. Dixon. ‘Mydear,’ said I, ‘you will blind yourself’—for tears werein her eyes perpetually. One cannot wonder, one cannot wonder. It is a greatchange; and though she is amazingly fortunate—such a situation, Isuppose, as no young woman before ever met with on first going out—do notthink us ungrateful, Miss Woodhouse, for such surprising goodfortune—(again dispersing her tears)—but, poor dear soul! if youwere to see what a headache she has. When one is in great pain, you know onecannot feel any blessing quite as it may deserve. She is as low as possible. Tolook at her, nobody would think how delighted and happy she is to have securedsuch a situation. You will excuse her not coming to you—she is notable—she is gone into her own room—I want her to lie down upon thebed. ‘My dear,’ said I, ‘I shall say you are laid down uponthe bed:’ but, however, she is not; she is walking about the room. But,now that she has written her letters, she says she shall soon be well. She willbe extremely sorry to miss seeing you, Miss Woodhouse, but your kindness willexcuse her. You were kept waiting at the door—I was quiteashamed—but somehow there was a little bustle—for it so happenedthat we had not heard the knock, and till you were on the stairs, we did notknow any body was coming. ‘It is only Mrs. Cole,’ said I,‘depend upon it. Nobody else would come so early.’‘Well,’ said she, ‘it must be borne some time or other, andit may as well be now.’ But then Patty came in, and said it was you.‘Oh!’ said I, ‘it is Miss Woodhouse: I am sure you will liketo see her.’—‘I can see nobody,’ said she; and up shegot, and would go away; and that was what made us keep you waiting—andextremely sorry and ashamed we were. ‘If you must go, my dear,’said I, ‘you must, and I will say you are laid down upon thebed.’”Emma was most sincerely interested. Her heart had been long growing kindertowards Jane; and this picture of her present sufferings acted as a cure ofevery former ungenerous suspicion, and left her nothing but pity; and theremembrance of the less just and less gentle sensations of the past, obligedher to admit that Jane might very naturally resolve on seeing Mrs. Cole or anyother steady friend, when she might not bear to see herself. She spoke as shefelt, with earnest regret and solicitude—sincerely wishing that thecircumstances which she collected from Miss Bates to be now actually determinedon, might be as much for Miss Fairfax’s advantage and comfort aspossible. “It must be a severe trial to them all. She had understood itwas to be delayed till Colonel Campbell’s return.”“So very kind!” replied Miss Bates. “But you are alwayskind.”There was no bearing such an “always;” and to break through herdreadful gratitude, Emma made the direct inquiry of—“Where—may I ask?—is Miss Fairfax going?”“To a Mrs. Smallridge—charming woman—most superior—tohave the charge of her three little girls—delightful children. Impossiblethat any situation could be more replete with comfort; if we except, perhaps,Mrs. Suckling’s own family, and Mrs. Bragge’s; but Mrs. Smallridgeis intimate with both, and in the very same neighbourhood:—lives onlyfour miles from Maple Grove. Jane will be only four miles from MapleGrove.”“Mrs. Elton, I suppose, has been the person to whom Miss Fairfaxowes—”“Yes, our good Mrs. Elton. The most indefatigable, true friend. She wouldnot take a denial. She would not let Jane say, ‘No;’ for when Janefirst heard of it, (it was the day before yesterday, the very morning we wereat Donwell,) when Jane first heard of it, she was quite decided againstaccepting the offer, and for the reasons you mention; exactly as you say, shehad made up her mind to close with nothing till Colonel Campbell’sreturn, and nothing should induce her to enter into any engagement atpresent—and so she told Mrs. Elton over and over again—and I amsure I had no more idea that she would change her mind!—but that goodMrs. Elton, whose judgment never fails her, saw farther than I did. It is notevery body that would have stood out in such a kind way as she did, and refuseto take Jane’s answer; but she positively declared she would notwrite any such denial yesterday, as Jane wished her; she would wait—and,sure enough, yesterday evening it was all settled that Jane should go. Quite asurprize to me! I had not the least idea!—Jane took Mrs. Elton aside, andtold her at once, that upon thinking over the advantages of Mrs.Smallridge’s situation, she had come to the resolution of acceptingit.—I did not know a word of it till it was all settled.”“You spent the evening with Mrs. Elton?”“Yes, all of us; Mrs. Elton would have us come. It was settled so, uponthe hill, while we were walking about with Mr. Knightley. ‘Youmust all spend your evening with us,’ saidshe—‘I positively must have you all come.’”“Mr. Knightley was there too, was he?”“No, not Mr. Knightley; he declined it from the first; and though Ithought he would come, because Mrs. Elton declared she would not let him off,he did not;—but my mother, and Jane, and I, were all there, and a veryagreeable evening we had. Such kind friends, you know, Miss Woodhouse, one mustalways find agreeable, though every body seemed rather fagged after themorning’s party. Even pleasure, you know, is fatiguing—and I cannotsay that any of them seemed very much to have enjoyed it. However, Ishall always think it a very pleasant party, and feel extremely obliged to thekind friends who included me in it.”“Miss Fairfax, I suppose, though you were not aware of it, had beenmaking up her mind the whole day?”“I dare say she had.”“Whenever the time may come, it must be unwelcome to her and all herfriends—but I hope her engagement will have every alleviation that ispossible—I mean, as to the character and manners of the family.”“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse. Yes, indeed, there is every thing in theworld that can make her happy in it. Except the Sucklings and Bragges, there isnot such another nursery establishment, so liberal and elegant, in all Mrs.Elton’s acquaintance. Mrs. Smallridge, a most delightful woman!—Astyle of living almost equal to Maple Grove—and as to the children,except the little Sucklings and little Bragges, there are not such elegantsweet children anywhere. Jane will be treated with such regard andkindness!—It will be nothing but pleasure, a life of pleasure.—Andher salary!—I really cannot venture to name her salary to you, MissWoodhouse. Even you, used as you are to great sums, would hardly believe thatso much could be given to a young person like Jane.”“Ah! madam,” cried Emma, “if other children are at all likewhat I remember to have been myself, I should think five times the amount ofwhat I have ever yet heard named as a salary on such occasions, dearlyearned.”“You are so noble in your ideas!”“And when is Miss Fairfax to leave you?”“Very soon, very soon, indeed; that’s the worst of it. Within afortnight. Mrs. Smallridge is in a great hurry. My poor mother does not knowhow to bear it. So then, I try to put it out of her thoughts, and say, Comema’am, do not let us think about it any more.”“Her friends must all be sorry to lose her; and will not Colonel and Mrs.Campbell be sorry to find that she has engaged herself before theirreturn?”“Yes; Jane says she is sure they will; but yet, this is such a situationas she cannot feel herself justified in declining. I was so astonished when shefirst told me what she had been saying to Mrs. Elton, and when Mrs. Elton atthe same moment came congratulating me upon it! It was beforetea—stay—no, it could not be before tea, because we were just goingto cards—and yet it was before tea, because I remember thinking—Oh!no, now I recollect, now I have it; something happened before tea, but notthat. Mr. Elton was called out of the room before tea, old John Abdy’sson wanted to speak with him. Poor old John, I have a great regard for him; hewas clerk to my poor father twenty-seven years; and now, poor old man, he isbed-ridden, and very poorly with the rheumatic gout in his joints—I mustgo and see him to-day; and so will Jane, I am sure, if she gets out at all. Andpoor John’s son came to talk to Mr. Elton about relief from the parish;he is very well to do himself, you know, being head man at the Crown, ostler,and every thing of that sort, but still he cannot keep his father without somehelp; and so, when Mr. Elton came back, he told us what John ostler had beentelling him, and then it came out about the chaise having been sent to Randallsto take Mr. Frank Churchill to Richmond. That was what happened before tea. Itwas after tea that Jane spoke to Mrs. Elton.”Miss Bates would hardly give Emma time to say how perfectly new thiscircumstance was to her; but as without supposing it possible that she could beignorant of any of the particulars of Mr. Frank Churchill’s going, sheproceeded to give them all, it was of no consequence.What Mr. Elton had learned from the ostler on the subject, being theaccumulation of the ostler’s own knowledge, and the knowledge of theservants at Randalls, was, that a messenger had come over from Richmond soonafter the return of the party from Box Hill—which messenger, however, hadbeen no more than was expected; and that Mr. Churchill had sent his nephew afew lines, containing, upon the whole, a tolerable account of Mrs. Churchill,and only wishing him not to delay coming back beyond the next morning early;but that Mr. Frank Churchill having resolved to go home directly, withoutwaiting at all, and his horse seeming to have got a cold, Tom had been sent offimmediately for the Crown chaise, and the ostler had stood out and seen it passby, the boy going a good pace, and driving very steady.There was nothing in all this either to astonish or interest, and it caughtEmma’s attention only as it united with the subject which already engagedher mind. The contrast between Mrs. Churchill’s importance in the world,and Jane Fairfax’s, struck her; one was every thing, the othernothing—and she sat musing on the difference of woman’s destiny,and quite unconscious on what her eyes were fixed, till roused by MissBates’s saying,“Aye, I see what you are thinking of, the pianoforte. What is to becomeof that?—Very true. Poor dear Jane was talking of it justnow.—‘You must go,’ said she. ‘You and I must part. Youwill have no business here.—Let it stay, however,’ said she;‘give it houseroom till Colonel Campbell comes back. I shall talk aboutit to him; he will settle for me; he will help me out of all mydifficulties.’—And to this day, I do believe, she knows not whetherit was his present or his daughter’s.”Now Emma was obliged to think of the pianoforte; and the remembrance of all herformer fanciful and unfair conjectures was so little pleasing, that she soonallowed herself to believe her visit had been long enough; and, with arepetition of every thing that she could venture to say of the good wisheswhich she really felt, took leave.CHAPTER IXEmma’s pensive meditations, as she walked home, were not interrupted; buton entering the parlour, she found those who must rouse her. Mr. Knightley andHarriet had arrived during her absence, and were sitting with herfather.—Mr. Knightley immediately got up, and in a manner decidedlygraver than usual, said,“I would not go away without seeing you, but I have no time to spare, andtherefore must now be gone directly. I am going to London, to spend a few dayswith John and Isabella. Have you any thing to send or say, besides the‘love,’ which nobody carries?”“Nothing at all. But is not this a sudden scheme?”“Yes—rather—I have been thinking of it some littletime.”Emma was sure he had not forgiven her; he looked unlike himself. Time, however,she thought, would tell him that they ought to be friends again. While hestood, as if meaning to go, but not going—her father began his inquiries.“Well, my dear, and did you get there safely?—And how did you findmy worthy old friend and her daughter?—I dare say they must have beenvery much obliged to you for coming. Dear Emma has been to call on Mrs. andMiss Bates, Mr. Knightley, as I told you before. She is always so attentive tothem!”Emma’s colour was heightened by this unjust praise; and with a smile, andshake of the head, which spoke much, she looked at Mr. Knightley.—Itseemed as if there were an instantaneous impression in her favour, as if hiseyes received the truth from hers, and all that had passed of good in herfeelings were at once caught and honoured.— He looked at her with a glowof regard. She was warmly gratified—and in another moment still more so,by a little movement of more than common friendliness on his part.—Hetook her hand;—whether she had not herself made the first motion, shecould not say—she might, perhaps, have rather offered it—but hetook her hand, pressed it, and certainly was on the point of carrying it to hislips—when, from some fancy or other, he suddenly let it go.—Why heshould feel such a scruple, why he should change his mind when it was all butdone, she could not perceive.—He would have judged better, she thought,if he had not stopped.—The intention, however, was indubitable; andwhether it was that his manners had in general so little gallantry, or howeverelse it happened, but she thought nothing became him more.—It was withhim, of so simple, yet so dignified a nature.—She could not but recallthe attempt with great satisfaction. It spoke such perfect amity.—He leftthem immediately afterwards—gone in a moment. He always moved with thealertness of a mind which could neither be undecided nor dilatory, but now heseemed more sudden than usual in his disappearance.Emma could not regret her having gone to Miss Bates, but she wished she hadleft her ten minutes earlier;—it would have been a great pleasure to talkover Jane Fairfax’s situation with Mr. Knightley.—Neither would sheregret that he should be going to Brunswick Square, for she knew how much hisvisit would be enjoyed—but it might have happened at a bettertime—and to have had longer notice of it, would have beenpleasanter.—They parted thorough friends, however; she could not bedeceived as to the meaning of his countenance, and his unfinishedgallantry;—it was all done to assure her that she had fully recovered hisgood opinion.—He had been sitting with them half an hour, she found. Itwas a pity that she had not come back earlier!In the hope of diverting her father’s thoughts from the disagreeablenessof Mr. Knightley’s going to London; and going so suddenly; and going onhorseback, which she knew would be all very bad; Emma communicated her news ofJane Fairfax, and her dependence on the effect was justified; it supplied avery useful check,—interested, without disturbing him. He had long madeup his mind to Jane Fairfax’s going out as governess, and could talk ofit cheerfully, but Mr. Knightley’s going to London had been an unexpectedblow.“I am very glad, indeed, my dear, to hear she is to be so comfortablysettled. Mrs. Elton is very good-natured and agreeable, and I dare say heracquaintance are just what they ought to be. I hope it is a dry situation, andthat her health will be taken good care of. It ought to be a first object, as Iam sure poor Miss Taylor’s always was with me. You know, my dear, she isgoing to be to this new lady what Miss Taylor was to us. And I hope she will bebetter off in one respect, and not be induced to go away after it has been herhome so long.”The following day brought news from Richmond to throw every thing else into thebackground. An express arrived at Randalls to announce the death of Mrs.Churchill! Though her nephew had had no particular reason to hasten back on heraccount, she had not lived above six-and-thirty hours after his return. Asudden seizure of a different nature from any thing foreboded by her generalstate, had carried her off after a short struggle. The great Mrs. Churchill wasno more.It was felt as such things must be felt. Every body had a degree of gravity andsorrow; tenderness towards the departed, solicitude for the surviving friends;and, in a reasonable time, curiosity to know where she would be buried.Goldsmith tells us, that when lovely woman stoops to folly, she has nothing todo but to die; and when she stoops to be disagreeable, it is equally to berecommended as a clearer of ill-fame. Mrs. Churchill, after being disliked atleast twenty-five years, was now spoken of with compassionate allowances. Inone point she was fully justified. She had never been admitted before to beseriously ill. The event acquitted her of all the fancifulness, and all theselfishness of imaginary complaints.“Poor Mrs. Churchill! no doubt she had been suffering a great deal: morethan any body had ever supposed—and continual pain would try the temper.It was a sad event—a great shock—with all her faults, what wouldMr. Churchill do without her? Mr. Churchill’s loss would be dreadfulindeed. Mr. Churchill would never get over it.”—Even Mr. Westonshook his head, and looked solemn, and said, “Ah! poor woman, who wouldhave thought it!” and resolved, that his mourning should be as handsomeas possible; and his wife sat sighing and moralising over her broad hems with acommiseration and good sense, true and steady. How it would affect Frank wasamong the earliest thoughts of both. It was also a very early speculation withEmma. The character of Mrs. Churchill, the grief of her husband—her mindglanced over them both with awe and compassion—and then rested withlightened feelings on how Frank might be affected by the event, how benefited,how freed. She saw in a moment all the possible good. Now, an attachment toHarriet Smith would have nothing to encounter. Mr. Churchill, independent ofhis wife, was feared by nobody; an easy, guidable man, to be persuaded into anything by his nephew. All that remained to be wished was, that the nephew shouldform the attachment, as, with all her goodwill in the cause, Emma could feel nocertainty of its being already formed.Harriet behaved extremely well on the occasion, with great self-command. Whatever she might feel of brighter hope, she betrayed nothing. Emma was gratified,to observe such a proof in her of strengthened character, and refrained fromany allusion that might endanger its maintenance. They spoke, therefore, ofMrs. Churchill’s death with mutual forbearance.Short letters from Frank were received at Randalls, communicating all that wasimmediately important of their state and plans. Mr. Churchill was better thancould be expected; and their first removal, on the departure of the funeral forYorkshire, was to be to the house of a very old friend in Windsor, to whom Mr.Churchill had been promising a visit the last ten years. At present, there wasnothing to be done for Harriet; good wishes for the future were all that couldyet be possible on Emma’s side.It was a more pressing concern to shew attention to Jane Fairfax, whoseprospects were closing, while Harriet’s opened, and whose engagements nowallowed of no delay in any one at Highbury, who wished to shew herkindness—and with Emma it was grown into a first wish. She had scarcely astronger regret than for her past coldness; and the person, whom she had beenso many months neglecting, was now the very one on whom she would have lavishedevery distinction of regard or sympathy. She wanted to be of use to her; wantedto shew a value for her society, and testify respect and consideration. Sheresolved to prevail on her to spend a day at Hartfield. A note was written tourge it. The invitation was refused, and by a verbal message. “MissFairfax was not well enough to write;” and when Mr. Perry called atHartfield, the same morning, it appeared that she was so much indisposed as tohave been visited, though against her own consent, by himself, and that she wassuffering under severe headaches, and a nervous fever to a degree, which madehim doubt the possibility of her going to Mrs. Smallridge’s at the timeproposed. Her health seemed for the moment completely deranged—appetitequite gone—and though there were no absolutely alarming symptoms, nothingtouching the pulmonary complaint, which was the standing apprehension of thefamily, Mr. Perry was uneasy about her. He thought she had undertaken more thanshe was equal to, and that she felt it so herself, though she would not own it.Her spirits seemed overcome. Her present home, he could not but observe, wasunfavourable to a nervous disorder:—confined always to one room;—hecould have wished it otherwise—and her good aunt, though his very oldfriend, he must acknowledge to be not the best companion for an invalid of thatdescription. Her care and attention could not be questioned; they were, infact, only too great. He very much feared that Miss Fairfax derived more evilthan good from them. Emma listened with the warmest concern; grieved for hermore and more, and looked around eager to discover some way of being useful. Totake her—be it only an hour or two—from her aunt, to give herchange of air and scene, and quiet rational conversation, even for an hour ortwo, might do her good; and the following morning she wrote again to say, inthe most feeling language she could command, that she would call for her in thecarriage at any hour that Jane would name—mentioning that she had Mr.Perry’s decided opinion, in favour of such exercise for his patient. Theanswer was only in this short note:“Miss Fairfax’s compliments and thanks, but is quite unequal to anyexercise.”Emma felt that her own note had deserved something better; but it wasimpossible to quarrel with words, whose tremulous inequality shewedindisposition so plainly, and she thought only of how she might best counteractthis unwillingness to be seen or assisted. In spite of the answer, therefore,she ordered the carriage, and drove to Mrs. Bates’s, in the hope thatJane would be induced to join her—but it would not do;—Miss Batescame to the carriage door, all gratitude, and agreeing with her most earnestlyin thinking an airing might be of the greatest service—and every thingthat message could do was tried—but all in vain. Miss Bates was obligedto return without success; Jane was quite unpersuadable; the mere proposal ofgoing out seemed to make her worse.—Emma wished she could have seen her,and tried her own powers; but, almost before she could hint the wish, MissBates made it appear that she had promised her niece on no account to let MissWoodhouse in. “Indeed, the truth was, that poor dear Jane could not bearto see any body—any body at all—Mrs. Elton, indeed, could not bedenied—and Mrs. Cole had made such a point—and Mrs. Perry had saidso much—but, except them, Jane would really see nobody.”Emma did not want to be classed with the Mrs. Eltons, the Mrs. Perrys, and theMrs. Coles, who would force themselves anywhere; neither could she feel anyright of preference herself—she submitted, therefore, and only questionedMiss Bates farther as to her niece’s appetite and diet, which she longedto be able to assist. On that subject poor Miss Bates was very unhappy, andvery communicative; Jane would hardly eat any thing:—Mr. Perryrecommended nourishing food; but every thing they could command (and never hadany body such good neighbours) was distasteful.Emma, on reaching home, called the housekeeper directly, to an examination ofher stores; and some arrowroot of very superior quality was speedily despatchedto Miss Bates with a most friendly note. In half an hour the arrowroot wasreturned, with a thousand thanks from Miss Bates, but “dear Jane wouldnot be satisfied without its being sent back; it was a thing she could nottake—and, moreover, she insisted on her saying, that she was not at allin want of any thing.”When Emma afterwards heard that Jane Fairfax had been seen wandering about themeadows, at some distance from Highbury, on the afternoon of the very day onwhich she had, under the plea of being unequal to any exercise, so peremptorilyrefused to go out with her in the carriage, she could have nodoubt—putting every thing together—that Jane was resolved toreceive no kindness from her. She was sorry, very sorry. Her heart wasgrieved for a state which seemed but the more pitiable from this sort ofirritation of spirits, inconsistency of action, and inequality of powers; andit mortified her that she was given so little credit for proper feeling, oresteemed so little worthy as a friend: but she had the consolation of knowingthat her intentions were good, and of being able to say to herself, that couldMr. Knightley have been privy to all her attempts of assisting Jane Fairfax,could he even have seen into her heart, he would not, on this occasion, havefound any thing to reprove.CHAPTER XOne morning, about ten days after Mrs. Churchill’s decease, Emma wascalled downstairs to Mr. Weston, who “could not stay five minutes, andwanted particularly to speak with her.”—He met her at theparlour-door, and hardly asking her how she did, in the natural key of hisvoice, sunk it immediately, to say, unheard by her father,“Can you come to Randalls at any time this morning?—Do, if it bepossible. Mrs. Weston wants to see you. She must see you.”“Is she unwell?”“No, no, not at all—only a little agitated. She would have orderedthe carriage, and come to you, but she must see you alone, and that youknow—(nodding towards her father)—Humph!—Can you come?”“Certainly. This moment, if you please. It is impossible to refuse whatyou ask in such a way. But what can be the matter?—Is she really notill?”“Depend upon me—but ask no more questions. You will know it all intime. The most unaccountable business! But hush, hush!”To guess what all this meant, was impossible even for Emma. Something reallyimportant seemed announced by his looks; but, as her friend was well, sheendeavoured not to be uneasy, and settling it with her father, that she wouldtake her walk now, she and Mr. Weston were soon out of the house together andon their way at a quick pace for Randalls.“Now,”—said Emma, when they were fairly beyond the sweepgates,—“now Mr. Weston, do let me know what has happened.”“No, no,”—he gravely replied.—“Don’t askme. I promised my wife to leave it all to her. She will break it to you betterthan I can. Do not be impatient, Emma; it will all come out too soon.”“Break it to me,” cried Emma, standing still withterror.—“Good God!—Mr. Weston, tell me atonce.—Something has happened in Brunswick Square. I know it has. Tell me,I charge you tell me this moment what it is.”“No, indeed you are mistaken.”—“Mr. Weston do not trifle with me.—Consider how many of my dearestfriends are now in Brunswick Square. Which of them is it?—I charge you byall that is sacred, not to attempt concealment.”“Upon my word, Emma.”—“Your word!—why not your honour!—why not say upon yourhonour, that it has nothing to do with any of them? Good Heavens!—Whatcan be to be broke to me, that does not relate to one of thatfamily?”“Upon my honour,” said he very seriously, “it does not. It isnot in the smallest degree connected with any human being of the name ofKnightley.”Emma’s courage returned, and she walked on.“I was wrong,” he continued, “in talking of its beingbroke to you. I should not have used the expression. In fact, it doesnot concern you—it concerns only myself,—that is, wehope.—Humph!—In short, my dear Emma, there is no occasion to be souneasy about it. I don’t say that it is not a disagreeablebusiness—but things might be much worse.—If we walk fast, we shallsoon be at Randalls.”Emma found that she must wait; and now it required little effort. She asked nomore questions therefore, merely employed her own fancy, and that soon pointedout to her the probability of its being some money concern—something justcome to light, of a disagreeable nature in the circumstances of thefamily,—something which the late event at Richmond had brought forward.Her fancy was very active. Half a dozen natural children, perhaps—andpoor Frank cut off!—This, though very undesirable, would be no matter ofagony to her. It inspired little more than an animating curiosity.“Who is that gentleman on horseback?” said she, as theyproceeded—speaking more to assist Mr. Weston in keeping his secret, thanwith any other view.“I do not know.—One of the Otways.—Not Frank;—it is notFrank, I assure you. You will not see him. He is half way to Windsor by thistime.”“Has your son been with you, then?”“Oh! yes—did not you know?—Well, well, never mind.”For a moment he was silent; and then added, in a tone much more guarded anddemure,“Yes, Frank came over this morning, just to ask us how we did.”They hurried on, and were speedily at Randalls.—“Well, mydear,” said he, as they entered the room—“I have brought her,and now I hope you will soon be better. I shall leave you together. There is nouse in delay. I shall not be far off, if you want me.”—And Emmadistinctly heard him add, in a lower tone, before he quitted theroom,—“I have been as good as my word. She has not the leastidea.”Mrs. Weston was looking so ill, and had an air of so much perturbation, thatEmma’s uneasiness increased; and the moment they were alone, she eagerlysaid,“What is it my dear friend? Something of a very unpleasant nature, Ifind, has occurred;—do let me know directly what it is. I have beenwalking all this way in complete suspense. We both abhor suspense. Do not letmine continue longer. It will do you good to speak of your distress, whateverit may be.”“Have you indeed no idea?” said Mrs. Weston in a trembling voice.“Cannot you, my dear Emma—cannot you form a guess as to what youare to hear?”“So far as that it relates to Mr. Frank Churchill, I do guess.”“You are right. It does relate to him, and I will tell youdirectly;” (resuming her work, and seeming resolved against looking up.)“He has been here this very morning, on a most extraordinary errand. Itis impossible to express our surprize. He came to speak to his father on asubject,—to announce an attachment—”She stopped to breathe. Emma thought first of herself, and then of Harriet.“More than an attachment, indeed,” resumed Mrs. Weston; “anengagement—a positive engagement.—What will you say,Emma—what will any body say, when it is known that Frank Churchill andMiss Fairfax are engaged;—nay, that they have been long engaged!”Emma even jumped with surprize;—and, horror-struck, exclaimed,“Jane Fairfax!—Good God! You are not serious? You do not meanit?”“You may well be amazed,” returned Mrs. Weston, still averting hereyes, and talking on with eagerness, that Emma might have time torecover— “You may well be amazed. But it is even so. There has beena solemn engagement between them ever since October—formed at Weymouth,and kept a secret from every body. Not a creature knowing it butthemselves—neither the Campbells, nor her family, nor his.—It is sowonderful, that though perfectly convinced of the fact, it is yet almostincredible to myself. I can hardly believe it.—I thought I knewhim.”Emma scarcely heard what was said.—Her mind was divided between twoideas—her own former conversations with him about Miss Fairfax; and poorHarriet;—and for some time she could only exclaim, and requireconfirmation, repeated confirmation.“Well,” said she at last, trying to recover herself; “this isa circumstance which I must think of at least half a day, before I can at allcomprehend it. What!—engaged to her all the winter—before either ofthem came to Highbury?”“Engaged since October,—secretly engaged.—It has hurt me,Emma, very much. It has hurt his father equally. Some part of hisconduct we cannot excuse.”Emma pondered a moment, and then replied, “I will not pretend notto understand you; and to give you all the relief in my power, be assured thatno such effect has followed his attentions to me, as you are apprehensiveof.”Mrs. Weston looked up, afraid to believe; but Emma’s countenance was assteady as her words.“That you may have less difficulty in believing this boast, of my presentperfect indifference,” she continued, “I will farther tell you,that there was a period in the early part of our acquaintance, when I did likehim, when I was very much disposed to be attached to him—nay, wasattached—and how it came to cease, is perhaps the wonder. Fortunately,however, it did cease. I have really for some time past, for at least thesethree months, cared nothing about him. You may believe me, Mrs. Weston. This isthe simple truth.”Mrs. Weston kissed her with tears of joy; and when she could find utterance,assured her, that this protestation had done her more good than any thing elsein the world could do.“Mr. Weston will be almost as much relieved as myself,” said she.“On this point we have been wretched. It was our darling wish that youmight be attached to each other—and we were persuaded that it wasso.— Imagine what we have been feeling on your account.”“I have escaped; and that I should escape, may be a matter of gratefulwonder to you and myself. But this does not acquit him, Mrs. Weston; andI must say, that I think him greatly to blame. What right had he to come amongus with affection and faith engaged, and with manners so verydisengaged? What right had he to endeavour to please, as he certainlydid—to distinguish any one young woman with persevering attention, as hecertainly did—while he really belonged to another?—How could hetell what mischief he might be doing?—How could he tell that he might notbe making me in love with him?—very wrong, very wrong indeed.”“From something that he said, my dear Emma, I ratherimagine—”“And how could she bear such behaviour! Composure with a witness!to look on, while repeated attentions were offering to another woman, beforeher face, and not resent it.—That is a degree of placidity, which I canneither comprehend nor respect.”“There were misunderstandings between them, Emma; he said so expressly.He had not time to enter into much explanation. He was here only a quarter ofan hour, and in a state of agitation which did not allow the full use even ofthe time he could stay—but that there had been misunderstandings hedecidedly said. The present crisis, indeed, seemed to be brought on by them;and those misunderstandings might very possibly arise from the impropriety ofhis conduct.”“Impropriety! Oh! Mrs. Weston—it is too calm a censure. Much, muchbeyond impropriety!—It has sunk him, I cannot say how it has sunk him inmy opinion. So unlike what a man should be!—None of that uprightintegrity, that strict adherence to truth and principle, that disdain of trickand littleness, which a man should display in every transaction of hislife.”“Nay, dear Emma, now I must take his part; for though he has been wrongin this instance, I have known him long enough to answer for his having many,very many, good qualities; and—”“Good God!” cried Emma, not attending to her.—“Mrs.Smallridge, too! Jane actually on the point of going as governess! What couldhe mean by such horrible indelicacy? To suffer her to engage herself—tosuffer her even to think of such a measure!”“He knew nothing about it, Emma. On this article I can fully acquit him.It was a private resolution of hers, not communicated to him—or at leastnot communicated in a way to carry conviction.—Till yesterday, I know hesaid he was in the dark as to her plans. They burst on him, I do not know how,but by some letter or message—and it was the discovery of what she wasdoing, of this very project of hers, which determined him to come forward atonce, own it all to his uncle, throw himself on his kindness, and, in short,put an end to the miserable state of concealment that had been carrying on solong.”Emma began to listen better.“I am to hear from him soon,” continued Mrs. Weston. “He toldme at parting, that he should soon write; and he spoke in a manner which seemedto promise me many particulars that could not be given now. Let us wait,therefore, for this letter. It may bring many extenuations. It may make manythings intelligible and excusable which now are not to be understood.Don’t let us be severe, don’t let us be in a hurry to condemn him.Let us have patience. I must love him; and now that I am satisfied on onepoint, the one material point, I am sincerely anxious for its all turning outwell, and ready to hope that it may. They must both have suffered a great dealunder such a system of secresy and concealment.”“His sufferings,” replied Emma dryly, “do not appearto have done him much harm. Well, and how did Mr. Churchill take it?”“Most favourably for his nephew—gave his consent with scarcely adifficulty. Conceive what the events of a week have done in that family! Whilepoor Mrs. Churchill lived, I suppose there could not have been a hope, achance, a possibility;—but scarcely are her remains at rest in the familyvault, than her husband is persuaded to act exactly opposite to what she wouldhave required. What a blessing it is, when undue influence does not survive thegrave!—He gave his consent with very little persuasion.”“Ah!” thought Emma, “he would have done as much forHarriet.”“This was settled last night, and Frank was off with the light thismorning. He stopped at Highbury, at the Bates’s, I fancy, sometime—and then came on hither; but was in such a hurry to get back to hisuncle, to whom he is just now more necessary than ever, that, as I tell you, hecould stay with us but a quarter of an hour.—He was very muchagitated—very much, indeed—to a degree that made him appear quite adifferent creature from any thing I had ever seen him before.—In additionto all the rest, there had been the shock of finding her so very unwell, whichhe had had no previous suspicion of—and there was every appearance of hishaving been feeling a great deal.”“And do you really believe the affair to have been carrying on with suchperfect secresy?—The Campbells, the Dixons, did none of them know of theengagement?”Emma could not speak the name of Dixon without a little blush.“None; not one. He positively said that it had been known to no being inthe world but their two selves.”“Well,” said Emma, “I suppose we shall gradually growreconciled to the idea, and I wish them very happy. But I shall always think ita very abominable sort of proceeding. What has it been but a system ofhypocrisy and deceit,—espionage, and treachery?—To come among uswith professions of openness and simplicity; and such a league in secret tojudge us all!—Here have we been, the whole winter and spring, completelyduped, fancying ourselves all on an equal footing of truth and honour, with twopeople in the midst of us who may have been carrying round, comparing andsitting in judgment on sentiments and words that were never meant for both tohear.—They must take the consequence, if they have heard each otherspoken of in a way not perfectly agreeable!”“I am quite easy on that head,” replied Mrs. Weston. “I amvery sure that I never said any thing of either to the other, which both mightnot have heard.”“You are in luck.—Your only blunder was confined to my ear, whenyou imagined a certain friend of ours in love with the lady.”“True. But as I have always had a thoroughly good opinion of MissFairfax, I never could, under any blunder, have spoken ill of her; and as tospeaking ill of him, there I must have been safe.”At this moment Mr. Weston appeared at a little distance from the window,evidently on the watch. His wife gave him a look which invited him in; and,while he was coming round, added, “Now, dearest Emma, let me intreat youto say and look every thing that may set his heart at ease, and incline him tobe satisfied with the match. Let us make the best of it—and, indeed,almost every thing may be fairly said in her favour. It is not a connexion togratify; but if Mr. Churchill does not feel that, why should we? and it may bea very fortunate circumstance for him, for Frank, I mean, that he should haveattached himself to a girl of such steadiness of character and good judgment asI have always given her credit for—and still am disposed to give hercredit for, in spite of this one great deviation from the strict rule of right.And how much may be said in her situation for even that error!”“Much, indeed!” cried Emma feelingly. “If a woman can ever beexcused for thinking only of herself, it is in a situation like JaneFairfax’s.—Of such, one may almost say, that ‘the world isnot their’s, nor the world’s law.’”She met Mr. Weston on his entrance, with a smiling countenance, exclaiming,“A very pretty trick you have been playing me, upon my word! This was adevice, I suppose, to sport with my curiosity, and exercise my talent ofguessing. But you really frightened me. I thought you had lost half yourproperty, at least. And here, instead of its being a matter of condolence, itturns out to be one of congratulation.—I congratulate you, Mr. Weston,with all my heart, on the prospect of having one of the most lovely andaccomplished young women in England for your daughter.”A glance or two between him and his wife, convinced him that all was as rightas this speech proclaimed; and its happy effect on his spirits was immediate.His air and voice recovered their usual briskness: he shook her heartily andgratefully by the hand, and entered on the subject in a manner to prove, thathe now only wanted time and persuasion to think the engagement no very badthing. His companions suggested only what could palliate imprudence, or smoothobjections; and by the time they had talked it all over together, and he hadtalked it all over again with Emma, in their walk back to Hartfield, he wasbecome perfectly reconciled, and not far from thinking it the very best thingthat Frank could possibly have done.CHAPTER XI“Harriet, poor Harriet!”—Those were the words; in them laythe tormenting ideas which Emma could not get rid of, and which constituted thereal misery of the business to her. Frank Churchill had behaved very ill byherself—very ill in many ways,—but it was not so much hisbehaviour as her own, which made her so angry with him. It was thescrape which he had drawn her into on Harriet’s account, that gave thedeepest hue to his offence.—Poor Harriet! to be a second time the dupe ofher misconceptions and flattery. Mr. Knightley had spoken prophetically, whenhe once said, “Emma, you have been no friend to HarrietSmith.”—She was afraid she had done her nothing butdisservice.—It was true that she had not to charge herself, in thisinstance as in the former, with being the sole and original author of themischief; with having suggested such feelings as might otherwise never haveentered Harriet’s imagination; for Harriet had acknowledged heradmiration and preference of Frank Churchill before she had ever given her ahint on the subject; but she felt completely guilty of having encouraged whatshe might have repressed. She might have prevented the indulgence and increaseof such sentiments. Her influence would have been enough. And now she was veryconscious that she ought to have prevented them.—She felt that she hadbeen risking her friend’s happiness on most insufficient grounds. Commonsense would have directed her to tell Harriet, that she must not allow herselfto think of him, and that there were five hundred chances to one against hisever caring for her.—“But, with common sense,” she added,“I am afraid I have had little to do.”She was extremely angry with herself. If she could not have been angry withFrank Churchill too, it would have been dreadful.—As for Jane Fairfax,she might at least relieve her feelings from any present solicitude on heraccount. Harriet would be anxiety enough; she need no longer be unhappy aboutJane, whose troubles and whose ill-health having, of course, the same origin,must be equally under cure.—Her days of insignificance and evil wereover.—She would soon be well, and happy, and prosperous.—Emma couldnow imagine why her own attentions had been slighted. This discovery laid manysmaller matters open. No doubt it had been from jealousy.—In Jane’seyes she had been a rival; and well might any thing she could offer ofassistance or regard be repulsed. An airing in the Hartfield carriage wouldhave been the rack, and arrowroot from the Hartfield storeroom must have beenpoison. She understood it all; and as far as her mind could disengage itselffrom the injustice and selfishness of angry feelings, she acknowledged thatJane Fairfax would have neither elevation nor happiness beyond her desert. Butpoor Harriet was such an engrossing charge! There was little sympathy to bespared for any body else. Emma was sadly fearful that this seconddisappointment would be more severe than the first. Considering the verysuperior claims of the object, it ought; and judging by its apparently strongereffect on Harriet’s mind, producing reserve and self-command, itwould.—She must communicate the painful truth, however, and as soon aspossible. An injunction of secresy had been among Mr. Weston’s partingwords. “For the present, the whole affair was to be completely a secret.Mr. Churchill had made a point of it, as a token of respect to the wife he hadso very recently lost; and every body admitted it to be no more than duedecorum.”—Emma had promised; but still Harriet must be excepted. Itwas her superior duty.In spite of her vexation, she could not help feeling it almost ridiculous, thatshe should have the very same distressing and delicate office to perform byHarriet, which Mrs. Weston had just gone through by herself. The intelligence,which had been so anxiously announced to her, she was now to be anxiouslyannouncing to another. Her heart beat quick on hearing Harriet’s footstepand voice; so, she supposed, had poor Mrs. Weston felt when she wasapproaching Randalls. Could the event of the disclosure bear an equalresemblance!—But of that, unfortunately, there could be no chance.“Well, Miss Woodhouse!” cried Harriet, coming eagerly into theroom—“is not this the oddest news that ever was?”“What news do you mean?” replied Emma, unable to guess, by look orvoice, whether Harriet could indeed have received any hint.“About Jane Fairfax. Did you ever hear any thing so strange?Oh!—you need not be afraid of owning it to me, for Mr. Weston has told mehimself. I met him just now. He told me it was to be a great secret; and,therefore, I should not think of mentioning it to any body but you, but he saidyou knew it.”“What did Mr. Weston tell you?”—said Emma, still perplexed.“Oh! he told me all about it; that Jane Fairfax and Mr. Frank Churchillare to be married, and that they have been privately engaged to one anotherthis long while. How very odd!”It was, indeed, so odd; Harriet’s behaviour was so extremely odd, thatEmma did not know how to understand it. Her character appeared absolutelychanged. She seemed to propose shewing no agitation, or disappointment, orpeculiar concern in the discovery. Emma looked at her, quite unable to speak.“Had you any idea,” cried Harriet, “of his being in love withher?—You, perhaps, might.—You (blushing as she spoke) who can seeinto every body’s heart; but nobody else—”“Upon my word,” said Emma, “I begin to doubt my having anysuch talent. Can you seriously ask me, Harriet, whether I imagined him attachedto another woman at the very time that I was—tacitly, if notopenly—encouraging you to give way to your own feelings?—I neverhad the slightest suspicion, till within the last hour, of Mr. FrankChurchill’s having the least regard for Jane Fairfax. You may be verysure that if I had, I should have cautioned you accordingly.”“Me!” cried Harriet, colouring, and astonished. “Why shouldyou caution me?—You do not think I care about Mr. Frank Churchill.”“I am delighted to hear you speak so stoutly on the subject,”replied Emma, smiling; “but you do not mean to deny that there was atime—and not very distant either—when you gave me reason tounderstand that you did care about him?”“Him!—never, never. Dear Miss Woodhouse, how could you so mistakeme?” turning away distressed.“Harriet!” cried Emma, after a moment’spause—“What do you mean?—Good Heaven! what do youmean?—Mistake you!—Am I to suppose then?—”She could not speak another word.—Her voice was lost; and she sat down,waiting in great terror till Harriet should answer.Harriet, who was standing at some distance, and with face turned from her, didnot immediately say any thing; and when she did speak, it was in a voice nearlyas agitated as Emma’s.“I should not have thought it possible,” she began, “that youcould have misunderstood me! I know we agreed never to name him—butconsidering how infinitely superior he is to every body else, I should not havethought it possible that I could be supposed to mean any other person. Mr.Frank Churchill, indeed! I do not know who would ever look at him in thecompany of the other. I hope I have a better taste than to think of Mr. FrankChurchill, who is like nobody by his side. And that you should have been somistaken, is amazing!—I am sure, but for believing that you entirelyapproved and meant to encourage me in my attachment, I should have consideredit at first too great a presumption almost, to dare to think of him. At first,if you had not told me that more wonderful things had happened; that there hadbeen matches of greater disparity (those were your very words);—I shouldnot have dared to give way to—I should not have thought itpossible—But if you, who had been always acquainted withhim—”“Harriet!” cried Emma, collecting herselfresolutely—“Let us understand each other now, without thepossibility of farther mistake. Are you speaking of—Mr. Knightley?”“To be sure I am. I never could have an idea of any body else—andso I thought you knew. When we talked about him, it was as clear aspossible.”“Not quite,” returned Emma, with forced calmness, “for allthat you then said, appeared to me to relate to a different person. I couldalmost assert that you had named Mr. Frank Churchill. I am sure theservice Mr. Frank Churchill had rendered you, in protecting you from thegipsies, was spoken of.”“Oh! Miss Woodhouse, how you do forget!”“My dear Harriet, I perfectly remember the substance of what I said onthe occasion. I told you that I did not wonder at your attachment; thatconsidering the service he had rendered you, it was extremelynatural:—and you agreed to it, expressing yourself very warmly as to yoursense of that service, and mentioning even what your sensations had been inseeing him come forward to your rescue.—The impression of it is strong onmy memory.”“Oh, dear,” cried Harriet, “now I recollect what you mean;but I was thinking of something very different at the time. It was not thegipsies—it was not Mr. Frank Churchill that I meant. No! (with someelevation) I was thinking of a much more precious circumstance—of Mr.Knightley’s coming and asking me to dance, when Mr. Elton would not standup with me; and when there was no other partner in the room. That was the kindaction; that was the noble benevolence and generosity; that was the servicewhich made me begin to feel how superior he was to every other being uponearth.”“Good God!” cried Emma, “this has been a mostunfortunate—most deplorable mistake!—What is to be done?”“You would not have encouraged me, then, if you had understood me? Atleast, however, I cannot be worse off than I should have been, if the other hadbeen the person; and now—it is possible—”She paused a few moments. Emma could not speak.“I do not wonder, Miss Woodhouse,” she resumed, “that youshould feel a great difference between the two, as to me or as to any body. Youmust think one five hundred million times more above me than the other. But Ihope, Miss Woodhouse, that supposing—that if—strange as it mayappear—. But you know they were your own words, that morewonderful things had happened, matches of greater disparity had takenplace than between Mr. Frank Churchill and me; and, therefore, it seems as ifsuch a thing even as this, may have occurred before—and if I should be sofortunate, beyond expression, as to—if Mr. Knightley shouldreally—if he does not mind the disparity, I hope, dear MissWoodhouse, you will not set yourself against it, and try to put difficulties inthe way. But you are too good for that, I am sure.”Harriet was standing at one of the windows. Emma turned round to look at her inconsternation, and hastily said,“Have you any idea of Mr. Knightley’s returning youraffection?”“Yes,” replied Harriet modestly, but not fearfully—“Imust say that I have.”Emma’s eyes were instantly withdrawn; and she sat silently meditating, ina fixed attitude, for a few minutes. A few minutes were sufficient for makingher acquainted with her own heart. A mind like hers, once opening to suspicion,made rapid progress. She touched—she admitted—she acknowledged thewhole truth. Why was it so much worse that Harriet should be in love with Mr.Knightley, than with Frank Churchill? Why was the evil so dreadfully increasedby Harriet’s having some hope of a return? It darted through her, withthe speed of an arrow, that Mr. Knightley must marry no one but herself!Her own conduct, as well as her own heart, was before her in the same fewminutes. She saw it all with a clearness which had never blessed her before.How improperly had she been acting by Harriet! How inconsiderate, howindelicate, how irrational, how unfeeling had been her conduct! What blindness,what madness, had led her on! It struck her with dreadful force, and she wasready to give it every bad name in the world. Some portion of respect forherself, however, in spite of all these demerits—some concern for her ownappearance, and a strong sense of justice by Harriet—(there would be noneed of compassion to the girl who believed herself loved by Mr.Knightley—but justice required that she should not be made unhappy by anycoldness now,) gave Emma the resolution to sit and endure farther withcalmness, with even apparent kindness.—For her own advantage indeed, itwas fit that the utmost extent of Harriet’s hopes should be enquiredinto; and Harriet had done nothing to forfeit the regard and interest which hadbeen so voluntarily formed and maintained—or to deserve to be slighted bythe person, whose counsels had never led her right.—Rousing fromreflection, therefore, and subduing her emotion, she turned to Harriet again,and, in a more inviting accent, renewed the conversation; for as to the subjectwhich had first introduced it, the wonderful story of Jane Fairfax, that wasquite sunk and lost.—Neither of them thought but of Mr. Knightley andthemselves.Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was yet very glad to becalled from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge, and such afriend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to give the history ofher hopes with great, though trembling delight.—Emma’s tremblingsas she asked, and as she listened, were better concealed than Harriet’s,but they were not less. Her voice was not unsteady; but her mind was in all theperturbation that such a development of self, such a burst of threatening evil,such a confusion of sudden and perplexing emotions, must create.—Shelistened with much inward suffering, but with great outward patience, toHarriet’s detail.—Methodical, or well arranged, or very welldelivered, it could not be expected to be; but it contained, when separatedfrom all the feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink herspirit—especially with the corroborating circumstances, which her ownmemory brought in favour of Mr. Knightley’s most improved opinion ofHarriet.Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since thosetwo decisive dances.—Emma knew that he had, on that occasion, found hermuch superior to his expectation. From that evening, or at least from the timeof Miss Woodhouse’s encouraging her to think of him, Harriet had begun tobe sensible of his talking to her much more than he had been used to do, and ofhis having indeed quite a different manner towards her; a manner of kindnessand sweetness!—Latterly she had been more and more aware of it. When theyhad been all walking together, he had so often come and walked by her, andtalked so very delightfully!—He seemed to want to be acquainted with her.Emma knew it to have been very much the case. She had often observed thechange, to almost the same extent.—Harriet repeated expressions ofapprobation and praise from him—and Emma felt them to be in the closestagreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet. He praised her forbeing without art or affectation, for having simple, honest, generous,feelings.—She knew that he saw such recommendations in Harriet; he haddwelt on them to her more than once.—Much that lived in Harriet’smemory, many little particulars of the notice she had received from him, alook, a speech, a removal from one chair to another, a compliment implied, apreference inferred, had been unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma.Circumstances that might swell to half an hour’s relation, and containedmultiplied proofs to her who had seen them, had passed undiscerned by her whonow heard them; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned, the two ofstrongest promise to Harriet, were not without some degree of witness from Emmaherself.—The first, was his walking with her apart from the others, inthe lime-walk at Donwell, where they had been walking some time before Emmacame, and he had taken pains (as she was convinced) to draw her from the restto himself—and at first, he had talked to her in a more particular waythan he had ever done before, in a very particular way indeed!—(Harrietcould not recall it without a blush.) He seemed to be almost asking her,whether her affections were engaged.—But as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse)appeared likely to join them, he changed the subject, and began talking aboutfarming:—The second, was his having sat talking with her nearly half anhour before Emma came back from her visit, the very last morning of his beingat Hartfield—though, when he first came in, he had said that he could notstay five minutes—and his having told her, during their conversation,that though he must go to London, it was very much against his inclination thathe left home at all, which was much more (as Emma felt) than he hadacknowledged to her. The superior degree of confidence towards Harriet,which this one article marked, gave her severe pain.On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after a littlereflection, venture the following question. “Might he not?—Is notit possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of youraffections, he might be alluding to Mr. Martin—he might have Mr.Martin’s interest in view? But Harriet rejected the suspicion withspirit.“Mr. Martin! No indeed!—There was not a hint of Mr. Martin. I hopeI know better now, than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be suspected ofit.”When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear Miss Woodhouse,to say whether she had not good ground for hope.“I never should have presumed to think of it at first,” said she,“but for you. You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviourbe the rule of mine—and so I have. But now I seem to feel that I maydeserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing so verywonderful.”The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter feelings, madethe utmost exertion necessary on Emma’s side, to enable her to say onreply,“Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley is the lastman in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea of hisfeeling for her more than he really does.”Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so satisfactory; andEmma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which at that moment would havebeen dreadful penance, by the sound of her father’s footsteps. He wascoming through the hall. Harriet was too much agitated to encounter him.“She could not compose herself— Mr. Woodhouse would bealarmed—she had better go;”—with most ready encouragementfrom her friend, therefore, she passed off through another door—and themoment she was gone, this was the spontaneous burst of Emma’s feelings:“Oh God! that I had never seen her!”The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for herthoughts.—She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had rushedon her within the last few hours. Every moment had brought a fresh surprize;and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to her.—How tounderstand it all! How to understand the deceptions she had been thuspractising on herself, and living under!—The blunders, the blindness ofher own head and heart!—she sat still, she walked about, she tried herown room, she tried the shrubbery—in every place, every posture, sheperceived that she had acted most weakly; that she had been imposed on byothers in a most mortifying degree; that she had been imposing on herself in adegree yet more mortifying; that she was wretched, and should probably findthis day but the beginning of wretchedness.To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first endeavour. Tothat point went every leisure moment which her father’s claims on herallowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling declared himnow to be? When had his influence, such influence begun?— When had hesucceeded to that place in her affection, which Frank Churchill had once, for ashort period, occupied?—She looked back; she compared thetwo—compared them, as they had always stood in her estimation, from thetime of the latter’s becoming known to her—and as they must at anytime have been compared by her, had it—oh! had it, by any blessedfelicity, occurred to her, to institute the comparison.—She saw thatthere never had been a time when she did not consider Mr. Knightley asinfinitely the superior, or when his regard for her had not been infinitely themost dear. She saw, that in persuading herself, in fancying, in acting to thecontrary, she had been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her ownheart—and, in short, that she had never really cared for Frank Churchillat all!This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection. This was theknowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she reached; andwithout being long in reaching it.—She was most sorrowfully indignant;ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed to her—her affection forMr. Knightley.—Every other part of her mind was disgusting.With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of everybody’s feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange everybody’s destiny. She was proved to have been universally mistaken; and shehad not quite done nothing—for she had done mischief. She had broughtevil on Harriet, on herself, and she too much feared, on Mr.Knightley.—Were this most unequal of all connexions to take place, on hermust rest all the reproach of having given it a beginning; for his attachment,she must believe to be produced only by a consciousness ofHarriet’s;—and even were this not the case, he would never haveknown Harriet at all but for her folly.Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!—It was a union to distance every wonderof the kind.—The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax becamecommonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no surprize,presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said or thought.—Mr.Knightley and Harriet Smith!—Such an elevation on her side! Such adebasement on his! It was horrible to Emma to think how it must sink him in thegeneral opinion, to foresee the smiles, the sneers, the merriment it wouldprompt at his expense; the mortification and disdain of his brother, thethousand inconveniences to himself.—Could it be?—No; it wasimpossible. And yet it was far, very far, from impossible.—Was it a newcircumstance for a man of first-rate abilities to be captivated by veryinferior powers? Was it new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prizeof a girl who would seek him?—Was it new for any thing in this world tobe unequal, inconsistent, incongruous—or for chance and circumstance (assecond causes) to direct the human fate?Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward! Had she left her where she ought,and where he had told her she ought!—Had she not, with a folly which notongue could express, prevented her marrying the unexceptionable young man whowould have made her happy and respectable in the line of life to which sheought to belong—all would have been safe; none of this dreadful sequelwould have been.How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts to Mr.Knightley!—How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of such a mantill actually assured of it!—But Harriet was less humble, had fewerscruples than formerly.—Her inferiority, whether of mind or situation,seemed little felt.—She had seemed more sensible of Mr. Elton’sbeing to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr.Knightley’s.—Alas! was not that her own doing too? Who had been atpains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?—Who butherself had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible, and thather claims were great to a high worldly establishment?—If Harriet, frombeing humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.CHAPTER XIITill now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known how muchof her happiness depended on being first with Mr. Knightley, first ininterest and affection.—Satisfied that it was so, and feeling it her due,she had enjoyed it without reflection; and only in the dread of beingsupplanted, found how inexpressibly important it had been.—Long, verylong, she felt she had been first; for, having no female connexions of his own,there had been only Isabella whose claims could be compared with hers, and shehad always known exactly how far he loved and esteemed Isabella. She hadherself been first with him for many years past. She had not deserved it; shehad often been negligent or perverse, slighting his advice, or even wilfullyopposing him, insensible of half his merits, and quarrelling with him becausehe would not acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own—butstill, from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of mind, hehad loved her, and watched over her from a girl, with an endeavour to improveher, and an anxiety for her doing right, which no other creature had at allshared. In spite of all her faults, she knew she was dear to him; might she notsay, very dear?—When the suggestions of hope, however, which must followhere, presented themselves, she could not presume to indulge them. HarrietSmith might think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively,passionately loved by Mr. Knightley. She could not. She could notflatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to her. Shehad received a very recent proof of its impartiality.—How shocked had hebeen by her behaviour to Miss Bates! How directly, how strongly had heexpressed himself to her on the subject!—Not too strongly for theoffence—but far, far too strongly to issue from any feeling softer thanupright justice and clear-sighted goodwill.—She had no hope, nothing todeserve the name of hope, that he could have that sort of affection for herselfwhich was now in question; but there was a hope (at times a slight one, attimes much stronger,) that Harriet might have deceived herself, and beoverrating his regard for her.—Wish it she must, for hissake—be the consequence nothing to herself, but his remaining single allhis life. Could she be secure of that, indeed, of his never marrying at all,she believed she should be perfectly satisfied.—Let him but continue thesame Mr. Knightley to her and her father, the same Mr. Knightley to all theworld; let Donwell and Hartfield lose none of their precious intercourse offriendship and confidence, and her peace would be fullysecured.—Marriage, in fact, would not do for her. It would beincompatible with what she owed to her father, and with what she felt for him.Nothing should separate her from her father. She would not marry, even if shewere asked by Mr. Knightley.It must be her ardent wish that Harriet might be disappointed; and she hoped,that when able to see them together again, she might at least be able toascertain what the chances for it were.—She should see them henceforwardwith the closest observance; and wretchedly as she had hitherto misunderstoodeven those she was watching, she did not know how to admit that she could beblinded here.—He was expected back every day. The power of observationwould be soon given—frightfully soon it appeared when her thoughts werein one course. In the meanwhile, she resolved against seeing Harriet.—Itwould do neither of them good, it would do the subject no good, to be talkingof it farther.—She was resolved not to be convinced, as long as she coulddoubt, and yet had no authority for opposing Harriet’s confidence. Totalk would be only to irritate.—She wrote to her, therefore, kindly, butdecisively, to beg that she would not, at present, come to Hartfield;acknowledging it to be her conviction, that all farther confidential discussionof one topic had better be avoided; and hoping, that if a few days wereallowed to pass before they met again, except in the company ofothers—she objected only to a tête-à-tête—they might be able to actas if they had forgotten the conversation of yesterday.—Harrietsubmitted, and approved, and was grateful.This point was just arranged, when a visitor arrived to tear Emma’sthoughts a little from the one subject which had engrossed them, sleeping orwaking, the last twenty-four hours—Mrs. Weston, who had been calling onher daughter-in-law elect, and took Hartfield in her way home, almost as muchin duty to Emma as in pleasure to herself, to relate all the particulars of sointeresting an interview.Mr. Weston had accompanied her to Mrs. Bates’s, and gone through hisshare of this essential attention most handsomely; but she having then inducedMiss Fairfax to join her in an airing, was now returned with much more to say,and much more to say with satisfaction, than a quarter of an hour spent in Mrs.Bates’s parlour, with all the encumbrance of awkward feelings, could haveafforded.A little curiosity Emma had; and she made the most of it while her friendrelated. Mrs. Weston had set off to pay the visit in a good deal of agitationherself; and in the first place had wished not to go at all at present, to beallowed merely to write to Miss Fairfax instead, and to defer this ceremoniouscall till a little time had passed, and Mr. Churchill could be reconciled tothe engagement’s becoming known; as, considering every thing, she thoughtsuch a visit could not be paid without leading to reports:—but Mr. Westonhad thought differently; he was extremely anxious to shew his approbation toMiss Fairfax and her family, and did not conceive that any suspicion could beexcited by it; or if it were, that it would be of any consequence; for“such things,” he observed, “always got about.” Emmasmiled, and felt that Mr. Weston had very good reason for saying so. They hadgone, in short—and very great had been the evident distress and confusionof the lady. She had hardly been able to speak a word, and every look andaction had shewn how deeply she was suffering from consciousness. The quiet,heart-felt satisfaction of the old lady, and the rapturous delight of herdaughter—who proved even too joyous to talk as usual, had been agratifying, yet almost an affecting, scene. They were both so truly respectablein their happiness, so disinterested in every sensation; thought so much ofJane; so much of every body, and so little of themselves, that every kindlyfeeling was at work for them. Miss Fairfax’s recent illness had offered afair plea for Mrs. Weston to invite her to an airing; she had drawn back anddeclined at first, but, on being pressed had yielded; and, in the course oftheir drive, Mrs. Weston had, by gentle encouragement, overcome so much of herembarrassment, as to bring her to converse on the important subject. Apologiesfor her seemingly ungracious silence in their first reception, and the warmestexpressions of the gratitude she was always feeling towards herself and Mr.Weston, must necessarily open the cause; but when these effusions were put by,they had talked a good deal of the present and of the future state of theengagement. Mrs. Weston was convinced that such conversation must be thegreatest relief to her companion, pent up within her own mind as every thinghad so long been, and was very much pleased with all that she had said on thesubject.“On the misery of what she had suffered, during the concealment of somany months,” continued Mrs. Weston, “she was energetic. This wasone of her expressions. ‘I will not say, that since I entered into theengagement I have not had some happy moments; but I can say, that I have neverknown the blessing of one tranquil hour:’—and the quivering lip,Emma, which uttered it, was an attestation that I felt at my heart.”“Poor girl!” said Emma. “She thinks herself wrong, then, forhaving consented to a private engagement?”“Wrong! No one, I believe, can blame her more than she is disposed toblame herself. ‘The consequence,’ said she, ‘has been a stateof perpetual suffering to me; and so it ought. But after all the punishmentthat misconduct can bring, it is still not less misconduct. Pain is noexpiation. I never can be blameless. I have been acting contrary to all mysense of right; and the fortunate turn that every thing has taken, and thekindness I am now receiving, is what my conscience tells me ought not tobe.’ ‘Do not imagine, madam,’ she continued, ‘that Iwas taught wrong. Do not let any reflection fall on the principles or the careof the friends who brought me up. The error has been all my own; and I doassure you that, with all the excuse that present circumstances may appear togive, I shall yet dread making the story known to ColonelCampbell.’”“Poor girl!” said Emma again. “She loves him thenexcessively, I suppose. It must have been from attachment only, that she couldbe led to form the engagement. Her affection must have overpowered herjudgment.”“Yes, I have no doubt of her being extremely attached to him.”“I am afraid,” returned Emma, sighing, “that I must oftenhave contributed to make her unhappy.”“On your side, my love, it was very innocently done. But she probably hadsomething of that in her thoughts, when alluding to the misunderstandings whichhe had given us hints of before. One natural consequence of the evil she hadinvolved herself in,” she said, “was that of making herunreasonable. The consciousness of having done amiss, had exposed her toa thousand inquietudes, and made her captious and irritable to a degree thatmust have been—that had been—hard for him to bear. ‘I did notmake the allowances,’ said she, ‘which I ought to have done, forhis temper and spirits—his delightful spirits, and that gaiety, thatplayfulness of disposition, which, under any other circumstances, would, I amsure, have been as constantly bewitching to me, as they were at first.’She then began to speak of you, and of the great kindness you had shewn herduring her illness; and with a blush which shewed me how it was all connected,desired me, whenever I had an opportunity, to thank you—I could not thankyou too much—for every wish and every endeavour to do her good. She wassensible that you had never received any proper acknowledgment fromherself.”“If I did not know her to be happy now,” said Emma, seriously,“which, in spite of every little drawback from her scrupulous conscience,she must be, I could not bear these thanks;—for, oh! Mrs. Weston, ifthere were an account drawn up of the evil and the good I have done MissFairfax!—Well (checking herself, and trying to be more lively), this isall to be forgotten. You are very kind to bring me these interestingparticulars. They shew her to the greatest advantage. I am sure she is verygood—I hope she will be very happy. It is fit that the fortune should beon his side, for I think the merit will be all on hers.”Such a conclusion could not pass unanswered by Mrs. Weston. She thought well ofFrank in almost every respect; and, what was more, she loved him very much, andher defence was, therefore, earnest. She talked with a great deal of reason,and at least equal affection—but she had too much to urge forEmma’s attention; it was soon gone to Brunswick Square or to Donwell; sheforgot to attempt to listen; and when Mrs. Weston ended with, “We havenot yet had the letter we are so anxious for, you know, but I hope it will sooncome,” she was obliged to pause before she answered, and at last obligedto answer at random, before she could at all recollect what letter it was whichthey were so anxious for.“Are you well, my Emma?” was Mrs. Weston’s parting question.“Oh! perfectly. I am always well, you know. Be sure to give meintelligence of the letter as soon as possible.”Mrs. Weston’s communications furnished Emma with more food for unpleasantreflection, by increasing her esteem and compassion, and her sense of pastinjustice towards Miss Fairfax. She bitterly regretted not having sought acloser acquaintance with her, and blushed for the envious feelings which hadcertainly been, in some measure, the cause. Had she followed Mr.Knightley’s known wishes, in paying that attention to Miss Fairfax, whichwas every way her due; had she tried to know her better; had she done her parttowards intimacy; had she endeavoured to find a friend there instead of inHarriet Smith; she must, in all probability, have been spared from every painwhich pressed on her now.—Birth, abilities, and education, had beenequally marking one as an associate for her, to be received with gratitude; andthe other—what was she?—Supposing even that they had never becomeintimate friends; that she had never been admitted into Miss Fairfax’sconfidence on this important matter—which was most probable—still,in knowing her as she ought, and as she might, she must have been preservedfrom the abominable suspicions of an improper attachment to Mr. Dixon, whichshe had not only so foolishly fashioned and harboured herself, but had sounpardonably imparted; an idea which she greatly feared had been made a subjectof material distress to the delicacy of Jane’s feelings, by the levity orcarelessness of Frank Churchill’s. Of all the sources of evil surroundingthe former, since her coming to Highbury, she was persuaded that she mustherself have been the worst. She must have been a perpetual enemy. They nevercould have been all three together, without her having stabbed JaneFairfax’s peace in a thousand instances; and on Box Hill, perhaps, it hadbeen the agony of a mind that would bear no more.The evening of this day was very long, and melancholy, at Hartfield. Theweather added what it could of gloom. A cold stormy rain set in, and nothing ofJuly appeared but in the trees and shrubs, which the wind was despoiling, andthe length of the day, which only made such cruel sights the longer visible.The weather affected Mr. Woodhouse, and he could only be kept tolerablycomfortable by almost ceaseless attention on his daughter’s side, and byexertions which had never cost her half so much before. It reminded her oftheir first forlorn tête-à-tête, on the evening of Mrs. Weston’swedding-day; but Mr. Knightley had walked in then, soon after tea, anddissipated every melancholy fancy. Alas! such delightful proofs ofHartfield’s attraction, as those sort of visits conveyed, might shortlybe over. The picture which she had then drawn of the privations of theapproaching winter, had proved erroneous; no friends had deserted them, nopleasures had been lost.—But her present forebodings she feared wouldexperience no similar contradiction. The prospect before her now, wasthreatening to a degree that could not be entirely dispelled—that mightnot be even partially brightened. If all took place that might take place amongthe circle of her friends, Hartfield must be comparatively deserted; and sheleft to cheer her father with the spirits only of ruined happiness.The child to be born at Randalls must be a tie there even dearer than herself;and Mrs. Weston’s heart and time would be occupied by it. They shouldlose her; and, probably, in great measure, her husband also.—FrankChurchill would return among them no more; and Miss Fairfax, it was reasonableto suppose, would soon cease to belong to Highbury. They would be married, andsettled either at or near Enscombe. All that were good would be withdrawn; andif to these losses, the loss of Donwell were to be added, what would remain ofcheerful or of rational society within their reach? Mr. Knightley to be nolonger coming there for his evening comfort!—No longer walking in at allhours, as if ever willing to change his own home for their’s!—Howwas it to be endured? And if he were to be lost to them for Harriet’ssake; if he were to be thought of hereafter, as finding in Harriet’ssociety all that he wanted; if Harriet were to be the chosen, the first, thedearest, the friend, the wife to whom he looked for all the best blessings ofexistence; what could be increasing Emma’s wretchedness but thereflection never far distant from her mind, that it had been all her own work?When it came to such a pitch as this, she was not able to refrain from a start,or a heavy sigh, or even from walking about the room for a fewseconds—and the only source whence any thing like consolation orcomposure could be drawn, was in the resolution of her own better conduct, andthe hope that, however inferior in spirit and gaiety might be the following andevery future winter of her life to the past, it would yet find her morerational, more acquainted with herself, and leave her less to regret when itwere gone.CHAPTER XIIIThe weather continued much the same all the following morning; and the sameloneliness, and the same melancholy, seemed to reign at Hartfield—but inthe afternoon it cleared; the wind changed into a softer quarter; the cloudswere carried off; the sun appeared; it was summer again. With all the eagernesswhich such a transition gives, Emma resolved to be out of doors as soon aspossible. Never had the exquisite sight, smell, sensation of nature, tranquil,warm, and brilliant after a storm, been more attractive to her. She longed forthe serenity they might gradually introduce; and on Mr. Perry’s coming insoon after dinner, with a disengaged hour to give her father, she lost no timein hurrying into the shrubbery.—There, with spirits freshened, andthoughts a little relieved, she had taken a few turns, when she saw Mr.Knightley passing through the garden door, and coming towards her.—It wasthe first intimation of his being returned from London. She had been thinkingof him the moment before, as unquestionably sixteen miles distant.—Therewas time only for the quickest arrangement of mind. She must be collected andcalm. In half a minute they were together. The “How d’yedo’s” were quiet and constrained on each side. She asked aftertheir mutual friends; they were all well.—When had he leftthem?—Only that morning. He must have had a wet ride.—Yes.—Hemeant to walk with her, she found. “He had just looked into thedining-room, and as he was not wanted there, preferred being out ofdoors.”—She thought he neither looked nor spoke cheerfully; and thefirst possible cause for it, suggested by her fears, was, that he had perhapsbeen communicating his plans to his brother, and was pained by the manner inwhich they had been received.They walked together. He was silent. She thought he was often looking at her,and trying for a fuller view of her face than it suited her to give. And thisbelief produced another dread. Perhaps he wanted to speak to her, of hisattachment to Harriet; he might be watching for encouragement tobegin.—She did not, could not, feel equal to lead the way to any suchsubject. He must do it all himself. Yet she could not bear this silence. Withhim it was most unnatural. She considered—resolved—and, trying tosmile, began—“You have some news to hear, now you are come back, that will rathersurprize you.”“Have I?” said he quietly, and looking at her; “of whatnature?”“Oh! the best nature in the world—a wedding.”After waiting a moment, as if to be sure she intended to say no more, hereplied,“If you mean Miss Fairfax and Frank Churchill, I have heard thatalready.”“How is it possible?” cried Emma, turning her glowing cheekstowards him; for, while she spoke, it occurred to her that he might have calledat Mrs. Goddard’s in his way.“I had a few lines on parish business from Mr. Weston this morning, andat the end of them he gave me a brief account of what had happened.”Emma was quite relieved, and could presently say, with a little more composure,“You probably have been less surprized than any of us, for youhave had your suspicions.—I have not forgotten that you once tried togive me a caution.—I wish I had attended to it—but—(with asinking voice and a heavy sigh) I seem to have been doomed to blindness.”For a moment or two nothing was said, and she was unsuspicious of havingexcited any particular interest, till she found her arm drawn within his, andpressed against his heart, and heard him thus saying, in a tone of greatsensibility, speaking low,“Time, my dearest Emma, time will heal the wound.—Your ownexcellent sense—your exertions for your father’s sake—I knowyou will not allow yourself—.” Her arm was pressed again, as headded, in a more broken and subdued accent, “The feelings of the warmestfriendship—Indignation—Abominable scoundrel!”—And in alouder, steadier tone, he concluded with, “He will soon be gone. Theywill soon be in Yorkshire. I am sorry for her. She deserves a betterfate.”Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter ofpleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied,“You are very kind—but you are mistaken—and I must set youright.— I am not in want of that sort of compassion. My blindness to whatwas going on, led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed of,and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which may well layme open to unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other reason to regret that Iwas not in the secret earlier.”“Emma!” cried he, looking eagerly at her, “are you,indeed?”—but checking himself—“No, no, I understandyou—forgive me—I am pleased that you can say even so much.—Heis no object of regret, indeed! and it will not be very long, I hope, beforethat becomes the acknowledgment of more than your reason.—Fortunate thatyour affections were not farther entangled!—I could never, I confess,from your manners, assure myself as to the degree of what you felt—Icould only be certain that there was a preference—and a preference whichI never believed him to deserve.—He is a disgrace to the name ofman.—And is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman?—Jane,Jane, you will be a miserable creature.”“Mr. Knightley,” said Emma, trying to be lively, but reallyconfused—“I am in a very extraordinary situation. I cannot let youcontinue in your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such animpression, I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never havebeen at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be naturalfor a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.—But I neverhave.”He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to speak, but he would not. Shesupposed she must say more before she were entitled to his clemency; but it wasa hard case to be obliged still to lower herself in his opinion. She went on,however.“I have very little to say for my own conduct.—I was tempted by hisattentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.—An old story,probably—a common case—and no more than has happened to hundreds ofmy sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets up as Ido for Understanding. Many circumstances assisted the temptation. He was theson of Mr. Weston—he was continually here—I always found him verypleasant—and, in short, for (with a sigh) let me swell out the causesever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at last—my vanity wasflattered, and I allowed his attentions. Latterly, however—for some time,indeed—I have had no idea of their meaning any thing.—I thoughtthem a habit, a trick, nothing that called for seriousness on my side. He hasimposed on me, but he has not injured me. I have never been attached to him.And now I can tolerably comprehend his behaviour. He never wished to attach me.It was merely a blind to conceal his real situation with another.—It washis object to blind all about him; and no one, I am sure, could be moreeffectually blinded than myself—except that I was notblinded—that it was my good fortune—that, in short, I was somehowor other safe from him.”She had hoped for an answer here—for a few words to say that her conductwas at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far as she could judge,deep in thought. At last, and tolerably in his usual tone, he said,“I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.—I can suppose,however, that I may have underrated him. My acquaintance with him has been buttrifling.—And even if I have not underrated him hitherto, he may yet turnout well.—With such a woman he has a chance.—I have no motive forwishing him ill—and for her sake, whose happiness will be involved in hisgood character and conduct, I shall certainly wish him well.”“I have no doubt of their being happy together,” said Emma;“I believe them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached.”“He is a most fortunate man!” returned Mr. Knightley, with energy.“So early in life—at three-and-twenty—a period when, if a manchuses a wife, he generally chuses ill. At three-and-twenty to have drawn sucha prize! What years of felicity that man, in all human calculation, has beforehim!—Assured of the love of such a woman—the disinterested love,for Jane Fairfax’s character vouches for her disinterestedness; everything in his favour,—equality of situation—I mean, as far asregards society, and all the habits and manners that are important; equality inevery point but one—and that one, since the purity of her heart is not tobe doubted, such as must increase his felicity, for it will be his to bestowthe only advantages she wants.—A man would always wish to give a woman abetter home than the one he takes her from; and he who can do it, where thereis no doubt of her regard, must, I think, be the happiest ofmortals.—Frank Churchill is, indeed, the favourite of fortune. Everything turns out for his good.—He meets with a young woman at awatering-place, gains her affection, cannot even weary her by negligenttreatment—and had he and all his family sought round the world for aperfect wife for him, they could not have found her superior.—His aunt isin the way.—His aunt dies.—He has only to speak.—His friendsare eager to promote his happiness.—He had used every body ill—andthey are all delighted to forgive him.—He is a fortunate manindeed!”“You speak as if you envied him.”“And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is the object of myenvy.”Emma could say no more. They seemed to be within half a sentence of Harriet,and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject, if possible. She made herplan; she would speak of something totally different—the children inBrunswick Square; and she only waited for breath to begin, when Mr. Knightleystartled her, by saying,“You will not ask me what is the point of envy.—You are determined,I see, to have no curiosity.—You are wise—but I cannot bewise. Emma, I must tell you what you will not ask, though I may wish it unsaidthe next moment.”“Oh! then, don’t speak it, don’t speak it,” she eagerlycried. “Take a little time, consider, do not commit yourself.”“Thank you,” said he, in an accent of deep mortification, and notanother syllable followed.Emma could not bear to give him pain. He was wishing to confide inher—perhaps to consult her;—cost her what it would, she wouldlisten. She might assist his resolution, or reconcile him to it; she might givejust praise to Harriet, or, by representing to him his own independence,relieve him from that state of indecision, which must be more intolerable thanany alternative to such a mind as his.—They had reached the house.“You are going in, I suppose?” said he.“No,”—replied Emma—quite confirmed by the depressedmanner in which he still spoke—“I should like to take another turn.Mr. Perry is not gone.” And, after proceeding a few steps, sheadded—“I stopped you ungraciously, just now, Mr. Knightley, and, Iam afraid, gave you pain.—But if you have any wish to speak openly to meas a friend, or to ask my opinion of any thing that you may have incontemplation—as a friend, indeed, you may command me.—I will hearwhatever you like. I will tell you exactly what I think.”“As a friend!”—repeated Mr. Knightley.—“Emma,that I fear is a word—No, I have no wish—Stay, yes, why should Ihesitate?—I have gone too far already for concealment.—Emma, Iaccept your offer—Extraordinary as it may seem, I accept it, and refermyself to you as a friend.—Tell me, then, have I no chance of eversucceeding?”He stopped in his earnestness to look the question, and the expression of hiseyes overpowered her.“My dearest Emma,” said he, “for dearest you will always be,whatever the event of this hour’s conversation, my dearest, most belovedEmma—tell me at once. Say ‘No,’ if it is to besaid.”—She could really say nothing.—“You aresilent,” he cried, with great animation; “absolutely silent! atpresent I ask no more.”Emma was almost ready to sink under the agitation of this moment. The dread ofbeing awakened from the happiest dream, was perhaps the most prominent feeling.“I cannot make speeches, Emma:” he soon resumed; and in a tone ofsuch sincere, decided, intelligible tenderness as was tolerablyconvincing.—“If I loved you less, I might be able to talk about itmore. But you know what I am.—You hear nothing but truth from me.—Ihave blamed you, and lectured you, and you have borne it as no other woman inEngland would have borne it.—Bear with the truths I would tell you now,dearest Emma, as well as you have borne with them. The manner, perhaps, mayhave as little to recommend them. God knows, I have been a very indifferentlover.—But you understand me.—Yes, you see, you understand myfeelings—and will return them if you can. At present, I ask only to hear,once to hear your voice.”While he spoke, Emma’s mind was most busy, and, with all the wonderfulvelocity of thought, had been able—and yet without losing a word—tocatch and comprehend the exact truth of the whole; to see that Harriet’shopes had been entirely groundless, a mistake, a delusion, as complete adelusion as any of her own—that Harriet was nothing; that she was everything herself; that what she had been saying relative to Harriet had been alltaken as the language of her own feelings; and that her agitation, her doubts,her reluctance, her discouragement, had been all received as discouragementfrom herself.—And not only was there time for these convictions, with alltheir glow of attendant happiness; there was time also to rejoice thatHarriet’s secret had not escaped her, and to resolve that it need not,and should not.—It was all the service she could now render her poorfriend; for as to any of that heroism of sentiment which might have promptedher to entreat him to transfer his affection from herself to Harriet, asinfinitely the most worthy of the two—or even the more simple sublimityof resolving to refuse him at once and for ever, without vouchsafing anymotive, because he could not marry them both, Emma had it not. She felt forHarriet, with pain and with contrition; but no flight of generosity run mad,opposing all that could be probable or reasonable, entered her brain. She hadled her friend astray, and it would be a reproach to her for ever; but herjudgment was as strong as her feelings, and as strong as it had ever beenbefore, in reprobating any such alliance for him, as most unequal anddegrading. Her way was clear, though not quite smooth.—She spoke then, onbeing so entreated.—What did she say?—Just what she ought, ofcourse. A lady always does.—She said enough to shew there need not bedespair—and to invite him to say more himself. He had despaired atone period; he had received such an injunction to caution and silence, as forthe time crushed every hope;—she had begun by refusing to hearhim.—The change had perhaps been somewhat sudden;—her proposal oftaking another turn, her renewing the conversation which she had just put anend to, might be a little extraordinary!—She felt its inconsistency; butMr. Knightley was so obliging as to put up with it, and seek no fartherexplanation.Seldom, very seldom, does complete truth belong to any human disclosure; seldomcan it happen that something is not a little disguised, or a little mistaken;but where, as in this case, though the conduct is mistaken, the feelings arenot, it may not be very material.—Mr. Knightley could not impute to Emmaa more relenting heart than she possessed, or a heart more disposed to acceptof his.He had, in fact, been wholly unsuspicious of his own influence. He had followedher into the shrubbery with no idea of trying it. He had come, in his anxietyto see how she bore Frank Churchill’s engagement, with no selfish view,no view at all, but of endeavouring, if she allowed him an opening, to sootheor to counsel her.—The rest had been the work of the moment, theimmediate effect of what he heard, on his feelings. The delightful assurance ofher total indifference towards Frank Churchill, of her having a heartcompletely disengaged from him, had given birth to the hope, that, in time, hemight gain her affection himself;—but it had been no presenthope—he had only, in the momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment,aspired to be told that she did not forbid his attempt to attach her.—Thesuperior hopes which gradually opened were so much the moreenchanting.—The affection, which he had been asking to be allowed tocreate, if he could, was already his!—Within half an hour, he had passedfrom a thoroughly distressed state of mind, to something so like perfecthappiness, that it could bear no other name.Her change was equal.—This one half-hour had given to each thesame precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the same degreeof ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.—On his side, there had been along-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the expectation, of FrankChurchill.—He had been in love with Emma, and jealous of Frank Churchill,from about the same period, one sentiment having probably enlightened him as tothe other. It was his jealousy of Frank Churchill that had taken him from thecountry.—The Box Hill party had decided him on going away. He would savehimself from witnessing again such permitted, encouraged attentions.—Hehad gone to learn to be indifferent.—But he had gone to a wrong place.There was too much domestic happiness in his brother’s house; woman woretoo amiable a form in it; Isabella was too much like Emma—differing onlyin those striking inferiorities, which always brought the other in brilliancybefore him, for much to have been done, even had his time been longer.—Hehad stayed on, however, vigorously, day after day—till this verymorning’s post had conveyed the history of Jane Fairfax.—Then, withthe gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did not scruple to feel, havingnever believed Frank Churchill to be at all deserving Emma, was there so muchfond solicitude, so much keen anxiety for her, that he could stay no longer. Hehad ridden home through the rain; and had walked up directly after dinner, tosee how this sweetest and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all herfaults, bore the discovery.He had found her agitated and low.—Frank Churchill was a villain.—He heard her declare that she had never loved him. Frank Churchill’scharacter was not desperate.—She was his own Emma, by hand and word, whenthey returned into the house; and if he could have thought of Frank Churchillthen, he might have deemed him a very good sort of fellow.CHAPTER XIVWhat totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house from what shehad brought out!—she had then been only daring to hope for a littlerespite of suffering;—she was now in an exquisite flutter of happiness,and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be greater when theflutter should have passed away.They sat down to tea—the same party round the same table—how oftenit had been collected!—and how often had her eyes fallen on the sameshrubs in the lawn, and observed the same beautiful effect of the westernsun!—But never in such a state of spirits, never in any thing like it;and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of her usual self to bethe attentive lady of the house, or even the attentive daughter.Poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in the breastof that man whom he was so cordially welcoming, and so anxiously hoping mightnot have taken cold from his ride.—Could he have seen the heart, he wouldhave cared very little for the lungs; but without the most distant imaginationof the impending evil, without the slightest perception of any thingextraordinary in the looks or ways of either, he repeated to them verycomfortably all the articles of news he had received from Mr. Perry, and talkedon with much self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they could havetold him in return.As long as Mr. Knightley remained with them, Emma’s fever continued; butwhen he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised and subdued—andin the course of the sleepless night, which was the tax for such an evening,she found one or two such very serious points to consider, as made her feel,that even her happiness must have some alloy. Her father—and Harriet. Shecould not be alone without feeling the full weight of their separate claims;and how to guard the comfort of both to the utmost, was the question. Withrespect to her father, it was a question soon answered. She hardly knew yetwhat Mr. Knightley would ask; but a very short parley with her own heartproduced the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father.—Sheeven wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought. While he lived, it must beonly an engagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested of the dangerof drawing her away, it might become an increase of comfort to him.—Howto do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult decision;—how to spareher from any unnecessary pain; how to make her any possible atonement; how toappear least her enemy?—On these subjects, her perplexity and distresswere very great—and her mind had to pass again and again through everybitter reproach and sorrowful regret that had ever surrounded it.—Shecould only resolve at last, that she would still avoid a meeting with her, andcommunicate all that need be told by letter; that it would be inexpressiblydesirable to have her removed just now for a time from Highbury,and—indulging in one scheme more—nearly resolve, that it might bepracticable to get an invitation for her to Brunswick Square.—Isabellahad been pleased with Harriet; and a few weeks spent in London must give hersome amusement.—She did not think it in Harriet’s nature to escapebeing benefited by novelty and variety, by the streets, the shops, and thechildren.—At any rate, it would be a proof of attention and kindness inherself, from whom every thing was due; a separation for the present; anaverting of the evil day, when they must all be together again.She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment which left herso very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley, in walking up to Hartfieldto breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon; and half an hour stolenafterwards to go over the same ground again with him, literally andfiguratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in a proper share of thehappiness of the evening before.He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have the slightestinclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter was brought her fromRandalls—a very thick letter;—she guessed what it must contain, anddeprecated the necessity of reading it.—She was now in perfect charitywith Frank Churchill; she wanted no explanations, she wanted only to have herthoughts to herself—and as for understanding any thing he wrote, she wassure she was incapable of it.—It must be waded through, however. Sheopened the packet; it was too surely so;—a note from Mrs. Weston toherself, ushered in the letter from Frank to Mrs. Weston.“I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you theenclosed. I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have scarcely adoubt of its happy effect.—I think we shall never materially disagreeabout the writer again; but I will not delay you by a long preface.—Weare quite well.—This letter has been the cure of all the littlenervousness I have been feeling lately.—I did not quite like your lookson Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though you will never own beingaffected by weather, I think every body feels a north-east wind.—I feltfor your dear father very much in the storm of Tuesday afternoon and yesterdaymorning, but had the comfort of hearing last night, by Mr. Perry, that it hadnot made him ill.“Yours ever,          “A. W.”[To Mrs. Weston.]Windsor—July.MY DEAR MADAM,“If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected;but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour andindulgence.—You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need ofeven all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.—But Ihave been forgiven by one who had still more to resent. My courage rises whileI write. It is very difficult for the prosperous to be humble. I have alreadymet with such success in two applications for pardon, that I may be in dangerof thinking myself too sure of yours, and of those among your friends who havehad any ground of offence.—You must all endeavour to comprehend the exactnature of my situation when I first arrived at Randalls; you must consider meas having a secret which was to be kept at all hazards. This was the fact. Myright to place myself in a situation requiring such concealment, is anotherquestion. I shall not discuss it here. For my temptation to think it aright, I refer every caviller to a brick house, sashed windows below, andcasements above, in Highbury. I dared not address her openly; my difficultiesin the then state of Enscombe must be too well known to require definition; andI was fortunate enough to prevail, before we parted at Weymouth, and to inducethe most upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secretengagement.—Had she refused, I should have gone mad.—But you willbe ready to say, what was your hope in doing this?—What did you lookforward to?—To any thing, every thing—to time, chance,circumstance, slow effects, sudden bursts, perseverance and weariness, healthand sickness. Every possibility of good was before me, and the first ofblessings secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and correspondence. Ifyou need farther explanation, I have the honour, my dear madam, of being yourhusband’s son, and the advantage of inheriting a disposition to hope forgood, which no inheritance of houses or lands can ever equal the valueof.—See me, then, under these circumstances, arriving on my first visitto Randalls;—and here I am conscious of wrong, for that visit might havebeen sooner paid. You will look back and see that I did not come till MissFairfax was in Highbury; and as you were the person slighted, you willforgive me instantly; but I must work on my father’s compassion, byreminding him, that so long as I absented myself from his house, so long I lostthe blessing of knowing you. My behaviour, during the very happy fortnightwhich I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to reprehension, exceptingon one point. And now I come to the principal, the only important part of myconduct while belonging to you, which excites my own anxiety, or requires verysolicitous explanation. With the greatest respect, and the warmest friendship,do I mention Miss Woodhouse; my father perhaps will think I ought to add, withthe deepest humiliation.—A few words which dropped from him yesterdayspoke his opinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to.—Mybehaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated, I believe, more than it ought.—Inorder to assist a concealment so essential to me, I was led on to make morethan an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we were immediatelythrown.—I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my ostensibleobject—but I am sure you will believe the declaration, that had I notbeen convinced of her indifference, I would not have been induced by anyselfish views to go on.—Amiable and delightful as Miss Woodhouse is, shenever gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be attached; and that she wasperfectly free from any tendency to being attached to me, was as much myconviction as my wish.—She received my attentions with an easy, friendly,goodhumoured playfulness, which exactly suited me. We seemed to understand eachother. From our relative situation, those attentions were her due, and werefelt to be so.—Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand mebefore the expiration of that fortnight, I cannot say;—when I called totake leave of her, I remember that I was within a moment of confessing thetruth, and I then fancied she was not without suspicion; but I have no doubt ofher having since detected me, at least in some degree.—She may not havesurmised the whole, but her quickness must have penetrated a part. I cannotdoubt it. You will find, whenever the subject becomes freed from its presentrestraints, that it did not take her wholly by surprize. She frequently gave mehints of it. I remember her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs. Eltongratitude for her attentions to Miss Fairfax.—I hope this history of myconduct towards her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuationof what you saw amiss. While you considered me as having sinned against EmmaWoodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either. Acquit me here, and procure forme, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes of that said EmmaWoodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly affection, as to long to haveher as deeply and as happily in love as myself.—Whatever strange things Isaid or did during that fortnight, you have now a key to. My heart was inHighbury, and my business was to get my body thither as often as might be, andwith the least suspicion. If you remember any queernesses, set them all to theright account.—Of the pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it onlynecessary to say, that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to MissF—, who would never have allowed me to send it, had any choice been givenher.—The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement, my dearmadam, is much beyond my power of doing justice to. You will soon, I earnestlyhope, know her thoroughly yourself.—No description can describe her. Shemust tell you herself what she is—yet not by word, for never was there ahuman creature who would so designedly suppress her own merit.—Since Ibegan this letter, which will be longer than I foresaw, I have heard fromher.—She gives a good account of her own health; but as she nevercomplains, I dare not depend. I want to have your opinion of her looks. I knowyou will soon call on her; she is living in dread of the visit. Perhaps it ispaid already. Let me hear from you without delay; I am impatient for a thousandparticulars. Remember how few minutes I was at Randalls, and in how bewildered,how mad a state: and I am not much better yet; still insane either fromhappiness or misery. When I think of the kindness and favour I have met with,of her excellence and patience, and my uncle’s generosity, I am mad withjoy: but when I recollect all the uneasiness I occasioned her, and how little Ideserve to be forgiven, I am mad with anger. If I could but see heragain!—But I must not propose it yet. My uncle has been too good for meto encroach.—I must still add to this long letter. You have not heard allthat you ought to hear. I could not give any connected detail yesterday; butthe suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness with which the affairburst out, needs explanation; for though the event of the 26th ult., as youwill conclude, immediately opened to me the happiest prospects, I should nothave presumed on such early measures, but from the very particularcircumstances, which left me not an hour to lose. I should myself have shrunkfrom any thing so hasty, and she would have felt every scruple of mine withmultiplied strength and refinement.—But I had no choice. The hastyengagement she had entered into with that woman—Here, my dear madam, Iwas obliged to leave off abruptly, to recollect and compose myself.—Ihave been walking over the country, and am now, I hope, rational enough to makethe rest of my letter what it ought to be.—It is, in fact, a mostmortifying retrospect for me. I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit, thatmy manners to Miss W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were highly blameable.She disapproved them, which ought to have been enough.—My plea ofconcealing the truth she did not think sufficient.—She was displeased; Ithought unreasonably so: I thought her, on a thousand occasions, unnecessarilyscrupulous and cautious: I thought her even cold. But she was always right. IfI had followed her judgment, and subdued my spirits to the level of what shedeemed proper, I should have escaped the greatest unhappiness I have everknown.—We quarrelled.— Do you remember the morning spent atDonwell?—There every little dissatisfaction that had occurredbefore came to a crisis. I was late; I met her walking home by herself, andwanted to walk with her, but she would not suffer it. She absolutely refused toallow me, which I then thought most unreasonable. Now, however, I see nothingin it but a very natural and consistent degree of discretion. While I, to blindthe world to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionableparticularity to another woman, was she to be consenting the next to a proposalwhich might have made every previous caution useless?—Had we been metwalking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must have beensuspected.—I was mad enough, however, to resent.—I doubted heraffection. I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill; when, provoked by suchconduct on my side, such shameful, insolent neglect of her, and such apparentdevotion to Miss W., as it would have been impossible for any woman of sense toendure, she spoke her resentment in a form of words perfectly intelligible tome.—In short, my dear madam, it was a quarrel blameless on her side,abominable on mine; and I returned the same evening to Richmond, though I mighthave staid with you till the next morning, merely because I would be as angrywith her as possible. Even then, I was not such a fool as not to mean to bereconciled in time; but I was the injured person, injured by her coldness, andI went away determined that she should make the first advances.—I shallalways congratulate myself that you were not of the Box Hill party. Had youwitnessed my behaviour there, I can hardly suppose you would ever have thoughtwell of me again. Its effect upon her appears in the immediate resolution itproduced: as soon as she found I was really gone from Randalls, she closed withthe offer of that officious Mrs. Elton; the whole system of whose treatment ofher, by the bye, has ever filled me with indignation and hatred. I must notquarrel with a spirit of forbearance which has been so richly extended towardsmyself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest against the share of it whichthat woman has known.—‘Jane,’ indeed!—You will observethat I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that name, even to you.Think, then, what I must have endured in hearing it bandied between the Eltonswith all the vulgarity of needless repetition, and all the insolence ofimaginary superiority. Have patience with me, I shall soon have done.—Sheclosed with this offer, resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the nextday to tell me that we never were to meet again.—She feltthe engagement to be a sourceof repentance and misery to each:she dissolved it.—This letter reached me on the verymorning of my poor aunt’s death. I answered it within an hour; but fromthe confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business falling on me atonce, my answer, instead of being sent with all the many other letters of thatday, was locked up in my writing-desk; and I, trusting that I had writtenenough, though but a few lines, to satisfy her, remained without anyuneasiness.—I was rather disappointed that I did not hear from her againspeedily; but I made excuses for her, and was too busy, and—may Iadd?—too cheerful in my views to be captious.—We removed toWindsor; and two days afterwards I received a parcel from her, my own lettersall returned!—and a few lines at the same time by the post, stating herextreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply to her last; and adding,that as silence on such a point could not be misconstrued, and as it must beequally desirable to both to have every subordinate arrangement concluded assoon as possible, she now sent me, by a safe conveyance, all my letters, andrequested, that if I could not directly command hers, so as to send them toHighbury within a week, I would forward them after that period to herat—: in short, the full direction to Mr. Smallridge’s, nearBristol, stared me in the face. I knew the name, the place, I knew all aboutit, and instantly saw what she had been doing. It was perfectly accordant withthat resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the secrecy shehad maintained, as to any such design in her former letter, was equallydescriptive of its anxious delicacy. For the world would not she have seemed tothreaten me.—Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I had actually detectedmy own blunder, I raved at the blunders of the post.—What was to bedone?—One thing only.—I must speak to my uncle. Without hissanction I could not hope to be listened to again.—I spoke; circumstanceswere in my favour; the late event had softened away his pride, and he was,earlier than I could have anticipated, wholly reconciled and complying; andcould say at last, poor man! with a deep sigh, that he wished I might find asmuch happiness in the marriage state as he had done.—I felt that it wouldbe of a different sort.—Are you disposed to pity me for what I must havesuffered in opening the cause to him, for my suspense while all was atstake?—No; do not pity me till I reached Highbury, and saw how ill I hadmade her. Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks.—I reachedHighbury at the time of day when, from my knowledge of their late breakfasthour, I was certain of a good chance of finding her alone.—I was notdisappointed; and at last I was not disappointed either in the object of myjourney. A great deal of very reasonable, very just displeasure I had topersuade away. But it is done; we are reconciled, dearer, much dearer, thanever, and no moment’s uneasiness can ever occur between us again. Now, mydear madam, I will release you; but I could not conclude before. A thousand anda thousand thanks for all the kindness you have ever shewn me, and ten thousandfor the attentions your heart will dictate towards her.—If you think mein a way to be happier than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion.—MissW. calls me the child of good fortune. I hope she is right.—In onerespect, my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to subscribe myself,Your obliged and affectionate Son,          F. C. WESTON CHURCHILL.CHAPTER XVThis letter must make its way to Emma’s feelings. She was obliged, inspite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all the justicethat Mrs. Weston foretold. As soon as she came to her own name, it wasirresistible; every line relating to herself was interesting, and almost everyline agreeable; and when this charm ceased, the subject could still maintainitself, by the natural return of her former regard for the writer, and the verystrong attraction which any picture of love must have for her at that moment.She never stopt till she had gone through the whole; and though it wasimpossible not to feel that he had been wrong, yet he had been less wrong thanshe had supposed—and he had suffered, and was very sorry—and he wasso grateful to Mrs. Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she wasso happy herself, that there was no being severe; and could he have entered theroom, she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as ever.She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knightley came again, shedesired him to read it. She was sure of Mrs. Weston’s wishing it to becommunicated; especially to one, who, like Mr. Knightley, had seen so much toblame in his conduct.“I shall be very glad to look it over,” said he; “but itseems long. I will take it home with me at night.”But that would not do. Mr. Weston was to call in the evening, and she mustreturn it by him.“I would rather be talking to you,” he replied; “but as itseems a matter of justice, it shall be done.”He began—stopping, however, almost directly to say, “Had I beenoffered the sight of one of this gentleman’s letters to his mother-in-lawa few months ago, Emma, it would not have been taken with suchindifference.”He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then, with a smile,observed, “Humph! a fine complimentary opening: But it is his way. Oneman’s style must not be the rule of another’s. We will not besevere.”“It will be natural for me,” he added shortly afterwards, “tospeak my opinion aloud as I read. By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you.It will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it—”“Not at all. I should wish it.”Mr. Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.“He trifles here,” said he, “as to the temptation. He knowshe is wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.—Bad.—He ought not tohave formed the engagement.—‘His father’sdisposition:’—he is unjust, however, to his father. Mr.Weston’s sanguine temper was a blessing on all his upright and honourableexertions; but Mr. Weston earned every present comfort before he endeavoured togain it.—Very true; he did not come till Miss Fairfax was here.”“And I have not forgotten,” said Emma, “how sure you werethat he might have come sooner if he would. You pass it over veryhandsomely—but you were perfectly right.”“I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:—but yet, Ithink—had you not been in the case—I should still havedistrusted him.”When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole of italoud—all that related to her, with a smile; a look; a shake of the head;a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, as the subjectrequired; concluding, however, seriously, and, after steady reflection,thus—“Very bad—though it might have been worse.—Playing a mostdangerous game. Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.—Nojudge of his own manners by you.—Always deceived in fact by his ownwishes, and regardless of little besides his own convenience.—Fancyingyou to have fathomed his secret. Natural enough!—his own mind full ofintrigue, that he should suspect it in others.—Mystery; Finesse—howthey pervert the understanding! My Emma, does not every thing serve to provemore and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our dealings with eachother?”Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet’s account,which she could not give any sincere explanation of.“You had better go on,” said she.He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, “the pianoforte! Ah! Thatwas the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider whether theinconvenience of it might not very much exceed the pleasure. A boyish scheme,indeed!—I cannot comprehend a man’s wishing to give a woman anyproof of affection which he knows she would rather dispense with; and he didknow that she would have prevented the instrument’s coming if shecould.”After this, he made some progress without any pause. Frank Churchill’sconfession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for morethan a word in passing.“I perfectly agree with you, sir,”—was then his remark.“You did behave very shamefully. You never wrote a truer line.” Andhaving gone through what immediately followed of the basis of theirdisagreement, and his persisting to act in direct opposition to JaneFairfax’s sense of right, he made a fuller pause to say, “This isvery bad.—He had induced her to place herself, for his sake, in asituation of extreme difficulty and uneasiness, and it should have been hisfirst object to prevent her from suffering unnecessarily.—She must havehad much more to contend with, in carrying on the correspondence, than hecould. He should have respected even unreasonable scruples, had there beensuch; but hers were all reasonable. We must look to her one fault, and rememberthat she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the engagement, to bear thatshe should have been in such a state of punishment.”Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grewuncomfortable. Her own behaviour had been so very improper! She was deeplyashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. It was all read, however,steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and, excepting onemomentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear of givingpain—no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.“There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, theEltons,” was his next observation.—“His feelings arenatural.—What! actually resolve to break with him entirely!—Shefelt the engagement to be a source of repentance and misery to each—shedissolved it.—What a view this gives of her sense of hisbehaviour!—Well, he must be a most extraordinary—”“Nay, nay, read on.—You will find how very much he suffers.”“I hope he does,” replied Mr. Knightley coolly, and resuming theletter. “‘Smallridge!’—What does this mean? What is allthis?”“She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge’schildren—a dear friend of Mrs. Elton’s—a neighbour of MapleGrove; and, by the bye, I wonder how Mrs. Elton bears thedisappointment?”“Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read—not even ofMrs. Elton. Only one page more. I shall soon have done. What a letter the manwrites!”“I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him.”“Well, there is feeling here.—He does seem to have sufferedin finding her ill.—Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond ofher. ‘Dearer, much dearer than ever.’ I hope he may long continueto feel all the value of such a reconciliation.—He is a very liberalthanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands.—‘Happier than Ideserve.’ Come, he knows himself there. ‘Miss Woodhouse calls methe child of good fortune.’—Those were Miss Woodhouse’swords, were they?— And a fine ending—and there is the letter. Thechild of good fortune! That was your name for him, was it?”“You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am; but stillyou must, at least I hope you must, think the better of him for it. I hope itdoes him some service with you.”“Yes, certainly it does. He has had great faults, faults ofinconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinion inthinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: but still as he is, beyonda doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it may be hoped, havethe advantage of being constantly with her, I am very ready to believe hischaracter will improve, and acquire from hers the steadiness and delicacy ofprinciple that it wants. And now, let me talk to you of something else. I haveanother person’s interest at present so much at heart, that I cannotthink any longer about Frank Churchill. Ever since I left you this morning,Emma, my mind has been hard at work on one subject.”The subject followed; it was in plain, unaffected, gentlemanlike English, suchas Mr. Knightley used even to the woman he was in love with, how to be able toask her to marry him, without attacking the happiness of her father.Emma’s answer was ready at the first word. “While her dear fatherlived, any change of condition must be impossible for her. She could never quithim.” Part only of this answer, however, was admitted. The impossibilityof her quitting her father, Mr. Knightley felt as strongly as herself; but theinadmissibility of any other change, he could not agree to. He had beenthinking it over most deeply, most intently; he had at first hoped to induceMr. Woodhouse to remove with her to Donwell; he had wanted to believe itfeasible, but his knowledge of Mr. Woodhouse would not suffer him to deceivehimself long; and now he confessed his persuasion, that such a transplantationwould be a risk of her father’s comfort, perhaps even of his life, whichmust not be hazarded. Mr. Woodhouse taken from Hartfield!—No, he feltthat it ought not to be attempted. But the plan which had arisen on thesacrifice of this, he trusted his dearest Emma would not find in any respectobjectionable; it was, that he should be received at Hartfield; that so long asher father’s happiness—in other words, his life—requiredHartfield to continue her home, it should be his likewise.Of their all removing to Donwell, Emma had already had her own passingthoughts. Like him, she had tried the scheme and rejected it; but such analternative as this had not occurred to her. She was sensible of all theaffection it evinced. She felt that, in quitting Donwell, he must besacrificing a great deal of independence of hours and habits; that in livingconstantly with her father, and in no house of his own, there would be much,very much, to be borne with. She promised to think of it, and advised him tothink of it more; but he was fully convinced, that no reflection could alterhis wishes or his opinion on the subject. He had given it, he could assure her,very long and calm consideration; he had been walking away from William Larkinsthe whole morning, to have his thoughts to himself.“Ah! there is one difficulty unprovided for,” cried Emma. “Iam sure William Larkins will not like it. You must get his consent before youask mine.”She promised, however, to think of it; and pretty nearly promised, moreover, tothink of it, with the intention of finding it a very good scheme.It is remarkable, that Emma, in the many, very many, points of view in whichshe was now beginning to consider Donwell Abbey, was never struck with anysense of injury to her nephew Henry, whose rights as heir-expectant hadformerly been so tenaciously regarded. Think she must of the possibledifference to the poor little boy; and yet she only gave herself a saucyconscious smile about it, and found amusement in detecting the real cause ofthat violent dislike of Mr. Knightley’s marrying Jane Fairfax, or anybody else, which at the time she had wholly imputed to the amiable solicitudeof the sister and the aunt.This proposal of his, this plan of marrying and continuing atHartfield—the more she contemplated it, the more pleasing it became. Hisevils seemed to lessen, her own advantages to increase, their mutual good tooutweigh every drawback. Such a companion for herself in the periods of anxietyand cheerlessness before her!—Such a partner in all those duties andcares to which time must be giving increase of melancholy!She would have been too happy but for poor Harriet; but every blessing of herown seemed to involve and advance the sufferings of her friend, who must now beeven excluded from Hartfield. The delightful family party which Emma wassecuring for herself, poor Harriet must, in mere charitable caution, be kept ata distance from. She would be a loser in every way. Emma could not deplore herfuture absence as any deduction from her own enjoyment. In such a party,Harriet would be rather a dead weight than otherwise; but for the poor girlherself, it seemed a peculiarly cruel necessity that was to be placing her insuch a state of unmerited punishment.In time, of course, Mr. Knightley would be forgotten, that is, supplanted; butthis could not be expected to happen very early. Mr. Knightley himself would bedoing nothing to assist the cure;—not like Mr. Elton. Mr. Knightley,always so kind, so feeling, so truly considerate for every body, would neverdeserve to be less worshipped than now; and it really was too much to hope evenof Harriet, that she could be in love with more than three men in oneyear.CHAPTER XVIIt was a very great relief to Emma to find Harriet as desirous as herself toavoid a meeting. Their intercourse was painful enough by letter. How muchworse, had they been obliged to meet!Harriet expressed herself very much as might be supposed, without reproaches,or apparent sense of ill-usage; and yet Emma fancied there was a something ofresentment, a something bordering on it in her style, which increased thedesirableness of their being separate.—It might be only her ownconsciousness; but it seemed as if an angel only could have been quite withoutresentment under such a stroke.She had no difficulty in procuring Isabella’s invitation; and she wasfortunate in having a sufficient reason for asking it, without resorting toinvention.—There was a tooth amiss. Harriet really wished, and had wishedsome time, to consult a dentist. Mrs. John Knightley was delighted to be ofuse; any thing of ill health was a recommendation to her—and though notso fond of a dentist as of a Mr. Wingfield, she was quite eager to have Harrietunder her care.—When it was thus settled on her sister’s side, Emmaproposed it to her friend, and found her very persuadable.—Harriet was togo; she was invited for at least a fortnight; she was to be conveyed in Mr.Woodhouse’s carriage.—It was all arranged, it was all completed,and Harriet was safe in Brunswick Square.Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley’s visits; now she could talk,and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense of injustice,of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted her when remembering howdisappointed a heart was near her, how much might at that moment, and at alittle distance, be enduring by the feelings which she had led astray herself.The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard’s, or in London, made perhapsan unreasonable difference in Emma’s sensations; but she could not thinkof her in London without objects of curiosity and employment, which must beaverting the past, and carrying her out of herself.She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place in hermind which Harriet had occupied. There was a communication before her, onewhich she only could be competent to make—the confession of herengagement to her father; but she would have nothing to do with it atpresent.—She had resolved to defer the disclosure till Mrs. Weston weresafe and well. No additional agitation should be thrown at this period amongthose she loved—and the evil should not act on herself by anticipationbefore the appointed time.—A fortnight, at least, of leisure and peace ofmind, to crown every warmer, but more agitating, delight, should be hers.She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an hour ofthis holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.—She ought togo—and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their presentsituations increasing every other motive of goodwill. It would be asecret satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of prospectwould certainly add to the interest with which she should attend to any thingJane might communicate.She went—she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had not beeninto the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane had been insuch distress as had filled her with compassion, though all the worst of hersufferings had been unsuspected.—The fear of being still unwelcome,determined her, though assured of their being at home, to wait in the passage,and send up her name.—She heard Patty announcing it; but no such bustlesucceeded as poor Miss Bates had before made so happily intelligible.—No;she heard nothing but the instant reply of, “Beg her to walkup;”—and a moment afterwards she was met on the stairs by Janeherself, coming eagerly forward, as if no other reception of her were feltsufficient.—Emma had never seen her look so well, so lovely, so engaging.There was consciousness, animation, and warmth; there was every thing which hercountenance or manner could ever have wanted.— She came forward with anoffered hand; and said, in a low, but very feeling tone,“This is most kind, indeed!—Miss Woodhouse, it is impossible for meto express—I hope you will believe—Excuse me for being so entirelywithout words.”Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words, if the sound ofMrs. Elton’s voice from the sitting-room had not checked her, and made itexpedient to compress all her friendly and all her congratulatory sensationsinto a very, very earnest shake of the hand.Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Elton were together. Miss Bates was out, which accountedfor the previous tranquillity. Emma could have wished Mrs. Elton elsewhere; butshe was in a humour to have patience with every body; and as Mrs. Elton met herwith unusual graciousness, she hoped the rencontre would do them no harm.She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs. Elton’s thoughts, andunderstand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being in MissFairfax’s confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what was stilla secret to other people. Emma saw symptoms of it immediately in the expressionof her face; and while paying her own compliments to Mrs. Bates, and appearingto attend to the good old lady’s replies, she saw her with a sort ofanxious parade of mystery fold up a letter which she had apparently beenreading aloud to Miss Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold reticuleby her side, saying, with significant nods,“We can finish this some other time, you know. You and I shall not wantopportunities. And, in fact, you have heard all the essential already. I onlywanted to prove to you that Mrs. S. admits our apology, and is not offended.You see how delightfully she writes. Oh! she is a sweet creature! You wouldhave doated on her, had you gone.—But not a word more. Let us bediscreet—quite on our good behaviour.—Hush!—You rememberthose lines—I forget the poem at this moment:“For when a lady’s in the case,“You know all other things give place.”Now I say, my dear, in our case, for lady, read——mum!a word to the wise.—I am in a fine flow of spirits, an’t I? But Iwant to set your heart at ease as to Mrs. S.—My representation,you see, has quite appeased her.”And again, on Emma’s merely turning her head to look at Mrs.Bates’s knitting, she added, in a half whisper,“I mentioned no names, you will observe.—Oh! no; cautious asa minister of state. I managed it extremely well.”Emma could not doubt. It was a palpable display, repeated on every possibleoccasion. When they had all talked a little while in harmony of the weather andMrs. Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed with,“Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here ischarmingly recovered?—Do not you think her cure does Perry the highestcredit?—(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my word,Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!—Oh! if you had seenher, as I did, when she was at the worst!”—And when Mrs. Bates wassaying something to Emma, whispered farther, “We do not say a word of anyassistance that Perry might have; not a word of a certain youngphysician from Windsor.—Oh! no; Perry shall have all the credit.”“I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse,” sheshortly afterwards began, “since the party to Box Hill. Very pleasantparty. But yet I think there was something wanting. Things did notseem—that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits ofsome.—So it appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken. However, Ithink it answered so far as to tempt one to go again. What say you both to ourcollecting the same party, and exploring to Box Hill again, while the fineweather lasts?—It must be the same party, you know, quite the same party,not one exception.”Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help being diverted bythe perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting, she supposed, fromdoubt of what might be said, and impatience to say every thing.“Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.—It isimpossible to say—Yes, indeed, I quite understand—dearestJane’s prospects—that is, I do not mean.—But she ischarmingly recovered.—How is Mr. Woodhouse?—I am soglad.—Quite out of my power.—Such a happy little circle as you findus here.—Yes, indeed.—Charming young man!—that is—sovery friendly; I mean good Mr. Perry!—such attention toJane!”—And from her great, her more than commonly thankful delighttowards Mrs. Elton for being there, Emma guessed that there had been a littleshow of resentment towards Jane, from the vicarage quarter, which was nowgraciously overcome.—After a few whispers, indeed, which placed it beyonda guess, Mrs. Elton, speaking louder, said,“Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, thatanywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth is, thatI am waiting for my lord and master. He promised to join me here, and pay hisrespects to you.”“What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. Elton?—Thatwill be a favour indeed! for I know gentlemen do not like morning visits, andMr. Elton’s time is so engaged.”“Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.—He really is engaged from morningto night.—There is no end of people’s coming to him, on somepretence or other.—The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, arealways wanting his opinion. They seem not able to do any thing withouthim.—‘Upon my word, Mr. E.,’ I often say, ‘rather youthan I.—I do not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument,if I had half so many applicants.’—Bad enough as it is, for Iabsolutely neglect them both to an unpardonable degree.—I believe I havenot played a bar this fortnight.—However, he is coming, I assure you:yes, indeed, on purpose to wait on you all.” And putting up her hand toscreen her words from Emma—“A congratulatory visit, youknow.—Oh! yes, quite indispensable.”Miss Bates looked about her, so happily—!“He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself fromKnightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deepconsultation.—Mr. E. is Knightley’s right hand.”Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, “Is Mr. Eltongone on foot to Donwell?—He will have a hot walk.”“Oh! no, it is a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. Weston and Colewill be there too; but one is apt to speak only of those who lead.—Ifancy Mr. E. and Knightley have every thing their own way.”“Have not you mistaken the day?” said Emma. “I am almostcertain that the meeting at the Crown is not till to-morrow.—Mr.Knightley was at Hartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday.”“Oh! no, the meeting is certainly to-day,” was the abrupt answer,which denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton’sside.—“I do believe,” she continued, “this is the mosttroublesome parish that ever was. We never heard of such things at MapleGrove.”“Your parish there was small,” said Jane.“Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subjecttalked of.”“But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heard youspeak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Bragge; the onlyschool, and not more than five-and-twenty children.”“Ah! you clever creature, that’s very true. What a thinking brainyou have! I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if wecould be shaken together. My liveliness and your solidity would produceperfection.—Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that somepeople may not think you perfection already.—But hush!—not aword, if you please.”It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words, not toMrs. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw. The wish ofdistinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was very evident, though itcould not often proceed beyond a look.Mr. Elton made his appearance. His lady greeted him with some of her sparklingvivacity.“Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be an encumbranceto my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!—But you knew what adutiful creature you had to deal with. You knew I should not stir till my lordand master appeared.—Here have I been sitting this hour, giving theseyoung ladies a sample of true conjugal obedience—for who can say, youknow, how soon it may be wanted?”Mr. Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away. Hiscivilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent object was tolament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and the walk he had had fornothing.“When I got to Donwell,” said he, “Knightley could not befound. Very odd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning,and the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home tillone.”“Donwell!” cried his wife.—“My dear Mr. E., you havenot been to Donwell!—You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at theCrown.”“No, no, that’s to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to seeKnightley to-day on that very account.—Such a dreadful broilingmorning!—I went over the fields too—(speaking in a tone of greatill-usage,) which made it so much the worse. And then not to find him at home!I assure you I am not at all pleased. And no apology left, no message for me.The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being expected.—Veryextraordinary!—And nobody knew at all which way he was gone. Perhaps toHartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill, perhaps into his woods.—MissWoodhouse, this is not like our friend Knightley!—Can you explainit?”Emma amused herself by protesting that it was very extraordinary, indeed, andthat she had not a syllable to say for him.“I cannot imagine,” said Mrs. Elton, (feeling the indignity as awife ought to do,) “I cannot imagine how he could do such a thing by you,of all people in the world! The very last person whom one should expect to beforgotten!—My dear Mr. E., he must have left a message for you, I am surehe must.—Not even Knightley could be so very eccentric;—and hisservants forgot it. Depend upon it, that was the case: and very likely tohappen with the Donwell servants, who are all, I have often observed, extremelyawkward and remiss.—I am sure I would not have such a creature as hisHarry stand at our sideboard for any consideration. And as for Mrs. Hodges,Wright holds her very cheap indeed.—She promised Wright a receipt, andnever sent it.”“I met William Larkins,” continued Mr. Elton, “as I got nearthe house, and he told me I should not find his master at home, but I did notbelieve him.—William seemed rather out of humour. He did not know whatwas come to his master lately, he said, but he could hardly ever get the speechof him. I have nothing to do with William’s wants, but it really is ofvery great importance that I should see Knightley to-day; and it becomesa matter, therefore, of very serious inconvenience that I should have had thishot walk to no purpose.”Emma felt that she could not do better than go home directly. In allprobability she was at this very time waited for there; and Mr. Knightley mightbe preserved from sinking deeper in aggression towards Mr. Elton, if nottowards William Larkins.She was pleased, on taking leave, to find Miss Fairfax determined to attend herout of the room, to go with her even downstairs; it gave her an opportunitywhich she immediately made use of, to say,“It is as well, perhaps, that I have not had the possibility. Had you notbeen surrounded by other friends, I might have been tempted to introduce asubject, to ask questions, to speak more openly than might have been strictlycorrect.—I feel that I should certainly have been impertinent.”“Oh!” cried Jane, with a blush and an hesitation which Emma thoughtinfinitely more becoming to her than all the elegance of all her usualcomposure—“there would have been no danger. The danger would havebeen of my wearying you. You could not have gratified me more than byexpressing an interest—. Indeed, Miss Woodhouse, (speaking morecollectedly,) with the consciousness which I have of misconduct, very greatmisconduct, it is particularly consoling to me to know that those of myfriends, whose good opinion is most worth preserving, are not disgusted to sucha degree as to—I have not time for half that I could wish to say. I longto make apologies, excuses, to urge something for myself. I feel it so verydue. But, unfortunately—in short, if your compassion does not stand myfriend—”“Oh! you are too scrupulous, indeed you are,” cried Emma warmly,and taking her hand. “You owe me no apologies; and every body to whom youmight be supposed to owe them, is so perfectly satisfied, so delightedeven—”“You are very kind, but I know what my manners were to you.—So coldand artificial!—I had always a part to act.—It was a life ofdeceit!—I know that I must have disgusted you.”“Pray say no more. I feel that all the apologies should be on my side.Let us forgive each other at once. We must do whatever is to be done quickest,and I think our feelings will lose no time there. I hope you have pleasantaccounts from Windsor?”“Very.”“And the next news, I suppose, will be, that we are to loseyou—just as I begin to know you.”“Oh! as to all that, of course nothing can be thought of yet. I am heretill claimed by Colonel and Mrs. Campbell.”“Nothing can be actually settled yet, perhaps,” replied Emma,smiling—“but, excuse me, it must be thought of.”The smile was returned as Jane answered,“You are very right; it has been thought of. And I will own to you, (I amsure it will be safe), that so far as our living with Mr. Churchill atEnscombe, it is settled. There must be three months, at least, of deepmourning; but when they are over, I imagine there will be nothing more to waitfor.”“Thank you, thank you.—This is just what I wanted to be assuredof.—Oh! if you knew how much I love every thing that is decided andopen!—Good-bye, good-bye.”CHAPTER XVIIMrs. Weston’s friends were all made happy by her safety; and if thesatisfaction of her well-doing could be increased to Emma, it was by knowingher to be the mother of a little girl. She had been decided in wishing for aMiss Weston. She would not acknowledge that it was with any view of making amatch for her, hereafter, with either of Isabella’s sons; but she wasconvinced that a daughter would suit both father and mother best. It would be agreat comfort to Mr. Weston, as he grew older—and even Mr. Weston mightbe growing older ten years hence—to have his fireside enlivened by thesports and the nonsense, the freaks and the fancies of a child never banishedfrom home; and Mrs. Weston—no one could doubt that a daughter would bemost to her; and it would be quite a pity that any one who so well knew how toteach, should not have their powers in exercise again.“She has had the advantage, you know, of practising on me,” shecontinued—“like La Baronne d’Almane on La Comtessed’Ostalis, in Madame de Genlis’ Adelaide and Theodore, and we shallnow see her own little Adelaide educated on a more perfect plan.”“That is,” replied Mr. Knightley, “she will indulge her evenmore than she did you, and believe that she does not indulge her at all. Itwill be the only difference.”“Poor child!” cried Emma; “at that rate, what will become ofher?”“Nothing very bad.—The fate of thousands. She will be disagreeablein infancy, and correct herself as she grows older. I am losing all mybitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma. I, who am owing all myhappiness to you, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me to besevere on them?”Emma laughed, and replied: “But I had the assistance of all yourendeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people. I doubt whether my ownsense would have corrected me without it.”“Do you?—I have no doubt. Nature gave you understanding:—MissTaylor gave you principles. You must have done well. My interference was quiteas likely to do harm as good. It was very natural for you to say, what righthas he to lecture me?—and I am afraid very natural for you to feel thatit was done in a disagreeable manner. I do not believe I did you any good. Thegood was all to myself, by making you an object of the tenderest affection tome. I could not think about you so much without doating on you, faults and all;and by dint of fancying so many errors, have been in love with you ever sinceyou were thirteen at least.”“I am sure you were of use to me,” cried Emma. “I was veryoften influenced rightly by you—oftener than I would own at the time. Iam very sure you did me good. And if poor little Anna Weston is to be spoiled,it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her as you have donefor me, except falling in love with her when she is thirteen.”“How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of yoursaucy looks—‘Mr. Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so; papa says Imay, or I have Miss Taylor’s leave’—something which, youknew, I did not approve. In such cases my interference was giving you two badfeelings instead of one.”“What an amiable creature I was!—No wonder you should hold myspeeches in such affectionate remembrance.”“‘Mr. Knightley.’—You always called me, ‘Mr.Knightley;’ and, from habit, it has not so very formal a sound.—Andyet it is formal. I want you to call me something else, but I do not knowwhat.”“I remember once calling you ‘George,’ in one of my amiablefits, about ten years ago. I did it because I thought it would offend you; but,as you made no objection, I never did it again.”“And cannot you call me ‘George’ now?”“Impossible!—I never can call you any thing but ‘Mr.Knightley.’ I will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness ofMrs. Elton, by calling you Mr. K.—But I will promise,” she addedpresently, laughing and blushing—“I will promise to call you onceby your Christian name. I do not say when, but perhaps you may guesswhere;—in the building in which N. takes M. for better, for worse.”Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important servicewhich his better sense would have rendered her, to the advice which would havesaved her from the worst of all her womanly follies—her wilful intimacywith Harriet Smith; but it was too tender a subject.—She could not enteron it.—Harriet was very seldom mentioned between them. This, on his side,might merely proceed from her not being thought of; but Emma was ratherinclined to attribute it to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some appearances,that their friendship were declining. She was aware herself, that, partingunder any other circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more,and that her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost wholly did,on Isabella’s letters. He might observe that it was so. The pain of beingobliged to practise concealment towards him, was very little inferior to thepain of having made Harriet unhappy.Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be expected; onher first arrival she had thought her out of spirits, which appeared perfectlynatural, as there was a dentist to be consulted; but, since that business hadbeen over, she did not appear to find Harriet different from what she had knownher before.—Isabella, to be sure, was no very quick observer; yet ifHarriet had not been equal to playing with the children, it would not haveescaped her. Emma’s comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, byHarriet’s being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month atleast. Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley were to come down in August, and she wasinvited to remain till they could bring her back.“John does not even mention your friend,” said Mr. Knightley.“Here is his answer, if you like to see it.”It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. Emma acceptedit with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to know what he wouldsay about it, and not at all checked by hearing that her friend wasunmentioned.“John enters like a brother into my happiness,” continued Mr.Knightley, “but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him tohave, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from makingflourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather cool in herpraise. But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes.”“He writes like a sensible man,” replied Emma, when she had readthe letter. “I honour his sincerity. It is very plain that he considersthe good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is notwithout hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection, as you thinkme already. Had he said any thing to bear a different construction, I shouldnot have believed him.”“My Emma, he means no such thing. He only means—”“He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,”interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile—“much less, perhaps,than he is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on thesubject.”“Emma, my dear Emma—”“Oh!” she cried with more thorough gaiety, “if you fancy yourbrother does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret,and hear his opinion. Depend upon it, he will be much farther from doingyou justice. He will think all the happiness, all the advantage, on yourside of the question; all the merit on mine. I wish I may not sink into‘poor Emma’ with him at once.—His tender compassion towardsoppressed worth can go no farther.”“Ah!” he cried, “I wish your father might be half as easilyconvinced as John will be, of our having every right that equal worth can give,to be happy together. I am amused by one part of John’s letter—didyou notice it?—where he says, that my information did not take him whollyby surprize, that he was rather in expectation of hearing something of thekind.”“If I understand your brother, he only means so far as your having somethoughts of marrying. He had no idea of me. He seems perfectly unprepared forthat.”“Yes, yes—but I am amused that he should have seen so far into myfeelings. What has he been judging by?—I am not conscious of anydifference in my spirits or conversation that could prepare him at this timefor my marrying any more than at another.—But it was so, I suppose. Idare say there was a difference when I was staying with them the other day. Ibelieve I did not play with the children quite so much as usual. I remember oneevening the poor boys saying, ‘Uncle seems always tirednow.’”The time was coming when the news must spread farther, and other persons’reception of it tried. As soon as Mrs. Weston was sufficiently recovered toadmit Mr. Woodhouse’s visits, Emma having it in view that her gentlereasonings should be employed in the cause, resolved first to announce it athome, and then at Randalls.—But how to break it to her father atlast!—She had bound herself to do it, in such an hour of Mr.Knightley’s absence, or when it came to the point her heart would havefailed her, and she must have put it off; but Mr. Knightley was to come at sucha time, and follow up the beginning she was to make.—She was forced tospeak, and to speak cheerfully too. She must not make it a more decided subjectof misery to him, by a melancholy tone herself. She must not appear to think ita misfortune.—With all the spirits she could command, she prepared himfirst for something strange, and then, in a few words, said, that if hisconsent and approbation could be obtained—which, she trusted, would beattended with no difficulty, since it was a plan to promote the happiness ofall—she and Mr. Knightley meant to marry; by which means Hartfield wouldreceive the constant addition of that person’s company whom she knew heloved, next to his daughters and Mrs. Weston, best in the world.Poor man!—it was at first a considerable shock to him, and he triedearnestly to dissuade her from it. She was reminded, more than once, of havingalways said she would never marry, and assured that it would be a great dealbetter for her to remain single; and told of poor Isabella, and poor MissTaylor.—But it would not do. Emma hung about him affectionately, andsmiled, and said it must be so; and that he must not class her with Isabellaand Mrs. Weston, whose marriages taking them from Hartfield, had, indeed, madea melancholy change: but she was not going from Hartfield; she should be alwaysthere; she was introducing no change in their numbers or their comforts but forthe better; and she was very sure that he would be a great deal the happier forhaving Mr. Knightley always at hand, when he were once got used to theidea.—Did he not love Mr. Knightley very much?—He would not denythat he did, she was sure.—Whom did he ever want to consult on businessbut Mr. Knightley?—Who was so useful to him, who so ready to write hisletters, who so glad to assist him?—Who so cheerful, so attentive, soattached to him?—Would not he like to have him always on thespot?—Yes. That was all very true. Mr. Knightley could not be there toooften; he should be glad to see him every day;—but they did see him everyday as it was.—Why could not they go on as they had done?Mr. Woodhouse could not be soon reconciled; but the worst was overcome, theidea was given; time and continual repetition must do the rest.—ToEmma’s entreaties and assurances succeeded Mr. Knightley’s, whosefond praise of her gave the subject even a kind of welcome; and he was soonused to be talked to by each, on every fair occasion.—They had all theassistance which Isabella could give, by letters of the strongest approbation;and Mrs. Weston was ready, on the first meeting, to consider the subject in themost serviceable light—first, as a settled, and, secondly, as a goodone—well aware of the nearly equal importance of the two recommendationsto Mr. Woodhouse’s mind.—It was agreed upon, as what was to be; andevery body by whom he was used to be guided assuring him that it would be forhis happiness; and having some feelings himself which almost admitted it, hebegan to think that some time or other—in another year or two,perhaps—it might not be so very bad if the marriage did take place.Mrs. Weston was acting no part, feigning no feelings in all that she said tohim in favour of the event.—She had been extremely surprized, never moreso, than when Emma first opened the affair to her; but she saw in it onlyincrease of happiness to all, and had no scruple in urging him to theutmost.—She had such a regard for Mr. Knightley, as to think he deservedeven her dearest Emma; and it was in every respect so proper, suitable, andunexceptionable a connexion, and in one respect, one point of the highestimportance, so peculiarly eligible, so singularly fortunate, that now it seemedas if Emma could not safely have attached herself to any other creature, andthat she had herself been the stupidest of beings in not having thought of it,and wished it long ago.—How very few of those men in a rank of life toaddress Emma would have renounced their own home for Hartfield! And who but Mr.Knightley could know and bear with Mr. Woodhouse, so as to make such anarrangement desirable!—The difficulty of disposing of poor Mr. Woodhousehad been always felt in her husband’s plans and her own, for a marriagebetween Frank and Emma. How to settle the claims of Enscombe and Hartfield hadbeen a continual impediment—less acknowledged by Mr. Weston than byherself—but even he had never been able to finish the subject better thanby saying—“Those matters will take care of themselves; the youngpeople will find a way.” But here there was nothing to be shifted off ina wild speculation on the future. It was all right, all open, all equal. Nosacrifice on any side worth the name. It was a union of the highest promise offelicity in itself, and without one real, rational difficulty to oppose ordelay it.Mrs. Weston, with her baby on her knee, indulging in such reflections as these,was one of the happiest women in the world. If any thing could increase herdelight, it was perceiving that the baby would soon have outgrown its first setof caps.The news was universally a surprize wherever it spread; and Mr. Weston had hisfive minutes share of it; but five minutes were enough to familiarise the ideato his quickness of mind.—He saw the advantages of the match, andrejoiced in them with all the constancy of his wife; but the wonder of it wasvery soon nothing; and by the end of an hour he was not far from believing thathe had always foreseen it.“It is to be a secret, I conclude,” said he. “These mattersare always a secret, till it is found out that every body knows them. Only letme be told when I may speak out.—I wonder whether Jane has anysuspicion.”He went to Highbury the next morning, and satisfied himself on that point. Hetold her the news. Was not she like a daughter, his eldest daughter?—hemust tell her; and Miss Bates being present, it passed, of course, to Mrs.Cole, Mrs. Perry, and Mrs. Elton, immediately afterwards. It was no more thanthe principals were prepared for; they had calculated from the time of itsbeing known at Randalls, how soon it would be over Highbury; and were thinkingof themselves, as the evening wonder in many a family circle, with greatsagacity.In general, it was a very well approved match. Some might think him, and othersmight think her, the most in luck. One set might recommend their all removingto Donwell, and leaving Hartfield for the John Knightleys; and another mightpredict disagreements among their servants; but yet, upon the whole, there wasno serious objection raised, except in one habitation, theVicarage.—There, the surprize was not softened by any satisfaction. Mr.Elton cared little about it, compared with his wife; he only hoped “theyoung lady’s pride would now be contented;” and supposed “shehad always meant to catch Knightley if she could;” and, on the point ofliving at Hartfield, could daringly exclaim, “Rather he thanI!”—But Mrs. Elton was very much discomposedindeed.—“Poor Knightley! poor fellow!—sad business forhim.”—She was extremely concerned; for, though very eccentric, hehad a thousand good qualities.—How could he be so taken in?—Did notthink him at all in love—not in the least.—PoorKnightley!—There would be an end of all pleasant intercourse withhim.—How happy he had been to come and dine with them whenever they askedhim! But that would be all over now.—Poor fellow!—No more exploringparties to Donwell made for her. Oh! no; there would be a Mrs. Knightleyto throw cold water on every thing.—Extremely disagreeable! But she wasnot at all sorry that she had abused the housekeeper the otherday.—Shocking plan, living together. It would never do. She knew a familynear Maple Grove who had tried it, and been obliged to separate before the endof the first quarter.CHAPTER XVIIITime passed on. A few more to-morrows, and the party from London would bearriving. It was an alarming change; and Emma was thinking of it one morning,as what must bring a great deal to agitate and grieve her, when Mr. Knightleycame in, and distressing thoughts were put by. After the first chat of pleasurehe was silent; and then, in a graver tone, began with,“I have something to tell you, Emma; some news.”“Good or bad?” said she, quickly, looking up in his face.“I do not know which it ought to be called.”“Oh! good I am sure.—I see it in your countenance. You are tryingnot to smile.”“I am afraid,” said he, composing his features, “I am verymuch afraid, my dear Emma, that you will not smile when you hear it.”“Indeed! but why so?—I can hardly imagine that any thing whichpleases or amuses you, should not please and amuse me too.”“There is one subject,” he replied, “I hope but one, on whichwe do not think alike.” He paused a moment, again smiling, with his eyesfixed on her face. “Does nothing occur to you?—Do not yourecollect?—Harriet Smith.”Her cheeks flushed at the name, and she felt afraid of something, though sheknew not what.“Have you heard from her yourself this morning?” cried he.“You have, I believe, and know the whole.”“No, I have not; I know nothing; pray tell me.”“You are prepared for the worst, I see—and very bad it is. HarrietSmith marries Robert Martin.”Emma gave a start, which did not seem like being prepared—and her eyes,in eager gaze, said, “No, this is impossible!” but her lips wereclosed.“It is so, indeed,” continued Mr. Knightley; “I have it fromRobert Martin himself. He left me not half an hour ago.”She was still looking at him with the most speaking amazement.“You like it, my Emma, as little as I feared.—I wish our opinionswere the same. But in time they will. Time, you may be sure, will make one orthe other of us think differently; and, in the meanwhile, we need not talk muchon the subject.”“You mistake me, you quite mistake me,” she replied, exertingherself. “It is not that such a circumstance would now make me unhappy,but I cannot believe it. It seems an impossibility!—You cannot mean tosay, that Harriet Smith has accepted Robert Martin. You cannot mean that he haseven proposed to her again—yet. You only mean, that he intends it.”“I mean that he has done it,” answered Mr. Knightley, with smilingbut determined decision, “and been accepted.”“Good God!” she cried.—“Well!”—Then havingrecourse to her workbasket, in excuse for leaning down her face, and concealingall the exquisite feelings of delight and entertainment which she knew she mustbe expressing, she added, “Well, now tell me every thing; make thisintelligible to me. How, where, when?—Let me know it all. I never wasmore surprized—but it does not make me unhappy, I assureyou.—How—how has it been possible?”“It is a very simple story. He went to town on business three days ago,and I got him to take charge of some papers which I was wanting to send toJohn.—He delivered these papers to John, at his chambers, and was askedby him to join their party the same evening to Astley’s. They were goingto take the two eldest boys to Astley’s. The party was to be our brotherand sister, Henry, John—and Miss Smith. My friend Robert could notresist. They called for him in their way; were all extremely amused; and mybrother asked him to dine with them the next day—which he did—andin the course of that visit (as I understand) he found an opportunity ofspeaking to Harriet; and certainly did not speak in vain.—She made him,by her acceptance, as happy even as he is deserving. He came down byyesterday’s coach, and was with me this morning immediately afterbreakfast, to report his proceedings, first on my affairs, and then on his own.This is all that I can relate of the how, where, and when. Your friend Harrietwill make a much longer history when you see her.—She will give you allthe minute particulars, which only woman’s language can makeinteresting.—In our communications we deal only in thegreat.—However, I must say, that Robert Martin’s heart seemed forhim, and to me, very overflowing; and that he did mention,without its being much to the purpose, that on quitting their box atAstley’s, my brother took charge of Mrs. John Knightley and little John,and he followed with Miss Smith and Henry; and that at one time they were insuch a crowd, as to make Miss Smith rather uneasy.”He stopped.—Emma dared not attempt any immediate reply. To speak, she wassure would be to betray a most unreasonable degree of happiness. She must waita moment, or he would think her mad. Her silence disturbed him; and afterobserving her a little while, he added,“Emma, my love, you said that this circumstance would not now make youunhappy; but I am afraid it gives you more pain than you expected. Hissituation is an evil—but you must consider it as what satisfies yourfriend; and I will answer for your thinking better and better of him as youknow him more. His good sense and good principles would delight you.—Asfar as the man is concerned, you could not wish your friend in better hands.His rank in society I would alter if I could, which is saying a great deal Iassure you, Emma.—You laugh at me about William Larkins; but I couldquite as ill spare Robert Martin.”He wanted her to look up and smile; and having now brought herself not to smiletoo broadly—she did—cheerfully answering,“You need not be at any pains to reconcile me to the match. I thinkHarriet is doing extremely well. Her connexions may be worse thanhis. In respectability of character, there can be no doubt that theyare. I have been silent from surprize merely, excessive surprize. You cannotimagine how suddenly it has come on me! how peculiarly unprepared Iwas!—for I had reason to believe her very lately more determined againsthim, much more, than she was before.”“You ought to know your friend best,” replied Mr. Knightley;“but I should say she was a good-tempered, soft-hearted girl, not likelyto be very, very determined against any young man who told her he lovedher.”Emma could not help laughing as she answered, “Upon my word, I believeyou know her quite as well as I do.—But, Mr. Knightley, are you perfectlysure that she has absolutely and downright accepted him. I could supposeshe might in time—but can she already?—Did not you misunderstandhim?—You were both talking of other things; of business, shows of cattle,or new drills—and might not you, in the confusion of so many subjects,mistake him?—It was not Harriet’s hand that he was certainof—it was the dimensions of some famous ox.”The contrast between the countenance and air of Mr. Knightley and Robert Martinwas, at this moment, so strong to Emma’s feelings, and so strong was therecollection of all that had so recently passed on Harriet’s side, sofresh the sound of those words, spoken with such emphasis, “No, I hope Iknow better than to think of Robert Martin,” that she was reallyexpecting the intelligence to prove, in some measure, premature. It could notbe otherwise.“Do you dare say this?” cried Mr. Knightley. “Do you dare tosuppose me so great a blockhead, as not to know what a man is talkingof?—What do you deserve?”“Oh! I always deserve the best treatment, because I never put up with anyother; and, therefore, you must give me a plain, direct answer. Are you quitesure that you understand the terms on which Mr. Martin and Harriet noware?”“I am quite sure,” he replied, speaking very distinctly,“that he told me she had accepted him; and that there was no obscurity,nothing doubtful, in the words he used; and I think I can give you a proof thatit must be so. He asked my opinion as to what he was now to do. He knew of noone but Mrs. Goddard to whom he could apply for information of her relations orfriends. Could I mention any thing more fit to be done, than to go to Mrs.Goddard? I assured him that I could not. Then, he said, he would endeavour tosee her in the course of this day.”“I am perfectly satisfied,” replied Emma, with the brightestsmiles, “and most sincerely wish them happy.”“You are materially changed since we talked on this subjectbefore.”“I hope so—for at that time I was a fool.”“And I am changed also; for I am now very willing to grant you allHarriet’s good qualities. I have taken some pains for your sake, and forRobert Martin’s sake, (whom I have always had reason to believe as muchin love with her as ever,) to get acquainted with her. I have often talked toher a good deal. You must have seen that I did. Sometimes, indeed, I havethought you were half suspecting me of pleading poor Martin’s cause,which was never the case; but, from all my observations, I am convinced of herbeing an artless, amiable girl, with very good notions, very seriously goodprinciples, and placing her happiness in the affections and utility of domesticlife.—Much of this, I have no doubt, she may thank you for.”“Me!” cried Emma, shaking her head.—“Ah! poorHarriet!”She checked herself, however, and submitted quietly to a little more praisethan she deserved.Their conversation was soon afterwards closed by the entrance of her father.She was not sorry. She wanted to be alone. Her mind was in a state of flutterand wonder, which made it impossible for her to be collected. She was indancing, singing, exclaiming spirits; and till she had moved about, and talkedto herself, and laughed and reflected, she could be fit for nothing rational.Her father’s business was to announce James’s being gone out to putthe horses to, preparatory to their now daily drive to Randalls; and she had,therefore, an immediate excuse for disappearing.The joy, the gratitude, the exquisite delight of her sensations may beimagined. The sole grievance and alloy thus removed in the prospect ofHarriet’s welfare, she was really in danger of becoming too happy forsecurity.—What had she to wish for? Nothing, but to grow more worthy ofhim, whose intentions and judgment had been ever so superior to her own.Nothing, but that the lessons of her past folly might teach her humility andcircumspection in future.Serious she was, very serious in her thankfulness, and in her resolutions; andyet there was no preventing a laugh, sometimes in the very midst of them. Shemust laugh at such a close! Such an end of the doleful disappointment of fiveweeks back! Such a heart—such a Harriet!Now there would be pleasure in her returning—Every thing would be apleasure. It would be a great pleasure to know Robert Martin.High in the rank of her most serious and heartfelt felicities, was thereflection that all necessity of concealment from Mr. Knightley would soon beover. The disguise, equivocation, mystery, so hateful to her to practise, mightsoon be over. She could now look forward to giving him that full and perfectconfidence which her disposition was most ready to welcome as a duty.In the gayest and happiest spirits she set forward with her father; not alwayslistening, but always agreeing to what he said; and, whether in speech orsilence, conniving at the comfortable persuasion of his being obliged to go toRandalls every day, or poor Mrs. Weston would be disappointed.They arrived.—Mrs. Weston was alone in the drawing-room:—but hardlyhad they been told of the baby, and Mr. Woodhouse received the thanks forcoming, which he asked for, when a glimpse was caught through the blind, of twofigures passing near the window.“It is Frank and Miss Fairfax,” said Mrs. Weston. “I was justgoing to tell you of our agreeable surprize in seeing him arrive this morning.He stays till to-morrow, and Miss Fairfax has been persuaded to spend the daywith us.—They are coming in, I hope.”In half a minute they were in the room. Emma was extremely glad to seehim—but there was a degree of confusion—a number of embarrassingrecollections on each side. They met readily and smiling, but with aconsciousness which at first allowed little to be said; and having all sat downagain, there was for some time such a blank in the circle, that Emma began todoubt whether the wish now indulged, which she had long felt, of seeing FrankChurchill once more, and of seeing him with Jane, would yield its proportion ofpleasure. When Mr. Weston joined the party, however, and when the baby wasfetched, there was no longer a want of subject or animation—or of courageand opportunity for Frank Churchill to draw near her and say,“I have to thank you, Miss Woodhouse, for a very kind forgiving messagein one of Mrs. Weston’s letters. I hope time has not made you lesswilling to pardon. I hope you do not retract what you then said.”“No, indeed,” cried Emma, most happy to begin, “not in theleast. I am particularly glad to see and shake hands with you—and to giveyou joy in person.”He thanked her with all his heart, and continued some time to speak withserious feeling of his gratitude and happiness.“Is not she looking well?” said he, turning his eyes towards Jane.“Better than she ever used to do?—You see how my father and Mrs.Weston doat upon her.”But his spirits were soon rising again, and with laughing eyes, aftermentioning the expected return of the Campbells, he named the name ofDixon.—Emma blushed, and forbade its being pronounced in her hearing.“I can never think of it,” she cried, “without extremeshame.”“The shame,” he answered, “is all mine, or ought to be. Butis it possible that you had no suspicion?—I mean of late. Early, I know,you had none.”“I never had the smallest, I assure you.”“That appears quite wonderful. I was once very near—and I wish Ihad—it would have been better. But though I was always doing wrongthings, they were very bad wrong things, and such as did me noservice.—It would have been a much better transgression had I broken thebond of secrecy and told you every thing.”“It is not now worth a regret,” said Emma.“I have some hope,” resumed he, “of my uncle’s beingpersuaded to pay a visit at Randalls; he wants to be introduced to her. Whenthe Campbells are returned, we shall meet them in London, and continue there, Itrust, till we may carry her northward.—But now, I am at such a distancefrom her—is not it hard, Miss Woodhouse?—Till this morning, we havenot once met since the day of reconciliation. Do not you pity me?”Emma spoke her pity so very kindly, that with a sudden accession of gaythought, he cried,“Ah! by the bye,” then sinking his voice, and looking demure forthe moment—“I hope Mr. Knightley is well?” Hepaused.—She coloured and laughed.—“I know you saw my letter,and think you may remember my wish in your favour. Let me return yourcongratulations.—I assure you that I have heard the news with the warmestinterest and satisfaction.—He is a man whom I cannot presume topraise.”Emma was delighted, and only wanted him to go on in the same style; but hismind was the next moment in his own concerns and with his own Jane, and hisnext words were,“Did you ever see such a skin?—such smoothness! suchdelicacy!—and yet without being actually fair.—One cannot call herfair. It is a most uncommon complexion, with her dark eye-lashes andhair—a most distinguishing complexion! So peculiarly the lady init.—Just colour enough for beauty.”“I have always admired her complexion,” replied Emma, archly;“but do not I remember the time when you found fault with her for beingso pale?—When we first began to talk of her.—Have you quiteforgotten?”“Oh! no—what an impudent dog I was!—How could Idare—”But he laughed so heartily at the recollection, that Emma could not helpsaying,“I do suspect that in the midst of your perplexities at that time, youhad very great amusement in tricking us all.—I am sure you had.—Iam sure it was a consolation to you.”“Oh! no, no, no—how can you suspect me of such a thing? I was themost miserable wretch!”“Not quite so miserable as to be insensible to mirth. I am sure it was asource of high entertainment to you, to feel that you were taking us allin.—Perhaps I am the readier to suspect, because, to tell you the truth,I think it might have been some amusement to myself in the same situation. Ithink there is a little likeness between us.”He bowed.“If not in our dispositions,” she presently added, with a look oftrue sensibility, “there is a likeness in our destiny; the destiny whichbids fair to connect us with two characters so much superior to our own.”“True, true,” he answered, warmly. “No, not true on yourside. You can have no superior, but most true on mine.—She is a completeangel. Look at her. Is not she an angel in every gesture? Observe the turn ofher throat. Observe her eyes, as she is looking up at my father.—You willbe glad to hear (inclining his head, and whispering seriously) that my unclemeans to give her all my aunt’s jewels. They are to be new set. I amresolved to have some in an ornament for the head. Will not it be beautiful inher dark hair?”“Very beautiful, indeed,” replied Emma; and she spoke so kindly,that he gratefully burst out,“How delighted I am to see you again! and to see you in such excellentlooks!—I would not have missed this meeting for the world. I shouldcertainly have called at Hartfield, had you failed to come.”The others had been talking of the child, Mrs. Weston giving an account of alittle alarm she had been under, the evening before, from the infant’sappearing not quite well. She believed she had been foolish, but it had alarmedher, and she had been within half a minute of sending for Mr. Perry. Perhapsshe ought to be ashamed, but Mr. Weston had been almost as uneasy asherself.—In ten minutes, however, the child had been perfectly wellagain. This was her history; and particularly interesting it was to Mr.Woodhouse, who commended her very much for thinking of sending for Perry, andonly regretted that she had not done it. “She should always send forPerry, if the child appeared in the slightest degree disordered, were it onlyfor a moment. She could not be too soon alarmed, nor send for Perry too often.It was a pity, perhaps, that he had not come last night; for, though the childseemed well now, very well considering, it would probably have been better ifPerry had seen it.”Frank Churchill caught the name.“Perry!” said he to Emma, and trying, as he spoke, to catch MissFairfax’s eye. “My friend Mr. Perry! What are they saying about Mr.Perry?—Has he been here this morning?—And how does he travelnow?—Has he set up his carriage?”Emma soon recollected, and understood him; and while she joined in the laugh,it was evident from Jane’s countenance that she too was really hearinghim, though trying to seem deaf.“Such an extraordinary dream of mine!” he cried. “I can neverthink of it without laughing.—She hears us, she hears us, Miss Woodhouse.I see it in her cheek, her smile, her vain attempt to frown. Look at her. Donot you see that, at this instant, the very passage of her own letter, whichsent me the report, is passing under her eye—that the whole blunder isspread before her—that she can attend to nothing else, though pretendingto listen to the others?”Jane was forced to smile completely, for a moment; and the smile partlyremained as she turned towards him, and said in a conscious, low, yet steadyvoice,“How you can bear such recollections, is astonishing to me!—Theywill sometimes obtrude—but how you can court them!”He had a great deal to say in return, and very entertainingly; but Emma’sfeelings were chiefly with Jane, in the argument; and on leaving Randalls, andfalling naturally into a comparison of the two men, she felt, that pleased asshe had been to see Frank Churchill, and really regarding him as she did withfriendship, she had never been more sensible of Mr. Knightley’s highsuperiority of character. The happiness of this most happy day, received itscompletion, in the animated contemplation of his worth which this comparisonproduced.CHAPTER XIXIf Emma had still, at intervals, an anxious feeling for Harriet, a momentarydoubt of its being possible for her to be really cured of her attachment to Mr.Knightley, and really able to accept another man from unbiased inclination, itwas not long that she had to suffer from the recurrence of any suchuncertainty. A very few days brought the party from London, and she had nosooner an opportunity of being one hour alone with Harriet, than she becameperfectly satisfied—unaccountable as it was!—that Robert Martin hadthoroughly supplanted Mr. Knightley, and was now forming all her views ofhappiness.Harriet was a little distressed—did look a little foolish at first: buthaving once owned that she had been presumptuous and silly, and self-deceived,before, her pain and confusion seemed to die away with the words, and leave herwithout a care for the past, and with the fullest exultation in the present andfuture; for, as to her friend’s approbation, Emma had instantly removedevery fear of that nature, by meeting her with the most unqualifiedcongratulations.—Harriet was most happy to give every particular of theevening at Astley’s, and the dinner the next day; she could dwell on itall with the utmost delight. But what did such particulars explain?—Thefact was, as Emma could now acknowledge, that Harriet had always liked RobertMartin; and that his continuing to love her had been irresistible.—Beyondthis, it must ever be unintelligible to Emma.The event, however, was most joyful; and every day was giving her fresh reasonfor thinking so.—Harriet’s parentage became known. She proved to bethe daughter of a tradesman, rich enough to afford her the comfortablemaintenance which had ever been hers, and decent enough to have always wishedfor concealment.—Such was the blood of gentility which Emma had formerlybeen so ready to vouch for!—It was likely to be as untainted, perhaps, asthe blood of many a gentleman: but what a connexion had she been preparing forMr. Knightley—or for the Churchills—or even for Mr.Elton!—The stain of illegitimacy, unbleached by nobility or wealth, wouldhave been a stain indeed.No objection was raised on the father’s side; the young man was treatedliberally; it was all as it should be: and as Emma became acquainted withRobert Martin, who was now introduced at Hartfield, she fully acknowledged inhim all the appearance of sense and worth which could bid fairest for herlittle friend. She had no doubt of Harriet’s happiness with anygood-tempered man; but with him, and in the home he offered, there would be thehope of more, of security, stability, and improvement. She would be placed inthe midst of those who loved her, and who had better sense than herself;retired enough for safety, and occupied enough for cheerfulness. She would benever led into temptation, nor left for it to find her out. She would berespectable and happy; and Emma admitted her to be the luckiest creature in theworld, to have created so steady and persevering an affection in such aman;—or, if not quite the luckiest, to yield only to herself.Harriet, necessarily drawn away by her engagements with the Martins, was lessand less at Hartfield; which was not to be regretted.—The intimacybetween her and Emma must sink; their friendship must change into a calmer sortof goodwill; and, fortunately, what ought to be, and must be, seemed alreadybeginning, and in the most gradual, natural manner.Before the end of September, Emma attended Harriet to church, and saw her handbestowed on Robert Martin with so complete a satisfaction, as no remembrances,even connected with Mr. Elton as he stood before them, couldimpair.—Perhaps, indeed, at that time she scarcely saw Mr. Elton, but asthe clergyman whose blessing at the altar might next fall onherself.—Robert Martin and Harriet Smith, the latest couple engaged ofthe three, were the first to be married.Jane Fairfax had already quitted Highbury, and was restored to the comforts ofher beloved home with the Campbells.—The Mr. Churchills were also intown; and they were only waiting for November.The intermediate month was the one fixed on, as far as they dared, by Emma andMr. Knightley.—They had determined that their marriage ought to beconcluded while John and Isabella were still at Hartfield, to allow them thefortnight’s absence in a tour to the seaside, which was theplan.—John and Isabella, and every other friend, were agreed in approvingit. But Mr. Woodhouse—how was Mr. Woodhouse to be induced toconsent?—he, who had never yet alluded to their marriage but as a distantevent.When first sounded on the subject, he was so miserable, that they were almosthopeless.—A second allusion, indeed, gave less pain.—He began tothink it was to be, and that he could not prevent it—a very promisingstep of the mind on its way to resignation. Still, however, he was not happy.Nay, he appeared so much otherwise, that his daughter’s courage failed.She could not bear to see him suffering, to know him fancying himselfneglected; and though her understanding almost acquiesced in the assurance ofboth the Mr. Knightleys, that when once the event were over, his distress wouldbe soon over too, she hesitated—she could not proceed.In this state of suspense they were befriended, not by any sudden illuminationof Mr. Woodhouse’s mind, or any wonderful change of his nervous system,but by the operation of the same system in another way.—Mrs.Weston’s poultry-house was robbed one night of all herturkeys—evidently by the ingenuity of man. Other poultry-yards in theneighbourhood also suffered.—Pilfering was housebreaking to Mr.Woodhouse’s fears.—He was very uneasy; and but for the sense of hisson-in-law’s protection, would have been under wretched alarm every nightof his life. The strength, resolution, and presence of mind of the Mr.Knightleys, commanded his fullest dependence. While either of them protectedhim and his, Hartfield was safe.—But Mr. John Knightley must be in Londonagain by the end of the first week in November.The result of this distress was, that, with a much more voluntary, cheerfulconsent than his daughter had ever presumed to hope for at the moment, she wasable to fix her wedding-day—and Mr. Elton was called on, within a monthfrom the marriage of Mr. and Mrs. Robert Martin, to join the hands of Mr.Knightley and Miss Woodhouse.The wedding was very much like other weddings, where the parties have no tastefor finery or parade; and Mrs. Elton, from the particulars detailed by herhusband, thought it all extremely shabby, and very inferior to herown.—“Very little white satin, very few lace veils; a most pitifulbusiness!—Selina would stare when she heard of it.”—But, inspite of these deficiencies, the wishes, the hopes, the confidence, thepredictions of the small band of true friends who witnessed the ceremony, werefully answered in the perfect happiness of the union.FINIS*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMMA ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.