START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT EXPECTATIONS ***Great Expectations[1867 Edition]by Charles DickensContents Chapter I. Chapter II. Chapter III. Chapter IV. Chapter V. Chapter VI. Chapter VII. Chapter VIII. Chapter IX. Chapter X. Chapter XI. Chapter XII. Chapter XIII. Chapter XIV. Chapter XV. Chapter XVI. Chapter XVII. Chapter XVIII. Chapter XIX. Chapter XX. Chapter XXI. Chapter XXII. Chapter XXIII. Chapter XXIV. Chapter XXV. Chapter XXVI. Chapter XXVII. Chapter XXVIII. Chapter XXIX. Chapter XXX. Chapter XXXI. Chapter XXXII. Chapter XXXIII. Chapter XXXIV. Chapter XXXV. Chapter XXXVI. Chapter XXXVII. Chapter XXXVIII. Chapter XXXIX. Chapter XL. Chapter XLI. Chapter XLII. Chapter XLIII. Chapter XLIV. Chapter XLV. Chapter XLVI. Chapter XLVII. Chapter XLVIII. Chapter XLIX. Chapter L. Chapter LI. Chapter LII. Chapter LIII. Chapter LIV. Chapter LV. Chapter LVI. Chapter LVII. Chapter LVIII. Chapter LIX. Chapter I.Myfather’s family name being Pirrip, and my Christian name Philip, myinfant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit thanPip. So, I called myself Pip, and came to be called Pip.I give Pirrip as my father’s family name, on the authority of histombstone and my sister,—Mrs. Joe Gargery, who married the blacksmith. AsI never saw my father or my mother, and never saw any likeness of either ofthem (for their days were long before the days of photographs), my firstfancies regarding what they were like were unreasonably derived from theirtombstones. The shape of the letters on my father’s, gave me an odd ideathat he was a square, stout, dark man, with curly black hair. From thecharacter and turn of the inscription, “Also Georgiana Wife of theAbove,” I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled andsickly. To five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long, whichwere arranged in a neat row beside their grave, and were sacred to the memoryof five little brothers of mine,—who gave up trying to get a living,exceedingly early in that universal struggle,—I am indebted for a beliefI religiously entertained that they had all been born on their backs with theirhands in their trousers-pockets, and had never taken them out in this state ofexistence.Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river wound,twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid and broad impression of theidentity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoontowards evening. At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak placeovergrown with nettles was the churchyard; and that Philip Pirrip, late of thisparish, and also Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried; and thatAlexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and Roger, infant children of theaforesaid, were also dead and buried; and that the dark flat wilderness beyondthe churchyard, intersected with dikes and mounds and gates, with scatteredcattle feeding on it, was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond wasthe river; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing wasthe sea; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all andbeginning to cry, was Pip.“Hold your noise!” cried a terrible voice, as a man started up fromamong the graves at the side of the church porch. “Keep still, you littledevil, or I’ll cut your throat!”A fearful man, all in coarse grey, with a great iron on his leg. A man with nohat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round his head. A man whohad been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut byflints, and stung by nettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, andglared, and growled; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me bythe chin.“Oh! Don’t cut my throat, sir,” I pleaded in terror.“Pray don’t do it, sir.”“Tell us your name!” said the man. “Quick!”“Pip, sir.”“Once more,” said the man, staring at me. “Give itmouth!”“Pip. Pip, sir.”“Show us where you live,” said the man. “Pint out theplace!”I pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the alder-treesand pollards, a mile or more from the church.The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and emptiedmy pockets. There was nothing in them but a piece of bread. When the churchcame to itself,—for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go headover heels before me, and I saw the steeple under my feet,—when thechurch came to itself, I say, I was seated on a high tombstone, trembling whilehe ate the bread ravenously. “You young dog,” said the man, licking his lips, “what fatcheeks you ha’ got.”I believe they were fat, though I was at that time undersized for my years, andnot strong.“Darn me if I couldn’t eat ’em,” said the man, with athreatening shake of his head, “and if I han’t half a mindto’t!”I earnestly expressed my hope that he wouldn’t, and held tighter to thetombstone on which he had put me; partly, to keep myself upon it; partly, tokeep myself from crying.“Now lookee here!” said the man. “Where’s yourmother?”“There, sir!” said I.He started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over his shoulder.“There, sir!” I timidly explained. “Also Georgiana.That’s my mother.”“Oh!” said he, coming back. “And is that your father alongeryour mother?”“Yes, sir,” said I; “him too; late of this parish.”“Ha!” he muttered then, considering. “Who d’ye livewith,—supposin’ you’re kindly let to live, which Ihan’t made up my mind about?”“My sister, sir,—Mrs. Joe Gargery,—wife of Joe Gargery, theblacksmith, sir.”“Blacksmith, eh?” said he. And looked down at his leg.After darkly looking at his leg and me several times, he came closer to mytombstone, took me by both arms, and tilted me back as far as he could hold me;so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine, and mine looked mosthelplessly up into his.“Now lookee here,” he said, “the question being whetheryou’re to be let to live. You know what a file is?”“Yes, sir.”“And you know what wittles is?”“Yes, sir.”After each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greatersense of helplessness and danger.“You get me a file.” He tilted me again. “And you get mewittles.” He tilted me again. “You bring ’em both tome.” He tilted me again. “Or I’ll have your heart and liverout.” He tilted me again.I was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands,and said, “If you would kindly please to let me keep upright, sir,perhaps I shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps I could attend more.”He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped over itsown weathercock. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright position on thetop of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:—“You bring me, to-morrow morning early, that file and them wittles. Youbring the lot to me, at that old Battery over yonder. You do it, and you neverdare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such aperson as me, or any person sumever, and you shall be let to live. You fail, oryou go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small it is, and yourheart and your liver shall be tore out, roasted, and ate. Now, I ain’talone, as you may think I am. There’s a young man hid with me, incomparison with which young man I am a Angel. That young man hears the words Ispeak. That young man has a secret way pecooliar to himself, of getting at aboy, and at his heart, and at his liver. It is in wain for a boy to attempt tohide himself from that young man. A boy may lock his door, may be warm in bed,may tuck himself up, may draw the clothes over his head, may think himselfcomfortable and safe, but that young man will softly creep and creep his way tohim and tear him open. I am a keeping that young man from harming of you at thepresent moment, with great difficulty. I find it wery hard to hold that youngman off of your inside. Now, what do you say?”I said that I would get him the file, and I would get him what broken bits offood I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in the morning.“Say Lord strike you dead if you don’t!” said the man.I said so, and he took me down.“Now,” he pursued, “you remember what you’ve undertook,and you remember that young man, and you get home!”“Goo-good night, sir,” I faltered.“Much of that!” said he, glancing about him over the cold wet flat.“I wish I was a frog. Or a eel!”At the same time, he hugged his shuddering body in both hisarms,—clasping himself, as if to hold himself together,—and limpedtowards the low church wall. As I saw him go, picking his way among thenettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, he looked in myyoung eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching upcautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in.When he came to the low church wall, he got over it, like a man whose legs werenumbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for me. When I saw him turning,I set my face towards home, and made the best use of my legs. But presently Ilooked over my shoulder, and saw him going on again towards the river, stillhugging himself in both arms, and picking his way with his sore feet among thegreat stones dropped into the marshes here and there, for stepping-places whenthe rains were heavy or the tide was in.The marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as I stopped to lookafter him; and the river was just another horizontal line, not nearly so broadnor yet so black; and the sky was just a row of long angry red lines and denseblack lines intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out theonly two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be standing upright;one of these was the beacon by which the sailors steered,—like anunhooped cask upon a pole,—an ugly thing when you were near it; theother, a gibbet, with some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate.The man was limping on towards this latter, as if he were the pirate come tolife, and come down, and going back to hook himself up again. It gave me aterrible turn when I thought so; and as I saw the cattle lifting their heads togaze after him, I wondered whether they thought so too. I looked all round forthe horrible young man, and could see no signs of him. But now I was frightenedagain, and ran home without stopping.Chapter II.Mysister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years older than I, and hadestablished a great reputation with herself and the neighbours because she hadbrought me up “by hand.” Having at that time to find out for myselfwhat the expression meant, and knowing her to have a hard and heavy hand, andto be much in the habit of laying it upon her husband as well as upon me, Isupposed that Joe Gargery and I were both brought up by hand.She was not a good-looking woman, my sister; and I had a general impressionthat she must have made Joe Gargery marry her by hand. Joe was a fair man, withcurls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth face, and with eyes of such avery undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their ownwhites. He was a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dearfellow,—a sort of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing redness ofskin that I sometimes used to wonder whether it was possible she washed herselfwith a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. She was tall and bony, and almost alwayswore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and havinga square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. Shemade it a powerful merit in herself, and a strong reproach against Joe, thatshe wore this apron so much. Though I really see no reason why she should haveworn it at all; or why, if she did wear it at all, she should not have taken itoff, every day of her life.Joe’s forge adjoined our house, which was a wooden house, as many of thedwellings in our country were,—most of them, at that time. When I ranhome from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Joe was sitting alone inthe kitchen. Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidences as such,Joe imparted a confidence to me, the moment I raised the latch of the door andpeeped in at him opposite to it, sitting in the chimney corner.“Mrs. Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for you, Pip. Andshe’s out now, making it a baker’s dozen.”“Is she?”“Yes, Pip,” said Joe; “and what’s worse, she’sgot Tickler with her.”At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on my waistcoat roundand round, and looked in great depression at the fire. Tickler was a wax-endedpiece of cane, worn smooth by collision with my tickled frame.“She sot down,” said Joe, “and she got up, and she made agrab at Tickler, and she Ram-paged out. That’s what she did,” saidJoe, slowly clearing the fire between the lower bars with the poker, andlooking at it; “she Ram-paged out, Pip.”“Has she been gone long, Joe?” I always treated him as a largerspecies of child, and as no more than my equal.“Well,” said Joe, glancing up at the Dutch clock,“she’s been on the Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes,Pip. She’s a-coming! Get behind the door, old chap, and have thejack-towel betwixt you.”I took the advice. My sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door wide open, andfinding an obstruction behind it, immediately divined the cause, and appliedTickler to its further investigation. She concluded by throwing me—Ioften served as a connubial missile—at Joe, who, glad to get hold of meon any terms, passed me on into the chimney and quietly fenced me up there withhis great leg.“Where have you been, you young monkey?” said Mrs. Joe, stampingher foot. “Tell me directly what you’ve been doing to wear me awaywith fret and fright and worrit, or I’d have you out of that corner ifyou was fifty Pips, and he was five hundred Gargerys.”“I have only been to the churchyard,” said I, from my stool, cryingand rubbing myself.“Churchyard!” repeated my sister. “If it warn’t for meyou’d have been to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there. Who broughtyou up by hand?”“You did,” said I.“And why did I do it, I should like to know?” exclaimed my sister.I whimpered, “I don’t know.”“I don’t!” said my sister. “I’d never doit again! I know that. I may truly say I’ve never had this apron of mineoff since born you were. It’s bad enough to be a blacksmith’s wife(and him a Gargery) without being your mother.”My thoughts strayed from that question as I looked disconsolately at the fire.For the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed leg, the mysterious youngman, the file, the food, and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit alarceny on those sheltering premises, rose before me in the avenging coals.“Hah!” said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to his station.“Churchyard, indeed! You may well say churchyard, you two.” One ofus, by the by, had not said it at all. “You’ll drive me tothe churchyard betwixt you, one of these days, and O, a pr-r-recious pairyou’d be without me!”As she applied herself to set the tea-things, Joe peeped down at me over hisleg, as if he were mentally casting me and himself up, and calculating whatkind of pair we practically should make, under the grievous circumstancesforeshadowed. After that, he sat feeling his right-side flaxen curls andwhisker, and following Mrs. Joe about with his blue eyes, as his manner alwayswas at squally times.My sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter for us, thatnever varied. First, with her left hand she jammed the loaf hard and fastagainst her bib,—where it sometimes got a pin into it, and sometimes aneedle, which we afterwards got into our mouths. Then she took some butter (nottoo much) on a knife and spread it on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way,as if she were making a plaster,—using both sides of the knife with aslapping dexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round the crust.Then, she gave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaster, andthen sawed a very thick round off the loaf: which she finally, beforeseparating from the loaf, hewed into two halves, of which Joe got one, and Ithe other.On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared not eat my slice. I feltthat I must have something in reserve for my dreadful acquaintance, and hisally the still more dreadful young man. I knew Mrs. Joe’s housekeeping tobe of the strictest kind, and that my larcenous researches might find nothingavailable in the safe. Therefore I resolved to put my hunk of bread and butterdown the leg of my trousers.The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose I foundto be quite awful. It was as if I had to make up my mind to leap from the topof a high house, or plunge into a great depth of water. And it was made themore difficult by the unconscious Joe. In our already-mentioned freemasonry asfellow-sufferers, and in his good-natured companionship with me, it was ourevening habit to compare the way we bit through our slices, by silently holdingthem up to each other’s admiration now and then,—which stimulatedus to new exertions. To-night, Joe several times invited me, by the display ofhis fast diminishing slice, to enter upon our usual friendly competition; buthe found me, each time, with my yellow mug of tea on one knee, and my untouchedbread and butter on the other. At last, I desperately considered that the thingI contemplated must be done, and that it had best be done in the leastimprobable manner consistent with the circumstances. I took advantage of amoment when Joe had just looked at me, and got my bread and butter down my leg.Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what he supposed to be my loss ofappetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of his slice, which he didn’tseem to enjoy. He turned it about in his mouth much longer than usual,pondering over it a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. He wasabout to take another bite, and had just got his head on one side for a goodpurchase on it, when his eye fell on me, and he saw that my bread and butterwas gone.The wonder and consternation with which Joe stopped on the threshold of hisbite and stared at me, were too evident to escape my sister’sobservation.“What’s the matter now?” said she, smartly, as she putdown her cup.“I say, you know!” muttered Joe, shaking his head at me in veryserious remonstrance. “Pip, old chap! You’ll do yourself amischief. It’ll stick somewhere. You can’t have chawed it,Pip.”“What’s the matter now?” repeated my sister, more sharplythan before.“If you can cough any trifle on it up, Pip, I’d recommend you to doit,” said Joe, all aghast. “Manners is manners, but still yourelth’s your elth.”By this time, my sister was quite desperate, so she pounced on Joe, and, takinghim by the two whiskers, knocked his head for a little while against the wallbehind him, while I sat in the corner, looking guiltily on.“Now, perhaps you’ll mention what’s the matter,” saidmy sister, out of breath, “you staring great stuck pig.”Joe looked at her in a helpless way, then took a helpless bite, and looked atme again.“You know, Pip,” said Joe, solemnly, with his last bite in hischeek, and speaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quite alone,“you and me is always friends, and I’d be the last to tell uponyou, any time. But such a—” he moved his chair and looked about thefloor between us, and then again at me—“such a most oncommon Boltas that!”“Been bolting his food, has he?” cried my sister.“You know, old chap,” said Joe, looking at me, and not at Mrs. Joe,with his bite still in his cheek, “I Bolted, myself, when I was yourage—frequent—and as a boy I’ve been among a many Bolters; butI never see your Bolting equal yet, Pip, and it’s a mercy you ain’tBolted dead.”My sister made a dive at me, and fished me up by the hair, saying nothing morethan the awful words, “You come along and be dosed.”Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as a fine medicine, andMrs. Joe always kept a supply of it in the cupboard; having a belief in itsvirtues correspondent to its nastiness. At the best of times, so much of thiselixir was administered to me as a choice restorative, that I was conscious ofgoing about, smelling like a new fence. On this particular evening the urgencyof my case demanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down my throat,for my greater comfort, while Mrs. Joe held my head under her arm, as a bootwould be held in a bootjack. Joe got off with half a pint; but was made toswallow that (much to his disturbance, as he sat slowly munching and meditatingbefore the fire), “because he had had a turn.” Judging from myself,I should say he certainly had a turn afterwards, if he had had none before.Conscience is a dreadful thing when it accuses man or boy; but when, in thecase of a boy, that secret burden co-operates with another secret burden downthe leg of his trousers, it is (as I can testify) a great punishment. Theguilty knowledge that I was going to rob Mrs. Joe—I never thought I wasgoing to rob Joe, for I never thought of any of the housekeeping property ashis—united to the necessity of always keeping one hand on my bread andbutter as I sat, or when I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand,almost drove me out of my mind. Then, as the marsh winds made the fire glow andflare, I thought I heard the voice outside, of the man with the iron on his legwho had sworn me to secrecy, declaring that he couldn’t andwouldn’t starve until to-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times, Ithought, What if the young man who was with so much difficulty restrained fromimbruing his hands in me should yield to a constitutional impatience, or shouldmistake the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart and liverto-night, instead of to-morrow! If ever anybody’s hair stood on end withterror, mine must have done so then. But, perhaps, nobody’s ever did?It was Christmas Eve, and I had to stir the pudding for next day, with acopper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch clock. I tried it with the loadupon my leg (and that made me think afresh of the man with the load onhis leg), and found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread andbutter out at my ankle, quite unmanageable. Happily I slipped away, anddeposited that part of my conscience in my garret bedroom.“Hark!” said I, when I had done my stirring, and was taking a finalwarm in the chimney corner before being sent up to bed; “was that greatguns, Joe?”“Ah!” said Joe. “There’s another conwict off.”“What does that mean, Joe?” said I.Mrs. Joe, who always took explanations upon herself, said, snappishly,“Escaped. Escaped.” Administering the definition like Tar-water.While Mrs. Joe sat with her head bending over her needlework, I put my mouthinto the forms of saying to Joe, “What’s a convict?” Joe puthis mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborate answer,that I could make out nothing of it but the single word “Pip.”“There was a conwict off last night,” said Joe, aloud, “aftersunset-gun. And they fired warning of him. And now it appears they’refiring warning of another.”“Who’s firing?” said I.“Drat that boy,” interposed my sister, frowning at me over herwork, “what a questioner he is. Ask no questions, and you’ll betold no lies.”It was not very polite to herself, I thought, to imply that I should be toldlies by her even if I did ask questions. But she never was polite unless therewas company.At this point Joe greatly augmented my curiosity by taking the utmost pains toopen his mouth very wide, and to put it into the form of a word that looked tome like “sulks.” Therefore, I naturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, andput my mouth into the form of saying, “her?” But Joe wouldn’thear of that, at all, and again opened his mouth very wide, and shook the formof a most emphatic word out of it. But I could make nothing of the word.“Mrs. Joe,” said I, as a last resort, “I should like toknow—if you wouldn’t much mind—where the firing comesfrom?”“Lord bless the boy!” exclaimed my sister, as if she didn’tquite mean that but rather the contrary. “From the Hulks!”“Oh-h!” said I, looking at Joe. “Hulks!”Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, “Well, I told youso.”“And please, what’s Hulks?” said I.“That’s the way with this boy!” exclaimed my sister, pointingme out with her needle and thread, and shaking her head at me. “Answerhim one question, and he’ll ask you a dozen directly. Hulks areprison-ships, right ’cross th’ meshes.” We always used thatname for marshes, in our country.“I wonder who’s put into prison-ships, and why they’re putthere?” said I, in a general way, and with quiet desperation.It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose. “I tell you what,young fellow,” said she, “I didn’t bring you up by hand tobadger people’s lives out. It would be blame to me and not praise, if Ihad. People are put in the Hulks because they murder, and because they rob, andforge, and do all sorts of bad; and they always begin by asking questions. Now,you get along to bed!”I was never allowed a candle to light me to bed, and, as I went upstairs in thedark, with my head tingling,—from Mrs. Joe’s thimble having playedthe tambourine upon it, to accompany her last words,—I felt fearfullysensible of the great convenience that the hulks were handy for me. I wasclearly on my way there. I had begun by asking questions, and I was going torob Mrs. Joe.Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thought that fewpeople know what secrecy there is in the young under terror. No matter howunreasonable the terror, so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of theyoung man who wanted my heart and liver; I was in mortal terror of myinterlocutor with the iron leg; I was in mortal terror of myself, from whom anawful promise had been extracted; I had no hope of deliverance through myall-powerful sister, who repulsed me at every turn; I am afraid to think ofwhat I might have done on requirement, in the secrecy of my terror.If I slept at all that night, it was only to imagine myself drifting down theriver on a strong spring-tide, to the Hulks; a ghostly pirate calling out to methrough a speaking-trumpet, as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had bettercome ashore and be hanged there at once, and not put it off. I was afraid tosleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the first faint dawn ofmorning I must rob the pantry. There was no doing it in the night, for therewas no getting a light by easy friction then; to have got one I must havestruck it out of flint and steel, and have made a noise like the very piratehimself rattling his chains.As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window was shot withgrey, I got up and went downstairs; every board upon the way, and every crackin every board calling after me, “Stop thief!” and “Get up,Mrs. Joe!” In the pantry, which was far more abundantly supplied thanusual, owing to the season, I was very much alarmed by a hare hanging up by theheels, whom I rather thought I caught, when my back was half turned, winking. Ihad no time for verification, no time for selection, no time for anything, forI had no time to spare. I stole some bread, some rind of cheese, about half ajar of mincemeat (which I tied up in my pocket-handkerchief with my lastnight’s slice), some brandy from a stone bottle (which I decanted into aglass bottle I had secretly used for making that intoxicating fluid,Spanish-liquorice-water, up in my room: diluting the stone bottle from a jug inthe kitchen cupboard), a meat bone with very little on it, and a beautifulround compact pork pie. I was nearly going away without the pie, but I wastempted to mount upon a shelf, to look what it was that was put away socarefully in a covered earthenware dish in a corner, and I found it was thepie, and I took it in the hope that it was not intended for early use, andwould not be missed for some time.There was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge; I unlocked andunbolted that door, and got a file from among Joe’s tools. Then I put thefastenings as I had found them, opened the door at which I had entered when Iran home last night, shut it, and ran for the misty marshes.Chapter III.It wasa rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the damp lying on the outside of mylittle window, as if some goblin had been crying there all night, and using thewindow for a pocket-handkerchief. Now, I saw the damp lying on the bare hedgesand spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders’ webs; hanging itselffrom twig to twig and blade to blade. On every rail and gate, wet lay clammy,and the marsh mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the post directingpeople to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for theynever came there—was invisible to me until I was quite close under it.Then, as I looked up at it, while it dripped, it seemed to my oppressedconscience like a phantom devoting me to the Hulks.The mist was heavier yet when I got out upon the marshes, so that instead of myrunning at everything, everything seemed to run at me. This was verydisagreeable to a guilty mind. The gates and dikes and banks came bursting atme through the mist, as if they cried as plainly as could be, “A boy withsomebody else’s pork pie! Stop him!” The cattle came upon me withlike suddenness, staring out of their eyes, and steaming out of their nostrils,“Halloa, young thief!” One black ox, with a white cravaton,—who even had to my awakened conscience something of a clericalair,—fixed me so obstinately with his eyes, and moved his blunt headround in such an accusatory manner as I moved round, that I blubbered out tohim, “I couldn’t help it, sir! It wasn’t for myself I tookit!” Upon which he put down his head, blew a cloud of smoke out of hisnose, and vanished with a kick-up of his hind-legs and a flourish of his tail.All this time, I was getting on towards the river; but however fast I went, Icouldn’t warm my feet, to which the damp cold seemed riveted, as the ironwas riveted to the leg of the man I was running to meet. I knew my way to theBattery, pretty straight, for I had been down there on a Sunday with Joe, andJoe, sitting on an old gun, had told me that when I was ’prentice to him,regularly bound, we would have such Larks there! However, in the confusion ofthe mist, I found myself at last too far to the right, and consequently had totry back along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the mud andthe stakes that staked the tide out. Making my way along here with alldespatch, I had just crossed a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery,and had just scrambled up the mound beyond the ditch, when I saw the mansitting before me. His back was towards me, and he had his arms folded, and wasnodding forward, heavy with sleep.I thought he would be more glad if I came upon him with his breakfast, in thatunexpected manner, so I went forward softly and touched him on the shoulder. Heinstantly jumped up, and it was not the same man, but another man!And yet this man was dressed in coarse grey, too, and had a great iron on hisleg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and was everything that the other manwas; except that he had not the same face, and had a flat broad-brimmedlow-crowned felt hat on. All this I saw in a moment, for I had only a moment tosee it in: he swore an oath at me, made a hit at me,—it was a round weakblow that missed me and almost knocked himself down, for it made himstumble,—and then he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went, and Ilost him.“It’s the young man!” I thought, feeling my heart shoot as Iidentified him. I dare say I should have felt a pain in my liver, too, if I hadknown where it was.I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the rightman,—hugging himself and limping to and fro, as if he had never all nightleft off hugging and limping,—waiting for me. He was awfully cold, to besure. I half expected to see him drop down before my face and die of deadlycold. His eyes looked so awfully hungry too, that when I handed him the fileand he laid it down on the grass, it occurred to me he would have tried to eatit, if he had not seen my bundle. He did not turn me upside down this time toget at what I had, but left me right side upwards while I opened the bundle andemptied my pockets.“What’s in the bottle, boy?” said he.“Brandy,” said I.He was already handing mincemeat down his throat in the most curiousmanner,—more like a man who was putting it away somewhere in a violenthurry, than a man who was eating it,—but he left off to take some of theliquor. He shivered all the while so violently, that it was quite as much as hecould do to keep the neck of the bottle between his teeth, without biting itoff.“I think you have got the ague,” said I.“I’m much of your opinion, boy,” said he.“It’s bad about here,” I told him. “You’ve beenlying out on the meshes, and they’re dreadful aguish. Rheumatictoo.”“I’ll eat my breakfast afore they’re the death of me,”said he. “I’d do that, if I was going to be strung up to that theregallows as there is over there, directly afterwards. I’ll beat theshivers so far, I’ll bet you.”He was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie, all at once:staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all round us, and oftenstopping—even stopping his jaws—to listen. Some real or fanciedsound, some clink upon the river or breathing of beast upon the marsh, now gavehim a start, and he said, suddenly,—“You’re not a deceiving imp? You brought no one with you?”“No, sir! No!”“Nor giv’ no one the office to follow you?”“No!”“Well,” said he, “I believe you. You’d be but a fierceyoung hound indeed, if at your time of life you could help to hunt a wretchedwarmint hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretched warmintis!”Something clicked in his throat as if he had works in him like a clock, and wasgoing to strike. And he smeared his ragged rough sleeve over his eyes.Pitying his desolation, and watching him as he gradually settled down upon thepie, I made bold to say, “I am glad you enjoy it.”“Did you speak?”“I said I was glad you enjoyed it.”“Thankee, my boy. I do.”I had often watched a large dog of ours eating his food; and I now noticed adecided similarity between the dog’s way of eating, and the man’s.The man took strong sharp sudden bites, just like the dog. He swallowed, orrather snapped up, every mouthful, too soon and too fast; and he lookedsideways here and there while he ate, as if he thought there was danger inevery direction of somebody’s coming to take the pie away. He wasaltogether too unsettled in his mind over it, to appreciate it comfortably Ithought, or to have anybody to dine with him, without making a chop with hisjaws at the visitor. In all of which particulars he was very like the dog.“I am afraid you won’t leave any of it for him,” said I,timidly; after a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness ofmaking the remark. “There’s no more to be got where that camefrom.” It was the certainty of this fact that impelled me to offer thehint.“Leave any for him? Who’s him?” said my friend, stopping inhis crunching of pie-crust.“The young man. That you spoke of. That was hid with you.”“Oh ah!” he returned, with something like a gruff laugh.“Him? Yes, yes! He don’t want no wittles.”“I thought he looked as if he did,” said I.The man stopped eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny and thegreatest surprise.“Looked? When?”“Just now.”“Where?”“Yonder,” said I, pointing; “over there, where I found himnodding asleep, and thought it was you.”He held me by the collar and stared at me so, that I began to think his firstidea about cutting my throat had revived.“Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat,” I explained,trembling; “and—and”—I was very anxious to put thisdelicately—“and with—the same reason for wanting to borrow afile. Didn’t you hear the cannon last night?”“Then there was firing!” he said to himself.“I wonder you shouldn’t have been sure of that,” I returned,“for we heard it up at home, and that’s farther away, and we wereshut in besides.”“Why, see now!” said he. “When a man’s alone on theseflats, with a light head and a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, hehears nothin’ all night, but guns firing, and voices calling. Hears? Hesees the soldiers, with their red coats lighted up by the torches carriedafore, closing in round him. Hears his number called, hears himself challenged,hears the rattle of the muskets, hears the orders ‘Make ready! Present!Cover him steady, men!’ and is laid hands on—and there’snothin’! Why, if I see one pursuing party last night—coming up inorder, Damn ’em, with their tramp, tramp—I see a hundred. And as tofiring! Why, I see the mist shake with the cannon, arter it was broadday,—But this man”; he had said all the rest, as if he hadforgotten my being there; “did you notice anything in him?”“He had a badly bruised face,” said I, recalling what I hardly knewI knew.“Not here?” exclaimed the man, striking his left cheek mercilessly,with the flat of his hand.“Yes, there!”“Where is he?” He crammed what little food was left, into thebreast of his grey jacket. “Show me the way he went. I’ll pull himdown, like a bloodhound. Curse this iron on my sore leg! Give us hold of thefile, boy.”I indicated in what direction the mist had shrouded the other man, and helooked up at it for an instant. But he was down on the rank wet grass, filingat his iron like a madman, and not minding me or minding his own leg, which hadan old chafe upon it and was bloody, but which he handled as roughly as if ithad no more feeling in it than the file. I was very much afraid of him again,now that he had worked himself into this fierce hurry, and I was likewise verymuch afraid of keeping away from home any longer. I told him I must go, but hetook no notice, so I thought the best thing I could do was to slip off. Thelast I saw of him, his head was bent over his knee and he was working hard athis fetter, muttering impatient imprecations at it and at his leg. The last Iheard of him, I stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going.Chapter IV.Ifully expected to find a Constable in the kitchen, waiting to take me up. Butnot only was there no Constable there, but no discovery had yet been made ofthe robbery. Mrs. Joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for thefestivities of the day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen doorstep to keephim out of the dust-pan,—an article into which his destiny always ledhim, sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping the floors of herestablishment.“And where the deuce ha’ you been?” was Mrs.Joe’s Christmas salutation, when I and my conscience showed ourselves.I said I had been down to hear the Carols. “Ah! well!” observedMrs. Joe. “You might ha’ done worse.” Not a doubt of that Ithought.“Perhaps if I warn’t a blacksmith’s wife, and (what’sthe same thing) a slave with her apron never off, I should have been tohear the Carols,” said Mrs. Joe. “I’m rather partial toCarols, myself, and that’s the best of reasons for my never hearingany.”Joe, who had ventured into the kitchen after me as the dustpan had retiredbefore us, drew the back of his hand across his nose with a conciliatory air,when Mrs. Joe darted a look at him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretlycrossed his two forefingers, and exhibited them to me, as our token that Mrs.Joe was in a cross temper. This was so much her normal state, that Joe and Iwould often, for weeks together, be, as to our fingers, like monumentalCrusaders as to their legs.We were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled pork andgreens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A handsome mince-pie had been madeyesterday morning (which accounted for the mincemeat not being missed), and thepudding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements occasioned us tobe cut off unceremoniously in respect of breakfast; “for Iain’t,” said Mrs. Joe,—“I ain’t a-going to haveno formal cramming and busting and washing up now, with what I’ve gotbefore me, I promise you!”So, we had our slices served out, as if we were two thousand troops on a forcedmarch instead of a man and boy at home; and we took gulps of milk and water,with apologetic countenances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime, Mrs.Joe put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered flounce across thewide chimney to replace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlouracross the passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, but passed therest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to thefour little white crockery poodles on the mantel-shelf, each with a black noseand a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the counterpart of the other.Mrs. Joe was a very clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making hercleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanlinessis next to Godliness, and some people do the same by their religion.My sister, having so much to do, was going to church vicariously, that is tosay, Joe and I were going. In his working-clothes, Joe was a well-knitcharacteristic-looking blacksmith; in his holiday clothes, he was more like ascarecrow in good circumstances, than anything else. Nothing that he wore thenfitted him or seemed to belong to him; and everything that he wore then grazedhim. On the present festive occasion he emerged from his room, when the blithebells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of Sunday penitentials.As to me, I think my sister must have had some general idea that I was a youngoffender whom an Accoucheur Policeman had taken up (on my birthday) anddelivered over to her, to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty ofthe law. I was always treated as if I had insisted on being born in oppositionto the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dissuadingarguments of my best friends. Even when I was taken to have a new suit ofclothes, the tailor had orders to make them like a kind of Reformatory, and onno account to let me have the free use of my limbs.Joe and I going to church, therefore, must have been a moving spectacle forcompassionate minds. Yet, what I suffered outside was nothing to what Iunderwent within. The terrors that had assailed me whenever Mrs. Joe had gonenear the pantry, or out of the room, were only to be equalled by the remorsewith which my mind dwelt on what my hands had done. Under the weight of mywicked secret, I pondered whether the Church would be powerful enough to shieldme from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if I divulged to thatestablishment. I conceived the idea that the time when the banns were read andwhen the clergyman said, “Ye are now to declare it!” would be thetime for me to rise and propose a private conference in the vestry. I am farfrom being sure that I might not have astonished our small congregation byresorting to this extreme measure, but for its being Christmas Day and noSunday.Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at church, was to dine with us; and Mr. Hubble thewheelwright and Mrs. Hubble; and Uncle Pumblechook (Joe’s uncle, but Mrs.Joe appropriated him), who was a well-to-do cornchandler in the nearest town,and drove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one. When Joe andI got home, we found the table laid, and Mrs. Joe dressed, and the dinnerdressing, and the front door unlocked (it never was at any other time) for thecompany to enter by, and everything most splendid. And still, not a word of therobbery.The time came, without bringing with it any relief to my feelings, and thecompany came. Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining baldforehead, had a deep voice which he was uncommonly proud of; indeed it wasunderstood among his acquaintance that if you could only give him his head, hewould read the clergyman into fits; he himself confessed that if the Church was“thrown open,” meaning to competition, he would not despair ofmaking his mark in it. The Church not being “thrown open,” he was,as I have said, our clerk. But he punished the Amens tremendously; and when hegave out the psalm,—always giving the whole verse,—he looked allround the congregation first, as much as to say, “You have heard myfriend overhead; oblige me with your opinion of this style!”I opened the door to the company,—making believe that it was a habit ofours to open that door,—and I opened it first to Mr. Wopsle, next to Mr.and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all to Uncle Pumblechook. N.B. I was notallowed to call him uncle, under the severest penalties.“Mrs. Joe,” said Uncle Pumblechook, a large hard-breathingmiddle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, and sandyhair standing upright on his head, so that he looked as if he had just been allbut choked, and had that moment come to, “I have brought you as thecompliments of the season—I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of sherrywine—and I have brought you, Mum, a bottle of port wine.”Every Christmas Day he presented himself, as a profound novelty, with exactlythe same words, and carrying the two bottles like dumb-bells. Every ChristmasDay, Mrs. Joe replied, as she now replied, “O, Un—clePum-ble—chook! This is kind!” Every Christmas Day, heretorted, as he now retorted, “It’s no more than your merits. Andnow are you all bobbish, and how’s Sixpennorth of halfpence?”meaning me.We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for the nuts andoranges and apples to the parlour; which was a change very like Joe’schange from his working-clothes to his Sunday dress. My sister was uncommonlylively on the present occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in thesociety of Mrs. Hubble than in other company. I remember Mrs. Hubble as alittle curly sharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenileposition, because she had married Mr. Hubble,—I don’t know at whatremote period,—when she was much younger than he. I remember Mr Hubble asa tough, high-shouldered, stooping old man, of a sawdusty fragrance, with hislegs extraordinarily wide apart: so that in my short days I always saw somemiles of open country between them when I met him coming up the lane.Among this good company I should have felt myself, even if I hadn’trobbed the pantry, in a false position. Not because I was squeezed in at anacute angle of the tablecloth, with the table in my chest, and thePumblechookian elbow in my eye, nor because I was not allowed to speak (Ididn’t want to speak), nor because I was regaled with the scaly tips ofthe drumsticks of the fowls, and with those obscure corners of pork of whichthe pig, when living, had had the least reason to be vain. No; I should nothave minded that, if they would only have left me alone. But theywouldn’t leave me alone. They seemed to think the opportunity lost, ifthey failed to point the conversation at me, every now and then, and stick thepoint into me. I might have been an unfortunate little bull in a Spanish arena,I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.It began the moment we sat down to dinner. Mr. Wopsle said grace withtheatrical declamation,—as it now appears to me, something like areligious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with Richard the Third,—and endedwith the very proper aspiration that we might be truly grateful. Upon which mysister fixed me with her eye, and said, in a low reproachful voice, “Doyou hear that? Be grateful.”“Especially,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “be grateful, boy, tothem which brought you up by hand.”Mrs. Hubble shook her head, and contemplating me with a mournful presentimentthat I should come to no good, asked, “Why is it that the young are nevergrateful?” This moral mystery seemed too much for the company until Mr.Hubble tersely solved it by saying, “Naterally wicious.” Everybodythen murmured “True!” and looked at me in a particularly unpleasantand personal manner.Joe’s station and influence were something feebler (if possible) whenthere was company than when there was none. But he always aided and comfortedme when he could, in some way of his own, and he always did so at dinner-timeby giving me gravy, if there were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joespooned into my plate, at this point, about half a pint.A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the sermon with someseverity, and intimated—in the usual hypothetical case of the Churchbeing “thrown open”—what kind of sermon he would havegiven them. After favouring them with some heads of that discourse, he remarkedthat he considered the subject of the day’s homily, ill chosen; which wasthe less excusable, he added, when there were so many subjects “goingabout.”“True again,” said Uncle Pumblechook. “You’ve hit it,sir! Plenty of subjects going about, for them that know how to put salt upontheir tails. That’s what’s wanted. A man needn’t go far tofind a subject, if he’s ready with his salt-box.” Mr. Pumblechookadded, after a short interval of reflection, “Look at Pork alone.There’s a subject! If you want a subject, look at Pork!”“True, sir. Many a moral for the young,” returned Mr.Wopsle,—and I knew he was going to lug me in, before he said it;“might be deduced from that text.”(“You listen to this,” said my sister to me, in a severeparenthesis.)Joe gave me some more gravy.“Swine,” pursued Mr. Wopsle, in his deepest voice, and pointing hisfork at my blushes, as if he were mentioning my Christianname,—“swine were the companions of the prodigal. The gluttony ofSwine is put before us, as an example to the young.” (I thought thispretty well in him who had been praising up the pork for being so plump andjuicy.) “What is detestable in a pig is more detestable in a boy.”“Or girl,” suggested Mr. Hubble.“Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble,” assented Mr. Wopsle, ratherirritably, “but there is no girl present.”“Besides,” said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on me, “thinkwhat you’ve got to be grateful for. If you’d been born aSqueaker—”“He was, if ever a child was,” said my sister, mostemphatically.Joe gave me some more gravy.“Well, but I mean a four-footed Squeaker,” said Mr. Pumblechook.“If you had been born such, would you have been here now? Notyou—”“Unless in that form,” said Mr. Wopsle, nodding towards the dish.“But I don’t mean in that form, sir,” returned Mr.Pumblechook, who had an objection to being interrupted; “I mean, enjoyinghimself with his elders and betters, and improving himself with theirconversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury. Would he have been doing that?No, he wouldn’t. And what would have been your destination?”turning on me again. “You would have been disposed of for so manyshillings according to the market price of the article, and Dunstable thebutcher would have come up to you as you lay in your straw, and he would havewhipped you under his left arm, and with his right he would have tucked up hisfrock to get a penknife from out of his waistcoat-pocket, and he would haveshed your blood and had your life. No bringing up by hand then. Not a bit ofit!”Joe offered me more gravy, which I was afraid to take.“He was a world of trouble to you, ma’am,” said Mrs. Hubble,commiserating my sister.“Trouble?” echoed my sister; “trouble?” and thenentered on a fearful catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of, andall the acts of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the high places I hadtumbled from, and all the low places I had tumbled into, and all the injuries Ihad done myself, and all the times she had wished me in my grave, and I hadcontumaciously refused to go there.I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, with theirnoses. Perhaps, they became the restless people they were, in consequence.Anyhow, Mr. Wopsle’s Roman nose so aggravated me, during the recital ofmy misdemeanours, that I should have liked to pull it until he howled. But, allI had endured up to this time was nothing in comparison with the awful feelingsthat took possession of me when the pause was broken which ensued upon mysister’s recital, and in which pause everybody had looked at me (as Ifelt painfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence.“Yet,” said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently back to thetheme from which they had strayed, “Pork—regarded as biled—isrich, too; ain’t it?”“Have a little brandy, uncle,” said my sister.O Heavens, it had come at last! He would find it was weak, he would say it wasweak, and I was lost! I held tight to the leg of the table under the cloth,with both hands, and awaited my fate.My sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone bottle, andpoured his brandy out: no one else taking any. The wretched man trifled withhis glass,—took it up, looked at it through the light, put itdown,—prolonged my misery. All this time Mrs. Joe and Joe were brisklyclearing the table for the pie and pudding.I couldn’t keep my eyes off him. Always holding tight by the leg of thetable with my hands and feet, I saw the miserable creature finger his glassplayfully, take it up, smile, throw his head back, and drink the brandy off.Instantly afterwards, the company were seized with unspeakable consternation,owing to his springing to his feet, turning round several times in an appallingspasmodic whooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; he then becamevisible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating, making themost hideous faces, and apparently out of his mind.I held on tight, while Mrs. Joe and Joe ran to him. I didn’t know how Ihad done it, but I had no doubt I had murdered him somehow. In my dreadfulsituation, it was a relief when he was brought back, and surveying the companyall round as if they had disagreed with him, sank down into his chairwith the one significant gasp, “Tar!”I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. I knew he would be worse byand by. I moved the table, like a Medium of the present day, by the vigor of myunseen hold upon it.“Tar!” cried my sister, in amazement. “Why, how ever couldTar come there?”But, Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen, wouldn’t hearthe word, wouldn’t hear of the subject, imperiously waved it all awaywith his hand, and asked for hot gin and water. My sister, who had begun to bealarmingly meditative, had to employ herself actively in getting the gin, thehot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel, and mixing them. For the time beingat least, I was saved. I still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched itnow with the fervor of gratitude.By degrees, I became calm enough to release my grasp and partake of pudding.Mr. Pumblechook partook of pudding. All partook of pudding. The courseterminated, and Mr. Pumblechook had begun to beam under the genial influence ofgin and water. I began to think I should get over the day, when my sister saidto Joe, “Clean plates,—cold.”I clutched the leg of the table again immediately, and pressed it to my bosomas if it had been the companion of my youth and friend of my soul. I foresawwhat was coming, and I felt that this time I really was gone.“You must taste,” said my sister, addressing the guests with herbest grace—“you must taste, to finish with, such a delightful anddelicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s!”Must they! Let them not hope to taste it!“You must know,” said my sister, rising, “it’s a pie; asavory pork pie.”The company murmured their compliments. Uncle Pumblechook, sensible of havingdeserved well of his fellow-creatures, said,—quite vivaciously, allthings considered,—“Well, Mrs. Joe, we’ll do our bestendeavours; let us have a cut at this same pie.”My sister went out to get it. I heard her steps proceed to the pantry. I sawMr. Pumblechook balance his knife. I saw reawakening appetite in the Romannostrils of Mr. Wopsle. I heard Mr. Hubble remark that “a bit of savorypork pie would lay atop of anything you could mention, and do no harm,”and I heard Joe say, “You shall have some, Pip.” I have never beenabsolutely certain whether I uttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit,or in the bodily hearing of the company. I felt that I could bear no more, andthat I must run away. I released the leg of the table, and ran for my life.But I ran no farther than the house door, for there I ran head-foremost into aparty of soldiers with their muskets, one of whom held out a pair of handcuffsto me, saying, “Here you are, look sharp, come on!”Chapter V.Theapparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the but-ends of their loadedmuskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party to rise from table inconfusion, and caused Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed, to stopshort and stare, in her wondering lament of “Gracious goodness graciousme, what’s gone—with the—pie!”The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Joe stood staring; at whichcrisis I partially recovered the use of my senses. It was the sergeant who hadspoken to me, and he was now looking round at the company, with his handcuffsinvitingly extended towards them in his right hand, and his left on myshoulder.“Excuse me, ladies and gentleman,” said the sergeant, “but asI have mentioned at the door to this smart young shaver,” (which hehadn’t), “I am on a chase in the name of the king, and I want theblacksmith.”“And pray what might you want with him?” retorted my sister,quick to resent his being wanted at all.“Missis,” returned the gallant sergeant, “speaking formyself, I should reply, the honour and pleasure of his fine wife’sacquaintance; speaking for the king, I answer, a little job done.”This was received as rather neat in the sergeant; insomuch that Mr. Pumblechookcried audibly, “Good again!”“You see, blacksmith,” said the sergeant, who had by this timepicked out Joe with his eye, “we have had an accident with these, and Ifind the lock of one of ’em goes wrong, and the coupling don’t actpretty. As they are wanted for immediate service, will you throw your eye overthem?”Joe threw his eye over them, and pronounced that the job would necessitate thelighting of his forge fire, and would take nearer two hours than one.“Will it? Then will you set about it at once, blacksmith?” said theoff-hand sergeant, “as it’s on his Majesty’s service. And ifmy men can bear a hand anywhere, they’ll make themselves useful.”With that, he called to his men, who came trooping into the kitchen one afteranother, and piled their arms in a corner. And then they stood about, assoldiers do; now, with their hands loosely clasped before them; now, resting aknee or a shoulder; now, easing a belt or a pouch; now, opening the door tospit stiffly over their high stocks, out into the yard.All these things I saw without then knowing that I saw them, for I was in anagony of apprehension. But beginning to perceive that the handcuffs were notfor me, and that the military had so far got the better of the pie as to put itin the background, I collected a little more of my scattered wits.“Would you give me the time?” said the sergeant, addressing himselfto Mr. Pumblechook, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified theinference that he was equal to the time.“It’s just gone half past two.”“That’s not so bad,” said the sergeant, reflecting;“even if I was forced to halt here nigh two hours, that’ll do. Howfar might you call yourselves from the marshes, hereabouts? Not above a mile, Ireckon?”“Just a mile,” said Mrs. Joe.“That’ll do. We begin to close in upon ’em about dusk. Alittle before dusk, my orders are. That’ll do.”“Convicts, sergeant?” asked Mr. Wopsle, in a matter-of-course way.“Ay!” returned the sergeant, “two. They’re pretty wellknown to be out on the marshes still, and they won’t try to get clear of’em before dusk. Anybody here seen anything of any such game?”Everybody, myself excepted, said no, with confidence. Nobody thought of me.“Well!” said the sergeant, “they’ll find themselvestrapped in a circle, I expect, sooner than they count on. Now, blacksmith! Ifyou’re ready, his Majesty the King is.”Joe had got his coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and his leather apron on,and passed into the forge. One of the soldiers opened its wooden windows,another lighted the fire, another turned to at the bellows, the rest stoodround the blaze, which was soon roaring. Then Joe began to hammer and clink,hammer and clink, and we all looked on.The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the general attention,but even made my sister liberal. She drew a pitcher of beer from the cask forthe soldiers, and invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy. But Mr.Pumblechook said, sharply, “Give him wine, Mum. I’ll engagethere’s no tar in that:” so, the sergeant thanked him and said thatas he preferred his drink without tar, he would take wine, if it was equallyconvenient. When it was given him, he drank his Majesty’s health andcompliments of the season, and took it all at a mouthful and smacked his lips.“Good stuff, eh, sergeant?” said Mr. Pumblechook.“I’ll tell you something,” returned the sergeant; “Isuspect that stuff’s of your providing.”Mr. Pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, “Ay, ay? Why?”“Because,” returned the sergeant, clapping him on the shoulder,“you’re a man that knows what’s what.”“D’ye think so?” said Mr. Pumblechook, with his former laugh.“Have another glass!”“With you. Hob and nob,” returned the sergeant. “The top ofmine to the foot of yours,—the foot of yours to the top ofmine,—Ring once, ring twice,—the best tune on the Musical Glasses!Your health. May you live a thousand years, and never be a worse judge of theright sort than you are at the present moment of your life!”The sergeant tossed off his glass again and seemed quite ready for anotherglass. I noticed that Mr. Pumblechook in his hospitality appeared to forgetthat he had made a present of the wine, but took the bottle from Mrs. Joe andhad all the credit of handing it about in a gush of joviality. Even I got some.And he was so very free of the wine that he even called for the other bottle,and handed that about with the same liberality, when the first was gone.As I watched them while they all stood clustering about the forge, enjoyingthemselves so much, I thought what terrible good sauce for a dinner my fugitivefriend on the marshes was. They had not enjoyed themselves a quarter so much,before the entertainment was brightened with the excitement he furnished. Andnow, when they were all in lively anticipation of “the twovillains” being taken, and when the bellows seemed to roar for thefugitives, the fire to flare for them, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit ofthem, Joe to hammer and clink for them, and all the murky shadows on the wallto shake at them in menace as the blaze rose and sank, and the red-hot sparksdropped and died, the pale afternoon outside almost seemed in my pitying youngfancy to have turned pale on their account, poor wretches.At last, Joe’s job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped. As Joegot on his coat, he mustered courage to propose that some of us should go downwith the soldiers and see what came of the hunt. Mr. Pumblechook and Mr. Hubbledeclined, on the plea of a pipe and ladies’ society; but Mr. Wopsle saidhe would go, if Joe would. Joe said he was agreeable, and would take me, ifMrs. Joe approved. We never should have got leave to go, I am sure, but forMrs. Joe’s curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. As it was,she merely stipulated, “If you bring the boy back with his head blown tobits by a musket, don’t look to me to put it together again.”The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from Mr. Pumblechookas from a comrade; though I doubt if he were quite as fully sensible of thatgentleman’s merits under arid conditions, as when something moist wasgoing. His men resumed their muskets and fell in. Mr. Wopsle, Joe, and I,received strict charge to keep in the rear, and to speak no word after wereached the marshes. When we were all out in the raw air and were steadilymoving towards our business, I treasonably whispered to Joe, “I hope,Joe, we shan’t find them.” and Joe whispered to me,“I’d give a shilling if they had cut and run, Pip.”We were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weather was cold andthreatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darkness coming on, and thepeople had good fires in-doors and were keeping the day. A few faces hurried toglowing windows and looked after us, but none came out. We passed thefinger-post, and held straight on to the churchyard. There we were stopped afew minutes by a signal from the sergeant’s hand, while two or three ofhis men dispersed themselves among the graves, and also examined the porch.They came in again without finding anything, and then we struck out on the openmarshes, through the gate at the side of the churchyard. A bitter sleet camerattling against us here on the east wind, and Joe took me on his back.Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little thought I hadbeen within eight or nine hours and had seen both men hiding, I considered forthe first time, with great dread, if we should come upon them, would myparticular convict suppose that it was I who had brought the soldiers there? Hehad asked me if I was a deceiving imp, and he had said I should be a fierceyoung hound if I joined the hunt against him. Would he believe that I was bothimp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed him?It was of no use asking myself this question now. There I was, on Joe’sback, and there was Joe beneath me, charging at the ditches like a hunter, andstimulating Mr. Wopsle not to tumble on his Roman nose, and to keep up with us.The soldiers were in front of us, extending into a pretty wide line with aninterval between man and man. We were taking the course I had begun with, andfrom which I had diverged in the mist. Either the mist was not out again yet,or the wind had dispelled it. Under the low red glare of sunset, the beacon,and the gibbet, and the mound of the Battery, and the opposite shore of theriver, were plain, though all of a watery lead colour.With my heart thumping like a blacksmith at Joe’s broad shoulder, Ilooked all about for any sign of the convicts. I could see none, I could hearnone. Mr. Wopsle had greatly alarmed me more than once, by his blowing and hardbreathing; but I knew the sounds by this time, and could dissociate them fromthe object of pursuit. I got a dreadful start, when I thought I heard the filestill going; but it was only a sheep-bell. The sheep stopped in their eatingand looked timidly at us; and the cattle, their heads turned from the wind andsleet, stared angrily as if they held us responsible for both annoyances; but,except these things, and the shudder of the dying day in every blade of grass,there was no break in the bleak stillness of the marshes.The soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old Battery, and we weremoving on a little way behind them, when, all of a sudden, we all stopped. Forthere had reached us on the wings of the wind and rain, a long shout. It wasrepeated. It was at a distance towards the east, but it was long and loud. Nay,there seemed to be two or more shouts raised together,—if one might judgefrom a confusion in the sound.To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under theirbreath, when Joe and I came up. After another moment’s listening, Joe(who was a good judge) agreed, and Mr. Wopsle (who was a bad judge) agreed. Thesergeant, a decisive man, ordered that the sound should not be answered, butthat the course should be changed, and that his men should make towards it“at the double.” So we slanted to the right (where the East was),and Joe pounded away so wonderfully, that I had to hold on tight to keep myseat.It was a run indeed now, and what Joe called, in the only two words he spokeall the time, “a Winder.” Down banks and up banks, and over gates,and splashing into dikes, and breaking among coarse rushes: no man cared wherehe went. As we came nearer to the shouting, it became more and more apparentthat it was made by more than one voice. Sometimes, it seemed to stopaltogether, and then the soldiers stopped. When it broke out again, thesoldiers made for it at a greater rate than ever, and we after them. After awhile, we had so run it down, that we could hear one voice calling“Murder!” and another voice, “Convicts! Runaways! Guard! Thisway for the runaway convicts!” Then both voices would seem to be stifledin a struggle, and then would break out again. And when it had come to this,the soldiers ran like deer, and Joe too.The sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, and two of hismen ran in close upon him. Their pieces were cocked and levelled when we allran in.“Here are both men!” panted the sergeant, struggling at the bottomof a ditch. “Surrender, you two! and confound you for two wild beasts!Come asunder!”Water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were being sworn, and blowswere being struck, when some more men went down into the ditch to help thesergeant, and dragged out, separately, my convict and the other one. Both werebleeding and panting and execrating and struggling; but of course I knew themboth directly.“Mind!” said my convict, wiping blood from his face with his raggedsleeves, and shaking torn hair from his fingers: “I took him!I give him up to you! Mind that!”“It’s not much to be particular about,” said the sergeant;“it’ll do you small good, my man, being in the same plightyourself. Handcuffs there!”“I don’t expect it to do me any good. I don’t want it to dome more good than it does now,” said my convict, with a greedy laugh.“I took him. He knows it. That’s enough for me.”The other convict was livid to look at, and, in addition to the old bruisedleft side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn all over. He could not somuch as get his breath to speak, until they were both separately handcuffed,but leaned upon a soldier to keep himself from falling.“Take notice, guard,—he tried to murder me,” were his firstwords.“Tried to murder him?” said my convict, disdainfully. “Try,and not do it? I took him, and giv’ him up; that’s what I done. Inot only prevented him getting off the marshes, but I dragged himhere,—dragged him this far on his way back. He’s a gentleman, ifyou please, this villain. Now, the Hulks has got its gentleman again, throughme. Murder him? Worth my while, too, to murder him, when I could do worse anddrag him back!”The other one still gasped, “He tried—he tried-to—murder me.Bear—bear witness.”“Lookee here!” said my convict to the sergeant.“Single-handed I got clear of the prison-ship; I made a dash and I doneit. I could ha’ got clear of these death-cold flats likewise—lookat my leg: you won’t find much iron on it—if I hadn’t madethe discovery that he was here. Let him go free? Let himprofit by the means as I found out? Let him make a tool of me afresh andagain? Once more? No, no, no. If I had died at the bottom there,” and hemade an emphatic swing at the ditch with his manacled hands, “I’dhave held to him with that grip, that you should have been safe to find him inmy hold.”The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion,repeated, “He tried to murder me. I should have been a dead man if youhad not come up.”“He lies!” said my convict, with fierce energy. “He’s aliar born, and he’ll die a liar. Look at his face; ain’t it writtenthere? Let him turn those eyes of his on me. I defy him to do it.”The other, with an effort at a scornful smile, which could not, however,collect the nervous working of his mouth into any set expression, looked at thesoldiers, and looked about at the marshes and at the sky, but certainly did notlook at the speaker.“Do you see him?” pursued my convict. “Do you see what avillain he is? Do you see those grovelling and wandering eyes? That’s howhe looked when we were tried together. He never looked at me.”The other, always working and working his dry lips and turning his eyesrestlessly about him far and near, did at last turn them for a moment on thespeaker, with the words, “You are not much to look at,” and with ahalf-taunting glance at the bound hands. At that point, my convict became sofrantically exasperated, that he would have rushed upon him but for theinterposition of the soldiers. “Didn’t I tell you,” said theother convict then, “that he would murder me, if he could?” And anyone could see that he shook with fear, and that there broke out upon his lipscurious white flakes, like thin snow.“Enough of this parley,” said the sergeant. “Light thosetorches.”As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, went down on hisknee to open it, my convict looked round him for the first time, and saw me. Ihad alighted from Joe’s back on the brink of the ditch when we came up,and had not moved since. I looked at him eagerly when he looked at me, andslightly moved my hands and shook my head. I had been waiting for him to see methat I might try to assure him of my innocence. It was not at all expressed tome that he even comprehended my intention, for he gave me a look that I did notunderstand, and it all passed in a moment. But if he had looked at me for anhour or for a day, I could not have remembered his face ever afterwards, ashaving been more attentive.The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or fourtorches, and took one himself and distributed the others. It had been almostdark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon afterwards very dark.Before we departed from that spot, four soldiers standing in a ring, firedtwice into the air. Presently we saw other torches kindled at some distancebehind us, and others on the marshes on the opposite bank of the river.“All right,” said the sergeant. “March.”We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of us with a sound thatseemed to burst something inside my ear. “You are expected onboard,” said the sergeant to my convict; “they know you are coming.Don’t straggle, my man. Close up here.”The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separate guard. I hadhold of Joe’s hand now, and Joe carried one of the torches. Mr. Wopslehad been for going back, but Joe was resolved to see it out, so we went on withthe party. There was a reasonably good path now, mostly on the edge of theriver, with a divergence here and there where a dike came, with a miniaturewindmill on it and a muddy sluice-gate. When I looked round, I could see theother lights coming in after us. The torches we carried dropped great blotchesof fire upon the track, and I could see those, too, lying smoking and flaring.I could see nothing else but black darkness. Our lights warmed the air about uswith their pitchy blaze, and the two prisoners seemed rather to like that, asthey limped along in the midst of the muskets. We could not go fast, because oftheir lameness; and they were so spent, that two or three times we had to haltwhile they rested.After an hour or so of this travelling, we came to a rough wooden hut and alanding-place. There was a guard in the hut, and they challenged, and thesergeant answered. Then, we went into the hut, where there was a smell oftobacco and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets,and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without themachinery, capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once. Three or foursoldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats were not much interested in us,but just lifted their heads and took a sleepy stare, and then lay down again.The sergeant made some kind of report, and some entry in a book, and then theconvict whom I call the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go onboard first.My convict never looked at me, except that once. While we stood in the hut, hestood before the fire looking thoughtfully at it, or putting up his feet byturns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully at them as if he pitied them fortheir recent adventures. Suddenly, he turned to the sergeant, andremarked,—“I wish to say something respecting this escape. It may prevent somepersons laying under suspicion alonger me.”“You can say what you like,” returned the sergeant, standing coollylooking at him with his arms folded, “but you have no call to say ithere. You’ll have opportunity enough to say about it, and hear about it,before it’s done with, you know.”“I know, but this is another pint, a separate matter. A man can’tstarve; at least I can’t. I took some wittles, up at the willageover yonder,—where the church stands a’most out on themarshes.”“You mean stole,” said the sergeant.“And I’ll tell you where from. From the blacksmith’s.”“Halloa!” said the sergeant, staring at Joe.“Halloa, Pip!” said Joe, staring at me.“It was some broken wittles—that’s what it was—and adram of liquor, and a pie.”“Have you happened to miss such an article as a pie, blacksmith?”asked the sergeant, confidentially.“My wife did, at the very moment when you came in. Don’t you know,Pip?”“So,” said my convict, turning his eyes on Joe in a moody manner,and without the least glance at me,—“so you’re theblacksmith, are you? Than I’m sorry to say, I’ve eat yourpie.”“God knows you’re welcome to it,—so far as it was evermine,” returned Joe, with a saving remembrance of Mrs. Joe. “Wedon’t know what you have done, but we wouldn’t have you starved todeath for it, poor miserable fellow-creatur.—Would us, Pip?”The something that I had noticed before, clicked in the man’s throatagain, and he turned his back. The boat had returned, and his guard were ready,so we followed him to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones, andsaw him put into the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself.No one seemed surprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to seehim, or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody in the boatgrowled as if to dogs, “Give way, you!” which was the signal forthe dip of the oars. By the light of the torches, we saw the black Hulk lyingout a little way from the mud of the shore, like a wicked Noah’s ark.Cribbed and barred and moored by massive rusty chains, the prison-ship seemedin my young eyes to be ironed like the prisoners. We saw the boat go alongside,and we saw him taken up the side and disappear. Then, the ends of the torcheswere flung hissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over withhim.Chapter VI.Mystate of mind regarding the pilfering from which I had been so unexpectedlyexonerated did not impel me to frank disclosure; but I hope it had some dregsof good at the bottom of it.I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to Mrs.Joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted off me. But I lovedJoe,—perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because thedear fellow let me love him,—and, as to him, my inner self was not soeasily composed. It was much upon my mind (particularly when I first saw himlooking about for his file) that I ought to tell Joe the whole truth. Yet I didnot, and for the reason that I mistrusted that if I did, he would think meworse than I was. The fear of losing Joe’s confidence, and of thenceforthsitting in the chimney corner at night staring drearily at my forever lostcompanion and friend, tied up my tongue. I morbidly represented to myself thatif Joe knew it, I never afterwards could see him at the fireside feeling hisfair whisker, without thinking that he was meditating on it. That, if Joe knewit, I never afterwards could see him glance, however casually, atyesterday’s meat or pudding when it came on to-day’s table, withoutthinking that he was debating whether I had been in the pantry. That, if Joeknew it, and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked thathis beer was flat or thick, the conviction that he suspected tar in it, wouldbring a rush of blood to my face. In a word, I was too cowardly to do what Iknew to be right, as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to bewrong. I had had no intercourse with the world at that time, and I imitatednone of its many inhabitants who act in this manner. Quite an untaught genius,I made the discovery of the line of action for myself.As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, Joe took me onhis back again and carried me home. He must have had a tiresome journey of it,for Mr. Wopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad temper that if theChurch had been thrown open, he would probably have excommunicated the wholeexpedition, beginning with Joe and myself. In his lay capacity, he persisted insitting down in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his coat was takenoff to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on histrousers would have hanged him, if it had been a capital offence.By that time, I was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little drunkard,through having been newly set upon my feet, and through having been fastasleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and noise of tongues. As Icame to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders, and therestorative exclamation “Yah! Was there ever such a boy as this!”from my sister,) I found Joe telling them about the convict’s confession,and all the visitors suggesting different ways by which he had got into thepantry. Mr. Pumblechook made out, after carefully surveying the premises, thathe had first got upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof ofthe house, and had then let himself down the kitchen chimney by a rope made ofhis bedding cut into strips; and as Mr. Pumblechook was very positive and drovehis own chaise-cart—over everybody—it was agreed that it must beso. Mr. Wopsle, indeed, wildly cried out, “No!” with the feeblemalice of a tired man; but, as he had no theory, and no coat on, he wasunanimously set at naught,—not to mention his smoking hard behind, as hestood with his back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out: which was notcalculated to inspire confidence.This was all I heard that night before my sister clutched me, as a slumberousoffence to the company’s eyesight, and assisted me up to bed with such astrong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on, and to be dangling them allagainst the edges of the stairs. My state of mind, as I have described it,began before I was up in the morning, and lasted long after the subject haddied out, and had ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions.Chapter VII.At thetime when I stood in the churchyard reading the family tombstones, I had justenough learning to be able to spell them out. My construction even of theirsimple meaning was not very correct, for I read “wife of the Above”as a complimentary reference to my father’s exaltation to a better world;and if any one of my deceased relations had been referred to as“Below,” I have no doubt I should have formed the worst opinions ofthat member of the family. Neither were my notions of the theological positionsto which my Catechism bound me, at all accurate; for, I have a livelyremembrance that I supposed my declaration that I was to “walk in thesame all the days of my life,” laid me under an obligation always to gothrough the village from our house in one particular direction, and never tovary it by turning down by the wheelwright’s or up by the mill.When I was old enough, I was to be apprenticed to Joe, and until I could assumethat dignity I was not to be what Mrs. Joe called “Pompeyed,” or(as I render it) pampered. Therefore, I was not only odd-boy about the forge,but if any neighbour happened to want an extra boy to frighten birds, or pickup stones, or do any such job, I was favoured with the employment. In order,however, that our superior position might not be compromised thereby, amoney-box was kept on the kitchen mantel-shelf, into which it was publicly madeknown that all my earnings were dropped. I have an impression that they were tobe contributed eventually towards the liquidation of the National Debt, but Iknow I had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure.Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt kept an evening school in the village; that is tosay, she was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and unlimited infirmity,who used to go to sleep from six to seven every evening, in the society ofyouth who paid two pence per week each, for the improving opportunity of seeingher do it. She rented a small cottage, and Mr. Wopsle had the room upstairs,where we students used to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified andterrific manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling. There was a fictionthat Mr. Wopsle “examined” the scholars once a quarter. What he didon those occasions was to turn up his cuffs, stick up his hair, and give usMark Antony’s oration over the body of Caesar. This was always followedby Collins’s Ode on the Passions, wherein I particularly venerated Mr.Wopsle as Revenge throwing his blood-stained sword in thunder down, and takingthe War-denouncing trumpet with a withering look. It was not with me then, asit was in later life, when I fell into the society of the Passions, andcompared them with Collins and Wopsle, rather to the disadvantage of bothgentlemen.Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt, besides keeping this Educational Institution,kept in the same room—a little general shop. She had no idea what stockshe had, or what the price of anything in it was; but there was a little greasymemorandum-book kept in a drawer, which served as a Catalogue of Prices, and bythis oracle Biddy arranged all the shop transactions. Biddy was Mr.Wopsle’s great-aunt’s granddaughter; I confess myself quite unequalto the working out of the problem, what relation she was to Mr. Wopsle. She wasan orphan like myself; like me, too, had been brought up by hand. She was mostnoticeable, I thought, in respect of her extremities; for, her hair alwayswanted brushing, her hands always wanted washing, and her shoes always wantedmending and pulling up at heel. This description must be received with aweek-day limitation. On Sundays, she went to church elaborated.Much of my unassisted self, and more by the help of Biddy than of Mr.Wopsle’s great-aunt, I struggled through the alphabet as if it had been abramble-bush; getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter. Afterthat I fell among those thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening todo something new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition. But, at last Ibegan, in a purblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the verysmallest scale.One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with my slate, expending greatefforts on the production of a letter to Joe. I think it must have been a fullyear after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a long time after, and it waswinter and a hard frost. With an alphabet on the hearth at my feet forreference, I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear thisepistle:—“MI DEER JO iOPE U R KRWITEWELL i OPE iSHAL SON BHABELL 4 2 TEEDGE UJO AN THEN WESHORL B SOGLODD AN WEN i MPRENGTD 2 U JO WOTLARX AN BLEVEME INF XN PIP.”There was no indispensable necessity for my communicating with Joe by letter,inasmuch as he sat beside me and we were alone. But I delivered this writtencommunication (slate and all) with my own hand, and Joe received it as amiracle of erudition.“I say, Pip, old chap!” cried Joe, opening his blue eyes wide,“what a scholar you are! An’t you?”“I should like to be,” said I, glancing at the slate as he held it;with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.“Why, here’s a J,” said Joe, “and a O equal toanythink! Here’s a J and a O, Pip, and a J-O, Joe.” I had never heard Joe read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable,and I had observed at church last Sunday, when I accidentally held ourPrayer-Book upside down, that it seemed to suit his convenience quite as wellas if it had been all right. Wishing to embrace the present occasion of findingout whether in teaching Joe, I should have to begin quite at the beginning, Isaid, “Ah! But read the rest, Jo.”“The rest, eh, Pip?” said Joe, looking at it with a slow, searchingeye, “One, two, three. Why, here’s three Js, and three Os, andthree J-O, Joes in it, Pip!”I leaned over Joe, and, with the aid of my forefinger read him the wholeletter.“Astonishing!” said Joe, when I had finished. “YouARE a scholar.”“How do you spell Gargery, Joe?” I asked him, with a modestpatronage.“I don’t spell it at all,” said Joe.“But supposing you did?”“It can’t be supposed,” said Joe. “Tho’I’m uncommon fond of reading, too.”“Are you, Joe?”“On-common. Give me,” said Joe, “a good book, or a goodnewspaper, and sit me down afore a good fire, and I ask no better. Lord!”he continued, after rubbing his knees a little, “when you do cometo a J and a O, and says you, ‘Here, at last, is a J-O, Joe,’ howinteresting reading is!”I derived from this, that Joe’s education, like Steam, was yet in itsinfancy. Pursuing the subject, I inquired,—“Didn’t you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little asme?”“No, Pip.”“Why didn’t you ever go to school, Joe, when you were as little asme?”“Well, Pip,” said Joe, taking up the poker, and settling himself tohis usual occupation when he was thoughtful, of slowly raking the fire betweenthe lower bars; “I’ll tell you. My father, Pip, he were given todrink, and when he were overtook with drink, he hammered away at my mother,most onmerciful. It were a’most the only hammering he did, indeed,’xcepting at myself. And he hammered at me with a wigor only to beequalled by the wigor with which he didn’t hammer at hisanwil.—You’re a listening and understanding, Pip?”“Yes, Joe.”“Consequence, my mother and me we ran away from my father several times;and then my mother she’d go out to work, and she’d say,“Joe,” she’d say, “now, please God, you shall have someschooling, child,” and she’d put me to school. But my father werethat good in his hart that he couldn’t abear to be without us. So,he’d come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the doorsof the houses where we was, that they used to be obligated to have no more todo with us and to give us up to him. And then he took us home and hammered us.Which, you see, Pip,” said Joe, pausing in his meditative raking of thefire, and looking at me, “were a drawback on my learning.”“Certainly, poor Joe!”“Though mind you, Pip,” said Joe, with a judicial touch or two ofthe poker on the top bar, “rendering unto all their doo, and maintainingequal justice betwixt man and man, my father were that good in his hart,don’t you see?”I didn’t see; but I didn’t say so.“Well!” Joe pursued, “somebody must keep the pot a-biling,Pip, or the pot won’t bile, don’t you know?”I saw that, and said so.“Consequence, my father didn’t make objections to my going to work;so I went to work at my present calling, which were his too, if he would havefollowed it, and I worked tolerable hard, I assure you, Pip. In time Iwere able to keep him, and I kep him till he went off in a purple leptic fit.And it were my intentions to have had put upon his tombstone that,Whatsume’er the failings on his part, Remember reader he were that goodin his heart.”Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity, thatI asked him if he had made it himself.“I made it,” said Joe, “my own self. I made it in a moment.It was like striking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow. I never was somuch surprised in all my life,—couldn’t credit my own ed,—totell you the truth, hardly believed it were my own ed. As I was saying,Pip, it were my intentions to have had it cut over him; but poetry costs money,cut it how you will, small or large, and it were not done. Not to mentionbearers, all the money that could be spared were wanted for my mother. She werein poor elth, and quite broke. She weren’t long of following, poor soul,and her share of peace come round at last.”Joe’s blue eyes turned a little watery; he rubbed first one of them, andthen the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner, with the roundknob on the top of the poker.“It were but lonesome then,” said Joe, “living here alone,and I got acquainted with your sister. Now, Pip,”—Joe looked firmlyat me as if he knew I was not going to agree with him;—“your sisteris a fine figure of a woman.”I could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt.“Whatever family opinions, or whatever the world’s opinions, onthat subject may be, Pip, your sister is,” Joe tapped the top bar withthe poker after every word following,“a-fine-figure—of—a—woman!”I could think of nothing better to say than “I am glad you think so,Joe.”“So am I,” returned Joe, catching me up. “I am glad Ithink so, Pip. A little redness or a little matter of Bone, here or there, whatdoes it signify to Me?”I sagaciously observed, if it didn’t signify to him, to whom did itsignify?“Certainly!” assented Joe. “That’s it. You’reright, old chap! When I got acquainted with your sister, it were the talk howshe was bringing you up by hand. Very kind of her too, all the folks said, andI said, along with all the folks. As to you,” Joe pursued with acountenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed, “if youcould have been aware how small and flabby and mean you was, dear me,you’d have formed the most contemptible opinion of yourself!”Not exactly relishing this, I said, “Never mind me, Joe.”“But I did mind you, Pip,” he returned with tender simplicity.“When I offered to your sister to keep company, and to be asked in churchat such times as she was willing and ready to come to the forge, I said to her,‘And bring the poor little child. God bless the poor little child,’I said to your sister, ‘there’s room for him at theforge!’”I broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Joe round the neck: whodropped the poker to hug me, and to say, “Ever the best of friends;an’t us, Pip? Don’t cry, old chap!”When this little interruption was over, Joe resumed:—“Well, you see, Pip, and here we are! That’s about where it lights;here we are! Now, when you take me in hand in my learning, Pip (and I tell youbeforehand I am awful dull, most awful dull), Mrs. Joe mustn’t see toomuch of what we’re up to. It must be done, as I may say, on the sly. Andwhy on the sly? I’ll tell you why, Pip.”He had taken up the poker again; without which, I doubt if he could haveproceeded in his demonstration.“Your sister is given to government.”“Given to government, Joe?” I was startled, for I had some shadowyidea (and I am afraid I must add, hope) that Joe had divorced her in a favourof the Lords of the Admiralty, or Treasury.“Given to government,” said Joe. “Which I meantersay thegovernment of you and myself.”“Oh!”“And she an’t over partial to having scholars on thepremises,” Joe continued, “and in partickler would not be overpartial to my being a scholar, for fear as I might rise. Like a sort of rebel,don’t you see?”I was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as“Why—” when Joe stopped me.“Stay a bit. I know what you’re a-going to say, Pip; stay a bit! Idon’t deny that your sister comes the Mo-gul over us, now and again. Idon’t deny that she do throw us back-falls, and that she do drop downupon us heavy. At such times as when your sister is on the Ram-page,Pip,” Joe sank his voice to a whisper and glanced at the door,“candour compels fur to admit that she is a Buster.”Joe pronounced this word, as if it began with at least twelve capital Bs.“Why don’t I rise? That were your observation when I broke it off,Pip?”“Yes, Joe.”“Well,” said Joe, passing the poker into his left hand, that hemight feel his whisker; and I had no hope of him whenever he took to thatplacid occupation; “your sister’s a master-mind. Amaster-mind.”“What’s that?” I asked, in some hope of bringing him to astand. But Joe was readier with his definition than I had expected, andcompletely stopped me by arguing circularly, and answering with a fixed look,“Her.”“And I ain’t a master-mind,” Joe resumed, when he had unfixedhis look, and got back to his whisker. “And last of all, Pip,—andthis I want to say very serious to you, old chap,—I see so much in mypoor mother, of a woman drudging and slaving and breaking her honest hart andnever getting no peace in her mortal days, that I’m dead afeerd of goingwrong in the way of not doing what’s right by a woman, and I’d furrather of the two go wrong the t’other way, and be a littleill-conwenienced myself. I wish it was only me that got put out, Pip; I wishthere warn’t no Tickler for you, old chap; I wish I could take it all onmyself; but this is the up-and-down-and-straight on it, Pip, and I hopeyou’ll overlook shortcomings.”Young as I was, I believe that I dated a new admiration of Joe from that night.We were equals afterwards, as we had been before; but, afterwards at quiettimes when I sat looking at Joe and thinking about him, I had a new sensationof feeling conscious that I was looking up to Joe in my heart.“However,” said Joe, rising to replenish the fire;“here’s the Dutch-clock a-working himself up to being equal tostrike Eight of ’em, and she’s not come home yet! I hope UnclePumblechook’s mare mayn’t have set a forefoot on a piece o’ice, and gone down.”Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook on market-days, to assisthim in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman’sjudgment; Uncle Pumblechook being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in hisdomestic servant. This was market-day, and Mrs. Joe was out on one of theseexpeditions.Joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to the door to listenfor the chaise-cart. It was a dry cold night, and the wind blew keenly, and thefrost was white and hard. A man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes,I thought. And then I looked at the stars, and considered how awful it would befor a man to turn his face up to them as he froze to death, and see no help orpity in all the glittering multitude.“Here comes the mare,” said Joe, “ringing like a peal ofbells!”The sound of her iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical, as she camealong at a much brisker trot than usual. We got a chair out, ready for Mrs.Joe’s alighting, and stirred up the fire that they might see a brightwindow, and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of itsplace. When we had completed these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to theeyes. Mrs. Joe was soon landed, and Uncle Pumblechook was soon down too,covering the mare with a cloth, and we were soon all in the kitchen, carryingso much cold air in with us that it seemed to drive all the heat out of thefire.“Now,” said Mrs. Joe, unwrapping herself with haste and excitement,and throwing her bonnet back on her shoulders where it hung by the strings,“if this boy ain’t grateful this night, he never will be!”I looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was wholly uninformed whyhe ought to assume that expression.“It’s only to be hoped,” said my sister, “that hewon’t be Pompeyed. But I have my fears.”“She ain’t in that line, Mum,” said Mr. Pumblechook.“She knows better.”She? I looked at Joe, making the motion with my lips and eyebrows,“She?” Joe looked at me, making the motion with his lips andeyebrows, “She?” My sister catching him in the act, he drew theback of his hand across his nose with his usual conciliatory air on suchoccasions, and looked at her.“Well?” said my sister, in her snappish way. “What are youstaring at? Is the house afire?”“—Which some individual,” Joe politely hinted,“mentioned—she.”“And she is a she, I suppose?” said my sister. “Unless youcall Miss Havisham a he. And I doubt if even you’ll go so far asthat.”“Miss Havisham, up town?” said Joe.“Is there any Miss Havisham down town?” returned my sister.“She wants this boy to go and play there. And of course he’s going.And he had better play there,” said my sister, shaking her head at me asan encouragement to be extremely light and sportive, “or I’ll workhim.”I had heard of Miss Havisham up town,—everybody for miles round had heardof Miss Havisham up town,—as an immensely rich and grim lady who lived ina large and dismal house barricaded against robbers, and who led a life ofseclusion.“Well to be sure!” said Joe, astounded. “I wonder how shecome to know Pip!”“Noodle!” cried my sister. “Who said she knew him?”“—Which some individual,” Joe again politely hinted,“mentioned that she wanted him to go and play there.”“And couldn’t she ask Uncle Pumblechook if he knew of a boy to goand play there? Isn’t it just barely possible that Uncle Pumblechook maybe a tenant of hers, and that he may sometimes—we won’t sayquarterly or half-yearly, for that would be requiring too much of you—butsometimes—go there to pay his rent? And couldn’t she then ask UnclePumblechook if he knew of a boy to go and play there? And couldn’t UnclePumblechook, being always considerate and thoughtful for us—though youmay not think it, Joseph,” in a tone of the deepest reproach, as if hewere the most callous of nephews, “then mention this boy, standingPrancing here”—which I solemnly declare I was notdoing—“that I have for ever been a willing slave to?”“Good again!” cried Uncle Pumblechook. “Well put! Prettilypointed! Good indeed! Now Joseph, you know the case.”“No, Joseph,” said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, whileJoe apologetically drew the back of his hand across and across his nose,“you do not yet—though you may not think it—know the case.You may consider that you do, but you do not, Joseph. For you do notknow that Uncle Pumblechook, being sensible that for anything we can tell, thisboy’s fortune may be made by his going to Miss Havisham’s, hasoffered to take him into town to-night in his own chaise-cart, and to keep himto-night, and to take him with his own hands to Miss Havisham’s to-morrowmorning. And Lor-a-mussy me!” cried my sister, casting off her bonnet insudden desperation, “here I stand talking to mere Mooncalfs, with UnclePumblechook waiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and the boy grimedwith crock and dirt from the hair of his head to the sole of his foot!”With that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and my face wassqueezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and my head was put under taps ofwater-butts, and I was soaped, and kneaded, and towelled, and thumped, andharrowed, and rasped, until I really was quite beside myself. (I may hereremark that I suppose myself to be better acquainted than any living authority,with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over thehuman countenance.)When my ablutions were completed, I was put into clean linen of the stiffestcharacter, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and was trussed up in mytightest and fearfullest suit. I was then delivered over to Mr. Pumblechook,who formally received me as if he were the Sheriff, and who let off upon me thespeech that I knew he had been dying to make all along: “Boy, be forevergrateful to all friends, but especially unto them which brought you up byhand!”“Good-bye, Joe!”“God bless you, Pip, old chap!”I had never parted from him before, and what with my feelings and what withsoapsuds, I could at first see no stars from the chaise-cart. But they twinkledout one by one, without throwing any light on the questions why on earth I wasgoing to play at Miss Havisham’s, and what on earth I was expected toplay at.Chapter VIII.Mr.Pumblechook’s premises in the High Street of the market town, were of apeppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises of a cornchandler andseedsman should be. It appeared to me that he must be a very happy man indeed,to have so many little drawers in his shop; and I wondered when I peeped intoone or two on the lower tiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside,whether the flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out ofthose jails, and bloom.It was in the early morning after my arrival that I entertained thisspeculation. On the previous night, I had been sent straight to bed in an atticwith a sloping roof, which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was,that I calculated the tiles as being within a foot of my eyebrows. In the sameearly morning, I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys.Mr. Pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did his shopman; and somehow, there wasa general air and flavour about the corduroys, so much in the nature of seeds,and a general air and flavour about the seeds, so much in the nature ofcorduroys, that I hardly knew which was which. The same opportunity served mefor noticing that Mr. Pumblechook appeared to conduct his business by lookingacross the street at the saddler, who appeared to transact his businessby keeping his eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in life by puttinghis hands in his pockets and contemplating the baker, who in his turn foldedhis arms and stared at the grocer, who stood at his door and yawned at thechemist. The watchmaker, always poring over a little desk with amagnifying-glass at his eye, and always inspected by a group of smock-frocksporing over him through the glass of his shop-window, seemed to be about theonly person in the High Street whose trade engaged his attention.Mr. Pumblechook and I breakfasted at eight o’clock in the parlour behindthe shop, while the shopman took his mug of tea and hunch of bread and butteron a sack of peas in the front premises. I considered Mr. Pumblechook wretchedcompany. Besides being possessed by my sister’s idea that a mortifyingand penitential character ought to be imparted to my diet,—besides givingme as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter, and puttingsuch a quantity of warm water into my milk that it would have been more candidto have left the milk out altogether,—his conversation consisted ofnothing but arithmetic. On my politely bidding him Good-morning, he said,pompously, “Seven times nine, boy?” And how should I be ableto answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place, on an empty stomach! I washungry, but before I had swallowed a morsel, he began a running sum that lastedall through the breakfast. “Seven?” “And four?”“And eight?” “And six?” “And two?”“And ten?” And so on. And after each figure was disposed of, it wasas much as I could do to get a bite or a sup, before the next came; while hesat at his ease guessing nothing, and eating bacon and hot roll, in (if I maybe allowed the expression) a gorging and gormandizing manner.For such reasons, I was very glad when ten o’clock came and we startedfor Miss Havisham’s; though I was not at all at my ease regarding themanner in which I should acquit myself under that lady’s roof. Within aquarter of an hour we came to Miss Havisham’s house, which was of oldbrick, and dismal, and had a great many iron bars to it. Some of the windowshad been walled up; of those that remained, all the lower were rustily barred.There was a courtyard in front, and that was barred; so we had to wait, afterringing the bell, until some one should come to open it. While we waited at thegate, I peeped in (even then Mr. Pumblechook said, “And fourteen?”but I pretended not to hear him), and saw that at the side of the house therewas a large brewery. No brewing was going on in it, and none seemed to havegone on for a long long time.A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded “What name?” Towhich my conductor replied, “Pumblechook.” The voice returned,“Quite right,” and the window was shut again, and a young lady cameacross the court-yard, with keys in her hand.“This,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “is Pip.”“This is Pip, is it?” returned the young lady, who was very prettyand seemed very proud; “come in, Pip.”Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also, when she stopped him with the gate.“Oh!” she said. “Did you wish to see Miss Havisham?”“If Miss Havisham wished to see me,” returned Mr. Pumblechook,discomfited.“Ah!” said the girl; “but you see she don’t.”She said it so finally, and in such an undiscussible way, that Mr. Pumblechook,though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could not protest. But he eyed meseverely,—as if I had done anything to him!—and departedwith the words reproachfully delivered: “Boy! Let your behaviour here bea credit unto them which brought you up by hand!” I was not free fromapprehension that he would come back to propound through the gate, “Andsixteen?” But he didn’t.My young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the courtyard. It waspaved and clean, but grass was growing in every crevice. The brewery buildingshad a little lane of communication with it, and the wooden gates of that lanestood open, and all the brewery beyond stood open, away to the high enclosingwall; and all was empty and disused. The cold wind seemed to blow colder therethan outside the gate; and it made a shrill noise in howling in and out at theopen sides of the brewery, like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship atsea.She saw me looking at it, and she said, “You could drink without hurt allthe strong beer that’s brewed there now, boy.”“I should think I could, miss,” said I, in a shy way.“Better not try to brew beer there now, or it would turn out sour, boy;don’t you think so?”“It looks like it, miss.”“Not that anybody means to try,” she added, “for that’sall done with, and the place will stand as idle as it is till it falls. As tostrong beer, there’s enough of it in the cellars already, to drown theManor House.” “Is that the name of this house, miss?”“One of its names, boy.”“It has more than one, then, miss?”“One more. Its other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew,or all three—or all one to me—for enough.”“Enough House,” said I; “that’s a curious name,miss.”“Yes,” she replied; “but it meant more than it said. Itmeant, when it was given, that whoever had this house could want nothing else.They must have been easily satisfied in those days, I should think. Butdon’t loiter, boy.”Though she called me “boy” so often, and with a carelessness thatwas far from complimentary, she was of about my own age. She seemed much olderthan I, of course, being a girl, and beautiful and self-possessed; and she wasas scornful of me as if she had been one-and-twenty, and a queen.We went into the house by a side door, the great front entrance had two chainsacross it outside,—and the first thing I noticed was, that the passageswere all dark, and that she had left a candle burning there. She took it up,and we went through more passages and up a staircase, and still it was alldark, and only the candle lighted us.At last we came to the door of a room, and she said, “Go in.”I answered, more in shyness than politeness, “After you, miss.”To this she returned: “Don’t be ridiculous, boy; I am not goingin.” And scornfully walked away, and—what was worse—took thecandle with her.This was very uncomfortable, and I was half afraid. However, the only thing tobe done being to knock at the door, I knocked, and was told from within toenter. I entered, therefore, and found myself in a pretty large room, welllighted with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in it. It was adressing-room, as I supposed from the furniture, though much of it was of formsand uses then quite unknown to me. But prominent in it was a draped table witha gilded looking-glass, and that I made out at first sight to be a finelady’s dressing-table.Whether I should have made out this object so soon if there had been no finelady sitting at it, I cannot say. In an arm-chair, with an elbow resting on thetable and her head leaning on that hand, sat the strangest lady I have everseen, or shall ever see.She was dressed in rich materials,—satins, and lace, and silks,—allof white. Her shoes were white. And she had a long white veil dependent fromher hair, and she had bridal flowers in her hair, but her hair was white. Somebright jewels sparkled on her neck and on her hands, and some other jewels laysparkling on the table. Dresses, less splendid than the dress she wore, andhalf-packed trunks, were scattered about. She had not quite finished dressing,for she had but one shoe on,—the other was on the table near herhand,—her veil was but half arranged, her watch and chain were not puton, and some lace for her bosom lay with those trinkets, and with herhandkerchief, and gloves, and some flowers, and a Prayer-Book all confusedlyheaped about the looking-glass.It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I sawmore of them in the first moments than might be supposed. But I saw thateverything within my view which ought to be white, had been white long ago, andhad lost its lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within thebridal dress had withered like the dress, and like the flowers, and had nobrightness left but the brightness of her sunken eyes. I saw that the dress hadbeen put upon the rounded figure of a young woman, and that the figure uponwhich it now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone. Once, I had been taken tosee some ghastly waxwork at the Fair, representing I know not what impossiblepersonage lying in state. Once, I had been taken to one of our old marshchurches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug outof a vault under the church pavement. Now, waxwork and skeleton seemed to havedark eyes that moved and looked at me. I should have cried out, if I could.“Who is it?” said the lady at the table.“Pip, ma’am.”“Pip?”“Mr. Pumblechook’s boy, ma’am. Come—to play.”“Come nearer; let me look at you. Come close.”It was when I stood before her, avoiding her eyes, that I took note of thesurrounding objects in detail, and saw that her watch had stopped at twentyminutes to nine, and that a clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes tonine.“Look at me,” said Miss Havisham. “You are not afraid of awoman who has never seen the sun since you were born?”I regret to state that I was not afraid of telling the enormous liecomprehended in the answer “No.”“Do you know what I touch here?” she said, laying her hands, oneupon the other, on her left side.“Yes, ma’am.” (It made me think of the young man.)“What do I touch?”“Your heart.”“Broken!”She uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis, and with aweird smile that had a kind of boast in it. Afterwards she kept her hands therefor a little while, and slowly took them away as if they were heavy.“I am tired,” said Miss Havisham. “I want diversion, and Ihave done with men and women. Play.”I think it will be conceded by my most disputatious reader, that she couldhardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world moredifficult to be done under the circumstances.“I sometimes have sick fancies,” she went on, “and I have asick fancy that I want to see some play. There, there!” with an impatientmovement of the fingers of her right hand; “play, play, play!”For a moment, with the fear of my sister’s working me before my eyes, Ihad a desperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of Mr.Pumblechook’s chaise-cart. But I felt myself so unequal to theperformance that I gave it up, and stood looking at Miss Havisham in what Isuppose she took for a dogged manner, inasmuch as she said, when we had taken agood look at each other,—“Are you sullen and obstinate?”“No, ma’am, I am very sorry for you, and very sorry I can’tplay just now. If you complain of me I shall get into trouble with my sister,so I would do it if I could; but it’s so new here, and so strange, and sofine,—and melancholy—.” I stopped, fearing I might say toomuch, or had already said it, and we took another look at each other.Before she spoke again, she turned her eyes from me, and looked at the dressshe wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally at herself in thelooking-glass.“So new to him,” she muttered, “so old to me; so strange tohim, so familiar to me; so melancholy to both of us! Call Estella.”As she was still looking at the reflection of herself, I thought she was stilltalking to herself, and kept quiet.“Call Estella,” she repeated, flashing a look at me. “You cando that. Call Estella. At the door.”To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawlingEstella to a scornful young lady neither visible nor responsive, and feeling ita dreadful liberty so to roar out her name, was almost as bad as playing toorder. But she answered at last, and her light came along the dark passage likea star.Miss Havisham beckoned her to come close, and took up a jewel from the table,and tried its effect upon her fair young bosom and against her pretty brownhair. “Your own, one day, my dear, and you will use it well. Let me seeyou play cards with this boy.”“With this boy? Why, he is a common labouring-boy!”I thought I overheard Miss Havisham answer,—only it seemed sounlikely,—“Well? You can break his heart.”“What do you play, boy?” asked Estella of myself, with the greatestdisdain.“Nothing but beggar my neighbour, miss.”“Beggar him,” said Miss Havisham to Estella. So we sat down tocards.It was then I began to understand that everything in the room had stopped, likethe watch and the clock, a long time ago. I noticed that Miss Havisham put downthe jewel exactly on the spot from which she had taken it up. As Estella dealtthe cards, I glanced at the dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe uponit, once white, now yellow, had never been worn. I glanced down at the footfrom which the shoe was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on it, oncewhite, now yellow, had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything,this standing still of all the pale decayed objects, not even the witheredbridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave-clothes, orthe long veil so like a shroud.So she sat, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings and trimmings onher bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. I knew nothing then of thediscoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times, whichfall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen; but, I have oftenthought since, that she must have looked as if the admission of the naturallight of day would have struck her to dust.“He calls the knaves Jacks, this boy!” said Estella with disdain,before our first game was out. “And what coarse hands he has! And whatthick boots!”I had never thought of being ashamed of my hands before; but I began toconsider them a very indifferent pair. Her contempt for me was so strong, thatit became infectious, and I caught it.She won the game, and I dealt. I misdealt, as was only natural, when I knew shewas lying in wait for me to do wrong; and she denounced me for a stupid, clumsylabouring-boy.“You say nothing of her,” remarked Miss Havisham to me, as shelooked on. “She says many hard things of you, but you say nothing of her.What do you think of her?”“I don’t like to say,” I stammered.“Tell me in my ear,” said Miss Havisham, bending down.“I think she is very proud,” I replied, in a whisper.“Anything else?”“I think she is very pretty.”“Anything else?”“I think she is very insulting.” (She was looking at me then with alook of supreme aversion.)“Anything else?”“I think I should like to go home.”“And never see her again, though she is so pretty?”“I am not sure that I shouldn’t like to see her again, but I shouldlike to go home now.”“You shall go soon,” said Miss Havisham, aloud. “Play thegame out.”Saving for the one weird smile at first, I should have felt almost sure thatMiss Havisham’s face could not smile. It had dropped into a watchful andbrooding expression,—most likely when all the things about her had becometransfixed,—and it looked as if nothing could ever lift it up again. Herchest had dropped, so that she stooped; and her voice had dropped, so that shespoke low, and with a dead lull upon her; altogether, she had the appearance ofhaving dropped body and soul, within and without, under the weight of acrushing blow.I played the game to an end with Estella, and she beggared me. She threw thecards down on the table when she had won them all, as if she despised them forhaving been won of me.“When shall I have you here again?” said Miss Havisham. “Letme think.”I was beginning to remind her that to-day was Wednesday, when she checked mewith her former impatient movement of the fingers of her right hand.“There, there! I know nothing of days of the week; I know nothing ofweeks of the year. Come again after six days. You hear?”“Yes, ma’am.”“Estella, take him down. Let him have something to eat, and let him roamand look about him while he eats. Go, Pip.”I followed the candle down, as I had followed the candle up, and she stood itin the place where we had found it. Until she opened the side entrance, I hadfancied, without thinking about it, that it must necessarily be night-time. Therush of the daylight quite confounded me, and made me feel as if I had been inthe candlelight of the strange room many hours.“You are to wait here, you boy,” said Estella; and disappeared andclosed the door.I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at my coarsehands and my common boots. My opinion of those accessories was not favourable.They had never troubled me before, but they troubled me now, as vulgarappendages. I determined to ask Joe why he had ever taught me to call thosepicture-cards Jacks, which ought to be called knaves. I wished Joe had beenrather more genteelly brought up, and then I should have been so too.She came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer. She put themug down on the stones of the yard, and gave me the bread and meat withoutlooking at me, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace. I was sohumiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry,—I cannot hit upon theright name for the smart—God knows what its name was,—that tearsstarted to my eyes. The moment they sprang there, the girl looked at me with aquick delight in having been the cause of them. This gave me power to keep themback and to look at her: so, she gave a contemptuous toss—but with asense, I thought, of having made too sure that I was so wounded—and leftme.But when she was gone, I looked about me for a place to hide my face in, andgot behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, and leaned my sleeve againstthe wall there, and leaned my forehead on it and cried. As I cried, I kickedthe wall, and took a hard twist at my hair; so bitter were my feelings, and sosharp was the smart without a name, that needed counteraction.My sister’s bringing up had made me sensitive. In the little world inwhich children have their existence whosoever brings them up, there is nothingso finely perceived and so finely felt as injustice. It may be only smallinjustice that the child can be exposed to; but the child is small, and itsworld is small, and its rocking-horse stands as many hands high, according toscale, as a big-boned Irish hunter. Within myself, I had sustained, from mybabyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice. I had known, from the time whenI could speak, that my sister, in her capricious and violent coercion, wasunjust to me. I had cherished a profound conviction that her bringing me up byhand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks. Through all my punishments,disgraces, fasts, and vigils, and other penitential performances, I had nursedthis assurance; and to my communing so much with it, in a solitary andunprotected way, I in great part refer the fact that I was morally timid andvery sensitive.I got rid of my injured feelings for the time by kicking them into the brewerywall, and twisting them out of my hair, and then I smoothed my face with mysleeve, and came from behind the gate. The bread and meat were acceptable, andthe beer was warming and tingling, and I was soon in spirits to look about me.To be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house in thebrewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind, andwould have made the pigeons think themselves at sea, if there had been anypigeons there to be rocked by it. But there were no pigeons in the dove-cot, nohorses in the stable, no pigs in the sty, no malt in the storehouse, no smellsof grains and beer in the copper or the vat. All the uses and scents of thebrewery might have evaporated with its last reek of smoke. In a by-yard, therewas a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance of betterdays lingering about them; but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample ofthe beer that was gone,—and in this respect I remember those recluses asbeing like most others.Behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with an old wall; notso high but that I could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it,and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house, and that it wasovergrown with tangled weeds, but that there was a track upon the green andyellow paths, as if some one sometimes walked there, and that Estella waswalking away from me even then. But she seemed to be everywhere. For when Iyielded to the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk on them, Isaw her walking on them at the end of the yard of casks. She had herback towards me, and held her pretty brown hair spread out in her two hands,and never looked round, and passed out of my view directly. So, in the breweryitself,—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used tomake the beer, and where the brewing utensils still were. When I first wentinto it, and, rather oppressed by its gloom, stood near the door looking aboutme, I saw her pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend some light ironstairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, as if she were going out intothe sky.It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing happened to myfancy. I thought it a strange thing then, and I thought it a stranger thinglong afterwards. I turned my eyes—a little dimmed by looking up at thefrosty light—towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the buildingnear me on my right hand, and I saw a figure hanging there by the neck. Afigure all in yellow white, with but one shoe to the feet; and it hung so, thatI could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper, andthat the face was Miss Havisham’s, with a movement going over the wholecountenance as if she were trying to call to me. In the terror of seeing thefigure, and in the terror of being certain that it had not been there a momentbefore, I at first ran from it, and then ran towards it. And my terror wasgreatest of all when I found no figure there.Nothing less than the frosty light of the cheerful sky, the sight of peoplepassing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and the reviving influence ofthe rest of the bread and meat and beer, would have brought me round. Even withthose aids, I might not have come to myself as soon as I did, but that I sawEstella approaching with the keys, to let me out. She would have some fairreason for looking down upon me, I thought, if she saw me frightened; and shewould have no fair reason.She gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if she rejoiced that my handswere so coarse and my boots were so thick, and she opened the gate, and stoodholding it. I was passing out without looking at her, when she touched me witha taunting hand.“Why don’t you cry?”“Because I don’t want to.”“You do,” said she. “You have been crying till you are halfblind, and you are near crying again now.”She laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the gate upon me. I wentstraight to Mr. Pumblechook’s, and was immensely relieved to find him notat home. So, leaving word with the shopman on what day I was wanted at MissHavisham’s again, I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge;pondering, as I went along, on all I had seen, and deeply revolving that I wasa common labouring-boy; that my hands were coarse; that my boots were thick;that I had fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks; that I wasmuch more ignorant than I had considered myself last night, and generally thatI was in a low-lived bad way.Chapter IX.When Ireached home, my sister was very curious to know all about MissHavisham’s, and asked a number of questions. And I soon found myselfgetting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck and the small of theback, and having my face ignominiously shoved against the kitchen wall, becauseI did not answer those questions at sufficient length.If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of other youngpeople to anything like the extent to which it used to be hidden inmine,—which I consider probable, as I have no particular reason tosuspect myself of having been a monstrosity,—it is the key to manyreservations. I felt convinced that if I described Miss Havisham’s as myeyes had seen it, I should not be understood. Not only that, but I feltconvinced that Miss Havisham too would not be understood; and although she wasperfectly incomprehensible to me, I entertained an impression that there wouldbe something coarse and treacherous in my dragging her as she really was (tosay nothing of Miss Estella) before the contemplation of Mrs. Joe.Consequently, I said as little as I could, and had my face shoved against thekitchen wall.The worst of it was that that bullying old Pumblechook, preyed upon by adevouring curiosity to be informed of all I had seen and heard, came gapingover in his chaise-cart at tea-time, to have the details divulged to him. Andthe mere sight of the torment, with his fishy eyes and mouth open, his sandyhair inquisitively on end, and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic,made me vicious in my reticence.“Well, boy,” Uncle Pumblechook began, as soon as he was seated inthe chair of honour by the fire. “How did you get on up town?”I answered, “Pretty well, sir,” and my sister shook her fist at me.“Pretty well?” Mr. Pumblechook repeated. “Pretty well is noanswer. Tell us what you mean by pretty well, boy?”Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of obstinacy perhaps.Anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on my forehead, my obstinacy wasadamantine. I reflected for some time, and then answered as if I had discovereda new idea, “I mean pretty well.”My sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me,—I hadno shadow of defence, for Joe was busy in the forge,—when Mr. Pumblechookinterposed with “No! Don’t lose your temper. Leave this lad to me,ma’am; leave this lad to me.” Mr. Pumblechook then turned metowards him, as if he were going to cut my hair, and said,—“First (to get our thoughts in order): Forty-three pence?”I calculated the consequences of replying “Four Hundred Pound,” andfinding them against me, went as near the answer as I could—which wassomewhere about eightpence off. Mr. Pumblechook then put me through mypence-table from “twelve pence make one shilling,” up to“forty pence make three and fourpence,” and then triumphantlydemanded, as if he had done for me, “Now! How much is forty-threepence?” To which I replied, after a long interval of reflection, “Idon’t know.” And I was so aggravated that I almost doubt if I didknow.Mr. Pumblechook worked his head like a screw to screw it out of me, and said,“Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens, forinstance?”“Yes!” said I. And although my sister instantly boxed my ears, itwas highly gratifying to me to see that the answer spoilt his joke, and broughthim to a dead stop.“Boy! What like is Miss Havisham?” Mr. Pumblechook began again whenhe had recovered; folding his arms tight on his chest and applying the screw.“Very tall and dark,” I told him.“Is she, uncle?” asked my sister.Mr. Pumblechook winked assent; from which I at once inferred that he had neverseen Miss Havisham, for she was nothing of the kind.“Good!” said Mr. Pumblechook conceitedly. (“This is the wayto have him! We are beginning to hold our own, I think, Mum?”)“I am sure, uncle,” returned Mrs. Joe, “I wish you had himalways; you know so well how to deal with him.”“Now, boy! What was she a-doing of, when you went in today?” askedMr. Pumblechook.“She was sitting,” I answered, “in a black velvetcoach.”Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another—as they wellmight—and both repeated, “In a black velvet coach?”“Yes,” said I. “And Miss Estella—that’s herniece, I think—handed her in cake and wine at the coach-window, on a goldplate. And we all had cake and wine on gold plates. And I got up behind thecoach to eat mine, because she told me to.”“Was anybody else there?” asked Mr. Pumblechook.“Four dogs,” said I.“Large or small?”“Immense,” said I. “And they fought for veal-cutlets out of asilver basket.”Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another again, in utter amazement. Iwas perfectly frantic,—a reckless witness under the torture,—andwould have told them anything.“Where was this coach, in the name of gracious?” asked mysister.“In Miss Havisham’s room.” They stared again. “Butthere weren’t any horses to it.” I added this saving clause, in themoment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which I had had wildthoughts of harnessing.“Can this be possible, uncle?” asked Mrs. Joe. “What can theboy mean?”“I’ll tell you, Mum,” said Mr. Pumblechook. “My opinionis, it’s a sedan-chair. She’s flighty, you know,—veryflighty,—quite flighty enough to pass her days in a sedan-chair.”“Did you ever see her in it, uncle?” asked Mrs. Joe.“How could I,” he returned, forced to the admission, “when Inever see her in my life? Never clapped eyes upon her!”“Goodness, uncle! And yet you have spoken to her?”“Why, don’t you know,” said Mr. Pumblechook, testily,“that when I have been there, I have been took up to the outside of herdoor, and the door has stood ajar, and she has spoke to me that way.Don’t say you don’t know that, Mum. Howsever, the boy wentthere to play. What did you play at, boy?”“We played with flags,” I said. (I beg to observe that I think ofmyself with amazement, when I recall the lies I told on this occasion.)“Flags!” echoed my sister.“Yes,” said I. “Estella waved a blue flag, and I waved a redone, and Miss Havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little gold stars, outat the coach-window. And then we all waved our swords and hurrahed.”“Swords!” repeated my sister. “Where did you get swordsfrom?”“Out of a cupboard,” said I. “And I saw pistols init,—and jam,—and pills. And there was no daylight in the room, butit was all lighted up with candles.”“That’s true, Mum,” said Mr. Pumblechook, with a grave nod.“That’s the state of the case, for that much I’ve seenmyself.” And then they both stared at me, and I, with an obtrusive showof artlessness on my countenance, stared at them, and plaited the right leg ofmy trousers with my right hand.If they had asked me any more questions, I should undoubtedly have betrayedmyself, for I was even then on the point of mentioning that there was a balloonin the yard, and should have hazarded the statement but for my invention beingdivided between that phenomenon and a bear in the brewery. They were so muchoccupied, however, in discussing the marvels I had already presented for theirconsideration, that I escaped. The subject still held them when Joe came infrom his work to have a cup of tea. To whom my sister, more for the relief ofher own mind than for the gratification of his, related my pretendedexperiences.Now, when I saw Joe open his blue eyes and roll them all round the kitchen inhelpless amazement, I was overtaken by penitence; but only as regardedhim,—not in the least as regarded the other two. Towards Joe, and Joeonly, I considered myself a young monster, while they sat debating what resultswould come to me from Miss Havisham’s acquaintance and favour. They hadno doubt that Miss Havisham would “do something” for me; theirdoubts related to the form that something would take. My sister stood out for“property.” Mr. Pumblechook was in favour of a handsome premium forbinding me apprentice to some genteel trade,—say, the corn and seedtrade, for instance. Joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both, for offeringthe bright suggestion that I might only be presented with one of the dogs whohad fought for the veal-cutlets. “If a fool’s head can’texpress better opinions than that,” said my sister, “and you havegot any work to do, you had better go and do it.” So he went.After Mr. Pumblechook had driven off, and when my sister was washing up, Istole into the forge to Joe, and remained by him until he had done for thenight. Then I said, “Before the fire goes out, Joe, I should like to tellyou something.”“Should you, Pip?” said Joe, drawing his shoeing-stool near theforge. “Then tell us. What is it, Pip?”“Joe,” said I, taking hold of his rolled-up shirt sleeve, andtwisting it between my finger and thumb, “you remember all that aboutMiss Havisham’s?”“Remember?” said Joe. “I believe you! Wonderful!”“It’s a terrible thing, Joe; it ain’t true.”“What are you telling of, Pip?” cried Joe, falling back in thegreatest amazement. “You don’t mean to say it’s—”“Yes I do; it’s lies, Joe.”“But not all of it? Why sure you don’t mean to say, Pip, that therewas no black welwet co—eh?” For, I stood shaking my head.“But at least there was dogs, Pip? Come, Pip,” said Joe,persuasively, “if there warn’t no weal-cutlets, at least there wasdogs?”“No, Joe.”“A dog?” said Joe. “A puppy? Come?”“No, Joe, there was nothing at all of the kind.”As I fixed my eyes hopelessly on Joe, Joe contemplated me in dismay.“Pip, old chap! This won’t do, old fellow! I say! Where do youexpect to go to?”“It’s terrible, Joe; ain’t it?”“Terrible?” cried Joe. “Awful! What possessed you?”“I don’t know what possessed me, Joe,” I replied, letting hisshirt sleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at his feet, hanging my head;“but I wish you hadn’t taught me to call Knaves at cards Jacks; andI wish my boots weren’t so thick nor my hands so coarse.”And then I told Joe that I felt very miserable, and that I hadn’t beenable to explain myself to Mrs. Joe and Pumblechook, who were so rude to me, andthat there had been a beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s who wasdreadfully proud, and that she had said I was common, and that I knew I wascommon, and that I wished I was not common, and that the lies had come of itsomehow, though I didn’t know how.This was a case of metaphysics, at least as difficult for Joe to deal with asfor me. But Joe took the case altogether out of the region of metaphysics, andby that means vanquished it.“There’s one thing you may be sure of, Pip,” said Joe, aftersome rumination, “namely, that lies is lies. Howsever they come, theydidn’t ought to come, and they come from the father of lies, and workround to the same. Don’t you tell no more of ’em, Pip. Thatain’t the way to get out of being common, old chap. And as to beingcommon, I don’t make it out at all clear. You are oncommon in somethings. You’re oncommon small. Likewise you’re a oncommonscholar.”“No, I am ignorant and backward, Joe.”“Why, see what a letter you wrote last night! Wrote in print even!I’ve seen letters—Ah! and from gentlefolks!—that I’llswear weren’t wrote in print,” said Joe.“I have learnt next to nothing, Joe. You think much of me. It’sonly that.”“Well, Pip,” said Joe, “be it so or be it son’t, youmust be a common scholar afore you can be a oncommon one, I should hope! Theking upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed, can’t sit and write hisacts of Parliament in print, without having begun, when he were a unpromotedPrince, with the alphabet.—Ah!” added Joe, with a shake of the headthat was full of meaning, “and begun at A too, and worked his way to Z.And I know what that is to do, though I can’t say I’veexactly done it.”There was some hope in this piece of wisdom, and it rather encouraged me.“Whether common ones as to callings and earnings,” pursued Joe,reflectively, “mightn’t be the better of continuing for to keepcompany with common ones, instead of going out to play with oncommonones,—which reminds me to hope that there were a flag, perhaps?”“No, Joe.”“(I’m sorry there weren’t a flag, Pip). Whether that might beor mightn’t be, is a thing as can’t be looked into now, withoutputting your sister on the Rampage; and that’s a thing not to be thoughtof as being done intentional. Lookee here, Pip, at what is said to you by atrue friend. Which this to you the true friend say. If you can’t get tobe oncommon through going straight, you’ll never get to do it throughgoing crooked. So don’t tell no more on ’em, Pip, and live well anddie happy.”“You are not angry with me, Joe?”“No, old chap. But bearing in mind that them were which I meantersay of astunning and outdacious sort,—alluding to them which bordered onweal-cutlets and dog-fighting,—a sincere well-wisher would adwise, Pip,their being dropped into your meditations, when you go upstairs to bed.That’s all, old chap, and don’t never do it no more.”When I got up to my little room and said my prayers, I did not forgetJoe’s recommendation, and yet my young mind was in that disturbed andunthankful state, that I thought long after I laid me down, how common Estellawould consider Joe, a mere blacksmith; how thick his boots, and how coarse hishands. I thought how Joe and my sister were then sitting in the kitchen, andhow I had come up to bed from the kitchen, and how Miss Havisham and Estellanever sat in a kitchen, but were far above the level of such common doings. Ifell asleep recalling what I “used to do” when I was at MissHavisham’s; as though I had been there weeks or months, instead of hours;and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance, instead of one thathad arisen only that day.That was a memorable day to me, for it made great changes in me. But it is thesame with any life. Imagine one selected day struck out of it, and think howdifferent its course would have been. Pause you who read this, and think for amoment of the long chain of iron or gold, of thorns or flowers, that wouldnever have bound you, but for the formation of the first link on one memorableday.Chapter X.Thefelicitous idea occurred to me a morning or two later when I woke, that thebest step I could take towards making myself uncommon was to get out of Biddyeverything she knew. In pursuance of this luminous conception I mentioned toBiddy when I went to Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s at night, that I hada particular reason for wishing to get on in life, and that I should feel verymuch obliged to her if she would impart all her learning to me. Biddy, who wasthe most obliging of girls, immediately said she would, and indeed began tocarry out her promise within five minutes.The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Wopsle’s great-auntmay be resolved into the following synopsis. The pupils ate apples and putstraws down one another’s backs, until Mr. Wopsle’s great-auntcollected her energies, and made an indiscriminate totter at them with abirch-rod. After receiving the charge with every mark of derision, the pupilsformed in line and buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand. The bookhad an alphabet in it, some figures and tables, and a littlespelling,—that is to say, it had had once. As soon as this volume beganto circulate, Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt fell into a state of coma, arisingeither from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm. The pupils then entered amongthemselves upon a competitive examination on the subject of Boots, with theview of ascertaining who could tread the hardest upon whose toes. This mentalexercise lasted until Biddy made a rush at them and distributed three defacedBibles (shaped as if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump end ofsomething), more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities ofliterature I have since met with, speckled all over with ironmould, and havingvarious specimens of the insect world smashed between their leaves. This partof the Course was usually lightened by several single combats between Biddy andrefractory students. When the fights were over, Biddy gave out the number of apage, and then we all read aloud what we could,—or what wecouldn’t—in a frightful chorus; Biddy leading with a high, shrill,monotonous voice, and none of us having the least notion of, or reverence for,what we were reading about. When this horrible din had lasted a certain time,it mechanically awoke Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt, who staggered at a boyfortuitously, and pulled his ears. This was understood to terminate the Coursefor the evening, and we emerged into the air with shrieks of intellectualvictory. It is fair to remark that there was no prohibition against anypupil’s entertaining himself with a slate or even with the ink (whenthere was any), but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study in thewinter season, on account of the little general shop in which the classes wereholden—and which was also Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’ssitting-room and bedchamber—being but faintly illuminated through theagency of one low-spirited dip-candle and no snuffers.It appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon, under thesecircumstances: nevertheless, I resolved to try it, and that very evening Biddyentered on our special agreement, by imparting some information from her littlecatalogue of Prices, under the head of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy athome, a large old English D which she had imitated from the heading of somenewspaper, and which I supposed, until she told me what it was, to be a designfor a buckle.Of course there was a public-house in the village, and of course Joe likedsometimes to smoke his pipe there. I had received strict orders from my sisterto call for him at the Three Jolly Bargemen, that evening, on my way fromschool, and bring him home at my peril. To the Three Jolly Bargemen, therefore,I directed my steps.There was a bar at the Jolly Bargemen, with some alarmingly long chalk scoresin it on the wall at the side of the door, which seemed to me to be never paidoff. They had been there ever since I could remember, and had grown more than Ihad. But there was a quantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps thepeople neglected no opportunity of turning it to account.It being Saturday night, I found the landlord looking rather grimly at theserecords; but as my business was with Joe and not with him, I merely wished himgood evening, and passed into the common room at the end of the passage, wherethere was a bright large kitchen fire, and where Joe was smoking his pipe incompany with Mr. Wopsle and a stranger. Joe greeted me as usual with“Halloa, Pip, old chap!” and the moment he said that, the strangerturned his head and looked at me.He was a secret-looking man whom I had never seen before. His head was all onone side, and one of his eyes was half shut up, as if he were taking aim atsomething with an invisible gun. He had a pipe in his mouth, and he took itout, and, after slowly blowing all his smoke away and looking hard at me allthe time, nodded. So, I nodded, and then he nodded again, and made room on thesettle beside him that I might sit down there.But as I was used to sit beside Joe whenever I entered that place of resort, Isaid “No, thank you, sir,” and fell into the space Joe made for meon the opposite settle. The strange man, after glancing at Joe, and seeing thathis attention was otherwise engaged, nodded to me again when I had taken myseat, and then rubbed his leg—in a very odd way, as it struck me.“You was saying,” said the strange man, turning to Joe, “thatyou was a blacksmith.”“Yes. I said it, you know,” said Joe.“What’ll you drink, Mr.—? You didn’t mention your name,by the bye.”Joe mentioned it now, and the strange man called him by it.“What’ll you drink, Mr. Gargery? At my expense? To top upwith?”“Well,” said Joe, “to tell you the truth, I ain’t muchin the habit of drinking at anybody’s expense but my own.”“Habit? No,” returned the stranger, “but once and away, andon a Saturday night too. Come! Put a name to it, Mr. Gargery.”“I wouldn’t wish to be stiff company,” said Joe.“Rum.”“Rum,” repeated the stranger. “And will the other gentlemanoriginate a sentiment.”“Rum,” said Mr. Wopsle.“Three Rums!” cried the stranger, calling to the landlord.“Glasses round!”“This other gentleman,” observed Joe, by way of introducing Mr.Wopsle, “is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out. Ourclerk at church.”“Aha!” said the stranger, quickly, and cocking his eye at me.“The lonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves roundit!”“That’s it,” said Joe.The stranger, with a comfortable kind of grunt over his pipe, put his legs upon the settle that he had to himself. He wore a flapping broad-brimmedtraveller’s hat, and under it a handkerchief tied over his head in themanner of a cap: so that he showed no hair. As he looked at the fire, I thoughtI saw a cunning expression, followed by a half-laugh, come into his face.“I am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but it seems asolitary country towards the river.”“Most marshes is solitary,” said Joe.“No doubt, no doubt. Do you find any gypsies, now, or tramps, or vagrantsof any sort, out there?”“No,” said Joe; “none but a runaway convict now and then. Andwe don’t find them, easy. Eh, Mr. Wopsle?”Mr. Wopsle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture, assented; but notwarmly.“Seems you have been out after such?” asked the stranger.“Once,” returned Joe. “Not that we wanted to take them, youunderstand; we went out as lookers on; me, and Mr. Wopsle, and Pip.Didn’t us, Pip?”“Yes, Joe.”The stranger looked at me again,—still cocking his eye, as if he wereexpressly taking aim at me with his invisible gun,—and said,“He’s a likely young parcel of bones that. What is it you callhim?”“Pip,” said Joe.“Christened Pip?”“No, not christened Pip.”“Surname Pip?”“No,” said Joe, “it’s a kind of family name what hegave himself when a infant, and is called by.”“Son of yours?”“Well,” said Joe, meditatively, not, of course, that it could be inanywise necessary to consider about it, but because it was the way at the JollyBargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed overpipes,—“well—no. No, he ain’t.”“Nevvy?” said the strange man.“Well,” said Joe, with the same appearance of profound cogitation,“he is not—no, not to deceive you, he is not—mynevvy.”“What the Blue Blazes is he?” asked the stranger. Which appeared tome to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength.Mr. Wopsle struck in upon that; as one who knew all about relationships, havingprofessional occasion to bear in mind what female relations a man might notmarry; and expounded the ties between me and Joe. Having his hand in, Mr.Wopsle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from Richard theThird, and seemed to think he had done quite enough to account for it when headded, “—as the poet says.”And here I may remark that when Mr. Wopsle referred to me, he considered it anecessary part of such reference to rumple my hair and poke it into my eyes. Icannot conceive why everybody of his standing who visited at our house shouldalways have put me through the same inflammatory process under similarcircumstances. Yet I do not call to mind that I was ever in my earlier youththe subject of remark in our social family circle, but some large-handed persontook some such ophthalmic steps to patronise me.All this while, the strange man looked at nobody but me, and looked at me as ifhe were determined to have a shot at me at last, and bring me down. But he saidnothing after offering his Blue Blazes observation, until the glasses of rumand water were brought; and then he made his shot, and a most extraordinaryshot it was.It was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dumb-show, and was pointedlyaddressed to me. He stirred his rum and water pointedly at me, and he tastedhis rum and water pointedly at me. And he stirred it and he tasted it; not witha spoon that was brought to him, but with a file.He did this so that nobody but I saw the file; and when he had done it he wipedthe file and put it in a breast-pocket. I knew it to be Joe’s file, and Iknew that he knew my convict, the moment I saw the instrument. I sat gazing athim, spell-bound. But he now reclined on his settle, taking very little noticeof me, and talking principally about turnips.There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause beforegoing on in life afresh, in our village on Saturday nights, which stimulatedJoe to dare to stay out half an hour longer on Saturdays than at other times.The half-hour and the rum and water running out together, Joe got up to go, andtook me by the hand.“Stop half a moment, Mr. Gargery,” said the strange man. “Ithink I’ve got a bright new shilling somewhere in my pocket, and if Ihave, the boy shall have it.”He looked it out from a handful of small change, folded it in some crumpledpaper, and gave it to me. “Yours!” said he. “Mind! Yourown.”I thanked him, staring at him far beyond the bounds of good manners, andholding tight to Joe. He gave Joe good-night, and he gave Mr. Wopsle good-night(who went out with us), and he gave me only a look with his aimingeye,—no, not a look, for he shut it up, but wonders may be done with aneye by hiding it.On the way home, if I had been in a humour for talking, the talk must have beenall on my side, for Mr. Wopsle parted from us at the door of the JollyBargemen, and Joe went all the way home with his mouth wide open, to rinse therum out with as much air as possible. But I was in a manner stupefied by thisturning up of my old misdeed and old acquaintance, and could think of nothingelse.My sister was not in a very bad temper when we presented ourselves in thekitchen, and Joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstance to tell her aboutthe bright shilling. “A bad un, I’ll be bound,” said Mrs. Joetriumphantly, “or he wouldn’t have given it to the boy! Let’slook at it.”I took it out of the paper, and it proved to be a good one. “Butwhat’s this?” said Mrs. Joe, throwing down the shilling andcatching up the paper. “Two One-Pound notes?”Nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have beenon terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle-markets in the county. Joecaught up his hat again, and ran with them to the Jolly Bargemen to restorethem to their owner. While he was gone, I sat down on my usual stool and lookedvacantly at my sister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there.Presently, Joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but that he, Joe, hadleft word at the Three Jolly Bargemen concerning the notes. Then my sistersealed them up in a piece of paper, and put them under some dried rose-leavesin an ornamental teapot on the top of a press in the state parlour. There theyremained, a nightmare to me, many and many a night and day.I had sadly broken sleep when I got to bed, through thinking of the strange mantaking aim at me with his invisible gun, and of the guiltily coarse and commonthing it was, to be on secret terms of conspiracy with convicts,—afeature in my low career that I had previously forgotten. I was haunted by thefile too. A dread possessed me that when I least expected it, the file wouldreappear. I coaxed myself to sleep by thinking of Miss Havisham’s, nextWednesday; and in my sleep I saw the file coming at me out of a door, withoutseeing who held it, and I screamed myself awake.Chapter XI.At theappointed time I returned to Miss Havisham’s, and my hesitating ring atthe gate brought out Estella. She locked it after admitting me, as she had donebefore, and again preceded me into the dark passage where her candle stood. Shetook no notice of me until she had the candle in her hand, when she looked overher shoulder, superciliously saying, “You are to come this wayto-day,” and took me to quite another part of the house.The passage was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole square basement ofthe Manor House. We traversed but one side of the square, however, and at theend of it she stopped, and put her candle down and opened a door. Here, thedaylight reappeared, and I found myself in a small paved courtyard, theopposite side of which was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked asif it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery.There was a clock in the outer wall of this house. Like the clock in MissHavisham’s room, and like Miss Havisham’s watch, it had stopped attwenty minutes to nine.We went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy room with a lowceiling, on the ground-floor at the back. There was some company in the room,and Estella said to me as she joined it, “You are to go and stand thereboy, till you are wanted.” “There”, being the window, Icrossed to it, and stood “there,” in a very uncomfortable state ofmind, looking out.It opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner of theneglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks, and one box-tree that hadbeen clipped round long ago, like a pudding, and had a new growth at the top ofit, out of shape and of a different colour, as if that part of the pudding hadstuck to the saucepan and got burnt. This was my homely thought, as Icontemplated the box-tree. There had been some light snow, overnight, and itlay nowhere else to my knowledge; but, it had not quite melted from the coldshadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught it up in little eddies andthrew it at the window, as if it pelted me for coming there.I divined that my coming had stopped conversation in the room, and that itsother occupants were looking at me. I could see nothing of the room except theshining of the fire in the window-glass, but I stiffened in all my joints withthe consciousness that I was under close inspection.There were three ladies in the room and one gentleman. Before I had beenstanding at the window five minutes, they somehow conveyed to me that they wereall toadies and humbugs, but that each of them pretended not to know that theothers were toadies and humbugs: because the admission that he or she did knowit, would have made him or her out to be a toady and humbug.They all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody’s pleasure,and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quite rigidly to repress ayawn. This lady, whose name was Camilla, very much reminded me of my sister,with the difference that she was older, and (as I found when I caught sight ofher) of a blunter cast of features. Indeed, when I knew her better I began tothink it was a Mercy she had any features at all, so very blank and high wasthe dead wall of her face.“Poor dear soul!” said this lady, with an abruptness of mannerquite my sister’s. “Nobody’s enemy but his own!”“It would be much more commendable to be somebody else’senemy,” said the gentleman; “far more natural.”“Cousin Raymond,” observed another lady, “we are to love ourneighbour.”“Sarah Pocket,” returned Cousin Raymond, “if a man is not hisown neighbour, who is?”Miss Pocket laughed, and Camilla laughed and said (checking a yawn), “Theidea!” But I thought they seemed to think it rather a good idea too. Theother lady, who had not spoken yet, said gravely and emphatically,“Very true!”“Poor soul!” Camilla presently went on (I knew they had all beenlooking at me in the mean time), “he is so very strange! Would anyonebelieve that when Tom’s wife died, he actually could not be induced tosee the importance of the children’s having the deepest of trimmings totheir mourning? ‘Good Lord!’ says he, ‘Camilla, what can itsignify so long as the poor bereaved little things are in black?’ So likeMatthew! The idea!”“Good points in him, good points in him,” said Cousin Raymond;“Heaven forbid I should deny good points in him; but he never had, and henever will have, any sense of the proprieties.”“You know I was obliged,” said Camilla,—“I was obligedto be firm. I said, ‘It WILL NOT DO, for the credit of thefamily.’ I told him that, without deep trimmings, the family wasdisgraced. I cried about it from breakfast till dinner. I injured my digestion.And at last he flung out in his violent way, and said, with a D, ‘Then doas you like.’ Thank Goodness it will always be a consolation to me toknow that I instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought the things.”“He paid for them, did he not?” asked Estella.“It’s not the question, my dear child, who paid for them,”returned Camilla. “I bought them. And I shall often think of thatwith peace, when I wake up in the night.”The ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of some cry or callalong the passage by which I had come, interrupted the conversation and causedEstella to say to me, “Now, boy!” On my turning round, they alllooked at me with the utmost contempt, and, as I went out, I heard Sarah Pocketsay, “Well I am sure! What next!” and Camilla add, withindignation, “Was there ever such a fancy! The i-de-a!”As we were going with our candle along the dark passage, Estella stopped all ofa sudden, and, facing round, said in her taunting manner, with her face quiteclose to mine,—“Well?”“Well, miss?” I answered, almost falling over her and checkingmyself.She stood looking at me, and, of course, I stood looking at her.“Am I pretty?”“Yes; I think you are very pretty.”“Am I insulting?”“Not so much so as you were last time,” said I.“Not so much so?”“No.”She fired when she asked the last question, and she slapped my face with suchforce as she had, when I answered it.“Now?” said she. “You little coarse monster, what do youthink of me now?”“I shall not tell you.”“Because you are going to tell upstairs. Is that it?”“No,” said I, “that’s not it.”“Why don’t you cry again, you little wretch?”“Because I’ll never cry for you again,” said I. Which was, Isuppose, as false a declaration as ever was made; for I was inwardly crying forher then, and I know what I know of the pain she cost me afterwards.We went on our way upstairs after this episode; and, as we were going up, wemet a gentleman groping his way down.“Whom have we here?” asked the gentleman, stopping and looking atme.“A boy,” said Estella.He was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with an exceedingly largehead, and a corresponding large hand. He took my chin in his large hand andturned up my face to have a look at me by the light of the candle. He wasprematurely bald on the top of his head, and had bushy black eyebrows thatwouldn’t lie down but stood up bristling. His eyes were set very deep inhis head, and were disagreeably sharp and suspicious. He had a largewatch-chain, and strong black dots where his beard and whiskers would have beenif he had let them. He was nothing to me, and I could have had no foresightthen, that he ever would be anything to me, but it happened that I had thisopportunity of observing him well.“Boy of the neighbourhood? Hey?” said he.“Yes, sir,” said I.“How do you come here?”“Miss Havisham sent for me, sir,” I explained.“Well! Behave yourself. I have a pretty large experience of boys, andyou’re a bad set of fellows. Now mind!” said he, biting the side ofhis great forefinger as he frowned at me, “you behave yourself!”With those words, he released me—which I was glad of, for his hand smeltof scented soap—and went his way downstairs. I wondered whether he couldbe a doctor; but no, I thought; he couldn’t be a doctor, or he would havea quieter and more persuasive manner. There was not much time to consider thesubject, for we were soon in Miss Havisham’s room, where she andeverything else were just as I had left them. Estella left me standing near thedoor, and I stood there until Miss Havisham cast her eyes upon me from thedressing-table.“So!” she said, without being startled or surprised: “thedays have worn away, have they?”“Yes, ma’am. To-day is—”“There, there, there!” with the impatient movement of her fingers.“I don’t want to know. Are you ready to play?”I was obliged to answer in some confusion, “I don’t think I am,ma’am.”“Not at cards again?” she demanded, with a searching look.“Yes, ma’am; I could do that, if I was wanted.”“Since this house strikes you old and grave, boy,” said MissHavisham, impatiently, “and you are unwilling to play, are you willing towork?”I could answer this inquiry with a better heart than I had been able to findfor the other question, and I said I was quite willing.“Then go into that opposite room,” said she, pointing at the doorbehind me with her withered hand, “and wait there till I come.”I crossed the staircase landing, and entered the room she indicated. From thatroom, too, the daylight was completely excluded, and it had an airless smellthat was oppressive. A fire had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashionedgrate, and it was more disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctantsmoke which hung in the room seemed colder than the clearer air,—like ourown marsh mist. Certain wintry branches of candles on the high chimney-piecefaintly lighted the chamber; or it would be more expressive to say, faintlytroubled its darkness. It was spacious, and I dare say had once been handsome,but every discernible thing in it was covered with dust and mould, and droppingto pieces. The most prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spreadon it, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the clocks allstopped together. An epergne or centre-piece of some kind was in the middle ofthis cloth; it was so heavily overhung with cobwebs that its form was quiteundistinguishable; and, as I looked along the yellow expanse out of which Iremember its seeming to grow, like a black fungus, I saw speckle-legged spiderswith blotchy bodies running home to it, and running out from it, as if somecircumstances of the greatest public importance had just transpired in thespider community.I heard the mice too, rattling behind the panels, as if the same occurrencewere important to their interests. But the black beetles took no notice of theagitation, and groped about the hearth in a ponderous elderly way, as if theywere short-sighted and hard of hearing, and not on terms with one another.These crawling things had fascinated my attention, and I was watching them froma distance, when Miss Havisham laid a hand upon my shoulder. In her other handshe had a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned, and she looked like theWitch of the place.“This,” said she, pointing to the long table with her stick,“is where I will be laid when I am dead. They shall come and look at mehere.”With some vague misgiving that she might get upon the table then and there anddie at once, the complete realisation of the ghastly waxwork at the Fair, Ishrank under her touch.“What do you think that is?” she asked me, again pointing with herstick; “that, where those cobwebs are?”“I can’t guess what it is, ma’am.”“It’s a great cake. A bride-cake. Mine!”She looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said, leaning on mewhile her hand twitched my shoulder, “Come, come, come! Walk me, walkme!”I made out from this, that the work I had to do, was to walk Miss Havishamround and round the room. Accordingly, I started at once, and she leaned uponmy shoulder, and we went away at a pace that might have been an imitation(founded on my first impulse under that roof) of Mr. Pumblechook’schaise-cart.She was not physically strong, and after a little time said,“Slower!” Still, we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as wewent, she twitched the hand upon my shoulder, and worked her mouth, and led meto believe that we were going fast because her thoughts went fast. After awhile she said, “Call Estella!” so I went out on the landing androared that name as I had done on the previous occasion. When her lightappeared, I returned to Miss Havisham, and we started away again round andround the room.If only Estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, I should havefelt sufficiently discontented; but as she brought with her the three ladiesand the gentleman whom I had seen below, I didn’t know what to do. In mypoliteness, I would have stopped; but Miss Havisham twitched my shoulder, andwe posted on,—with a shame-faced consciousness on my part that they wouldthink it was all my doing.“Dear Miss Havisham,” said Miss Sarah Pocket. “How well youlook!”“I do not,” returned Miss Havisham. “I am yellow skin andbone.”Camilla brightened when Miss Pocket met with this rebuff; and she murmured, asshe plaintively contemplated Miss Havisham, “Poor dear soul! Certainlynot to be expected to look well, poor thing. The idea!”“And how are you?” said Miss Havisham to Camilla. As we wereclose to Camilla then, I would have stopped as a matter of course, only MissHavisham wouldn’t stop. We swept on, and I felt that I was highlyobnoxious to Camilla.“Thank you, Miss Havisham,” she returned, “I am as well ascan be expected.”“Why, what’s the matter with you?” asked Miss Havisham, withexceeding sharpness.“Nothing worth mentioning,” replied Camilla. “I don’twish to make a display of my feelings, but I have habitually thought of youmore in the night than I am quite equal to.”“Then don’t think of me,” retorted Miss Havisham.“Very easily said!” remarked Camilla, amiably repressing a sob,while a hitch came into her upper lip, and her tears overflowed. “Raymondis a witness what ginger and sal volatile I am obliged to take in the night.Raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings I have in my legs. Chokings andnervous jerkings, however, are nothing new to me when I think with anxiety ofthose I love. If I could be less affectionate and sensitive, I should have abetter digestion and an iron set of nerves. I am sure I wish it could be so.But as to not thinking of you in the night—The idea!” Here, a burstof tears.The Raymond referred to, I understood to be the gentleman present, and him Iunderstood to be Mr. Camilla. He came to the rescue at this point, and said ina consolatory and complimentary voice, “Camilla, my dear, it is wellknown that your family feelings are gradually undermining you to the extent ofmaking one of your legs shorter than the other.”“I am not aware,” observed the grave lady whose voice I had heardbut once, “that to think of any person is to make a great claim upon thatperson, my dear.”Miss Sarah Pocket, whom I now saw to be a little dry, brown, corrugated oldwoman, with a small face that might have been made of walnut-shells, and alarge mouth like a cat’s without the whiskers, supported this position bysaying, “No, indeed, my dear. Hem!”“Thinking is easy enough,” said the grave lady.“What is easier, you know?” assented Miss Sarah Pocket.“Oh, yes, yes!” cried Camilla, whose fermenting feelings appearedto rise from her legs to her bosom. “It’s all very true! It’sa weakness to be so affectionate, but I can’t help it. No doubt my healthwould be much better if it was otherwise, still I wouldn’t change mydisposition if I could. It’s the cause of much suffering, but it’sa consolation to know I posses it, when I wake up in the night.” Hereanother burst of feeling.Miss Havisham and I had never stopped all this time, but kept going round andround the room; now brushing against the skirts of the visitors, now givingthem the whole length of the dismal chamber.“There’s Matthew!” said Camilla. “Never mixing with anynatural ties, never coming here to see how Miss Havisham is! I have taken tothe sofa with my staylace cut, and have lain there hours insensible, with myhead over the side, and my hair all down, and my feet I don’t knowwhere—”(“Much higher than your head, my love,” said Mr. Camilla.)“I have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account ofMatthew’s strange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thankedme.”“Really I must say I should think not!” interposed the grave lady.“You see, my dear,” added Miss Sarah Pocket (a blandly viciouspersonage), “the question to put to yourself is, who did you expect tothank you, my love?”“Without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort,” resumedCamilla, “I have remained in that state, hours and hours, and Raymond isa witness of the extent to which I have choked, and what the total inefficacyof ginger has been, and I have been heard at the piano-forte tuner’sacross the street, where the poor mistaken children have even supposed it to bepigeons cooing at a distance,—and now to be told—” HereCamilla put her hand to her throat, and began to be quite chemical as to theformation of new combinations there.When this same Matthew was mentioned, Miss Havisham stopped me and herself, andstood looking at the speaker. This change had a great influence in bringingCamilla’s chemistry to a sudden end.“Matthew will come and see me at last,” said Miss Havisham,sternly, “when I am laid on that table. That will be hisplace,—there,” striking the table with her stick, “at myhead! And yours will be there! And your husband’s there! And SarahPocket’s there! And Georgiana’s there! Now you all know where totake your stations when you come to feast upon me. And now go!”At the mention of each name, she had struck the table with her stick in a newplace. She now said, “Walk me, walk me!” and we went on again.“I suppose there’s nothing to be done,” exclaimed Camilla,“but comply and depart. It’s something to have seen the object ofone’s love and duty for even so short a time. I shall think of it with amelancholy satisfaction when I wake up in the night. I wish Matthew could havethat comfort, but he sets it at defiance. I am determined not to make a displayof my feelings, but it’s very hard to be told one wants to feast onone’s relations,—as if one was a Giant,—and to be told to go.The bare idea!”Mr. Camilla interposing, as Mrs. Camilla laid her hand upon her heaving bosom,that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which I supposed to beexpressive of an intention to drop and choke when out of view, and kissing herhand to Miss Havisham, was escorted forth. Sarah Pocket and Georgiana contendedwho should remain last; but Sarah was too knowing to be outdone, and ambledround Georgiana with that artful slipperiness that the latter was obliged totake precedence. Sarah Pocket then made her separate effect of departing with,“Bless you, Miss Havisham dear!” and with a smile of forgiving pityon her walnut-shell countenance for the weaknesses of the rest.While Estella was away lighting them down, Miss Havisham still walked with herhand on my shoulder, but more and more slowly. At last she stopped before thefire, and said, after muttering and looking at it some seconds,—“This is my birthday, Pip.”I was going to wish her many happy returns, when she lifted her stick.“I don’t suffer it to be spoken of. I don’t suffer those whowere here just now, or any one to speak of it. They come here on the day, butthey dare not refer to it.”Of course I made no further effort to refer to it.“On this day of the year, long before you were born, this heap ofdecay,” stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on thetable, but not touching it, “was brought here. It and I have worn awaytogether. The mice have gnawed at it, and sharper teeth than teeth of mice havegnawed at me.”She held the head of her stick against her heart as she stood looking at thetable; she in her once white dress, all yellow and withered; the once whitecloth all yellow and withered; everything around in a state to crumble under atouch.“When the ruin is complete,” said she, with a ghastly look,“and when they lay me dead, in my bride’s dress on thebride’s table,—which shall be done, and which will be the finishedcurse upon him,—so much the better if it is done on this day!”She stood looking at the table as if she stood looking at her own figure lyingthere. I remained quiet. Estella returned, and she too remained quiet. Itseemed to me that we continued thus for a long time. In the heavy air of theroom, and the heavy darkness that brooded in its remoter corners, I even had analarming fancy that Estella and I might presently begin to decay.At length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, but in aninstant, Miss Havisham said, “Let me see you two play cards; why have younot begun?” With that, we returned to her room, and sat down as before; Iwas beggared, as before; and again, as before, Miss Havisham watched us all thetime, directed my attention to Estella’s beauty, and made me notice itthe more by trying her jewels on Estella’s breast and hair.Estella, for her part, likewise treated me as before, except that she did notcondescend to speak. When we had played some half-dozen games, a day wasappointed for my return, and I was taken down into the yard to be fed in theformer dog-like manner. There, too, I was again left to wander about as Iliked.It is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall which I hadscrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on that last occasion, openor shut. Enough that I saw no gate then, and that I saw one now. As it stoodopen, and as I knew that Estella had let the visitors out,—for she hadreturned with the keys in her hand,—I strolled into the garden, andstrolled all over it. It was quite a wilderness, and there were oldmelon-frames and cucumber-frames in it, which seemed in their decline to haveproduced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old hats and boots,with now and then a weedy offshoot into the likeness of a battered saucepan.When I had exhausted the garden and a greenhouse with nothing in it but afallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, I found myself in the dismal cornerupon which I had looked out of the window. Never questioning for a moment thatthe house was now empty, I looked in at another window, and found myself, to mygreat surprise, exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with redeyelids and light hair.This pale young gentleman quickly disappeared, and reappeared beside me. He hadbeen at his books when I had found myself staring at him, and I now saw that hewas inky.“Halloa!” said he, “young fellow!”Halloa being a general observation which I had usually observed to be bestanswered by itself, I said, “Halloa!” politely omittingyoung fellow.“Who let you in?” said he.“Miss Estella.”“Who gave you leave to prowl about?”“Miss Estella.”“Come and fight,” said the pale young gentleman.What could I do but follow him? I have often asked myself the question since;but what else could I do? His manner was so final, and I was so astonished,that I followed where he led, as if I had been under a spell.“Stop a minute, though,” he said, wheeling round before we had gonemany paces. “I ought to give you a reason for fighting, too. There itis!” In a most irritating manner he instantly slapped his hands againstone another, daintily flung one of his legs up behind him, pulled my hair,slapped his hands again, dipped his head, and butted it into my stomach.The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that it was unquestionably tobe regarded in the light of a liberty, was particularly disagreeable just afterbread and meat. I therefore hit out at him and was going to hit out again, whenhe said, “Aha! Would you?” and began dancing backwards and forwardsin a manner quite unparalleled within my limited experience.“Laws of the game!” said he. Here, he skipped from his left leg onto his right. “Regular rules!” Here, he skipped from his right legon to his left. “Come to the ground, and go through thepreliminaries!” Here, he dodged backwards and forwards, and did all sortsof things while I looked helplessly at him.I was secretly afraid of him when I saw him so dexterous; but I felt morallyand physically convinced that his light head of hair could have had no businessin the pit of my stomach, and that I had a right to consider it irrelevant whenso obtruded on my attention. Therefore, I followed him without a word, to aretired nook of the garden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened bysome rubbish. On his asking me if I was satisfied with the ground, and on myreplying Yes, he begged my leave to absent himself for a moment, and quicklyreturned with a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar.“Available for both,” he said, placing these against the wall. Andthen fell to pulling off, not only his jacket and waistcoat, but his shirt too,in a manner at once light-hearted, business-like, and bloodthirsty.Although he did not look very healthy,—having pimples on his face, and abreaking out at his mouth,—these dreadful preparations quite appalled me.I judged him to be about my own age, but he was much taller, and he had a wayof spinning himself about that was full of appearance. For the rest, he was ayoung gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded for battle), with his elbows,knees, wrists, and heels considerably in advance of the rest of him as todevelopment.My heart failed me when I saw him squaring at me with every demonstration ofmechanical nicety, and eyeing my anatomy as if he were minutely choosing hisbone. I never have been so surprised in my life, as I was when I let out thefirst blow, and saw him lying on his back, looking up at me with a bloody noseand his face exceedingly fore-shortened.But, he was on his feet directly, and after sponging himself with a great showof dexterity began squaring again. The second greatest surprise I have ever hadin my life was seeing him on his back again, looking up at me out of a blackeye.His spirit inspired me with great respect. He seemed to have no strength, andhe never once hit me hard, and he was always knocked down; but he would be upagain in a moment, sponging himself or drinking out of the water-bottle, withthe greatest satisfaction in seconding himself according to form, and then cameat me with an air and a show that made me believe he really was going to do forme at last. He got heavily bruised, for I am sorry to record that the more Ihit him, the harder I hit him; but he came up again and again and again, untilat last he got a bad fall with the back of his head against the wall. Evenafter that crisis in our affairs, he got up and turned round and roundconfusedly a few times, not knowing where I was; but finally went on his kneesto his sponge and threw it up: at the same time panting out, “That meansyou have won.”He seemed so brave and innocent, that although I had not proposed the contest,I felt but a gloomy satisfaction in my victory. Indeed, I go so far as to hopethat I regarded myself while dressing as a species of savage young wolf orother wild beast. However, I got dressed, darkly wiping my sanguinary face atintervals, and I said, “Can I help you?” and he said “Nothankee,” and I said “Good afternoon,” and he said“Same to you.”When I got into the courtyard, I found Estella waiting with the keys. But sheneither asked me where I had been, nor why I had kept her waiting; and therewas a bright flush upon her face, as though something had happened to delighther. Instead of going straight to the gate, too, she stepped back into thepassage, and beckoned me.“Come here! You may kiss me, if you like.”I kissed her cheek as she turned it to me. I think I would have gone through agreat deal to kiss her cheek. But I felt that the kiss was given to the coarsecommon boy as a piece of money might have been, and that it was worth nothing.What with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and what with thefight, my stay had lasted so long, that when I neared home the light on thespit of sand off the point on the marshes was gleaming against a blacknight-sky, and Joe’s furnace was flinging a path of fire across the road.Chapter XII.Mymind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman. The more Ithought of the fight, and recalled the pale young gentleman on his back invarious stages of puffy and incrimsoned countenance, the more certain itappeared that something would be done to me. I felt that the pale younggentleman’s blood was on my head, and that the Law would avenge it.Without having any definite idea of the penalties I had incurred, it was clearto me that village boys could not go stalking about the country, ravaging thehouses of gentlefolks and pitching into the studious youth of England, withoutlaying themselves open to severe punishment. For some days, I even kept closeat home, and looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution andtrepidation before going on an errand, lest the officers of the County Jailshould pounce upon me. The pale young gentleman’s nose had stained mytrousers, and I tried to wash out that evidence of my guilt in the dead ofnight. I had cut my knuckles against the pale young gentleman’s teeth,and I twisted my imagination into a thousand tangles, as I devised incredibleways of accounting for that damnatory circumstance when I should be haledbefore the Judges.When the day came round for my return to the scene of the deed of violence, myterrors reached their height. Whether myrmidons of Justice, especially sentdown from London, would be lying in ambush behind the gate;—whether MissHavisham, preferring to take personal vengeance for an outrage done to herhouse, might rise in those grave-clothes of hers, draw a pistol, and shoot medead:—whether suborned boys—a numerous band ofmercenaries—might be engaged to fall upon me in the brewery, and cuff meuntil I was no more;—it was high testimony to my confidence in the spiritof the pale young gentleman, that I never imagined him accessory tothese retaliations; they always came into my mind as the acts of injudiciousrelatives of his, goaded on by the state of his visage and an indignantsympathy with the family features.However, go to Miss Havisham’s I must, and go I did. And behold! nothingcame of the late struggle. It was not alluded to in any way, and no pale younggentleman was to be discovered on the premises. I found the same gate open, andI explored the garden, and even looked in at the windows of the detached house;but my view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and all waslifeless. Only in the corner where the combat had taken place could I detectany evidence of the young gentleman’s existence. There were traces of hisgore in that spot, and I covered them with garden-mould from the eye of man.On the broad landing between Miss Havisham’s own room and that other roomin which the long table was laid out, I saw a garden-chair,—a light chairon wheels, that you pushed from behind. It had been placed there since my lastvisit, and I entered, that same day, on a regular occupation of pushing MissHavisham in this chair (when she was tired of walking with her hand upon myshoulder) round her own room, and across the landing, and round the other room.Over and over and over again, we would make these journeys, and sometimes theywould last as long as three hours at a stretch. I insensibly fall into ageneral mention of these journeys as numerous, because it was at once settledthat I should return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, andbecause I am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten months.As we began to be more used to one another, Miss Havisham talked more to me,and asked me such questions as what had I learnt and what was I going to be? Itold her I was going to be apprenticed to Joe, I believed; and I enlarged uponmy knowing nothing and wanting to know everything, in the hope that she mightoffer some help towards that desirable end. But she did not; on the contrary,she seemed to prefer my being ignorant. Neither did she ever give me anymoney,—or anything but my daily dinner,—nor ever stipulate that Ishould be paid for my services.Estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but never told me Imight kiss her again. Sometimes, she would coldly tolerate me; sometimes, shewould condescend to me; sometimes, she would be quite familiar with me;sometimes, she would tell me energetically that she hated me. Miss Havishamwould often ask me in a whisper, or when we were alone, “Does she growprettier and prettier, Pip?” And when I said yes (for indeed she did),would seem to enjoy it greedily. Also, when we played at cards Miss Havishamwould look on, with a miserly relish of Estella’s moods, whatever theywere. And sometimes, when her moods were so many and so contradictory of oneanother that I was puzzled what to say or do, Miss Havisham would embrace herwith lavish fondness, murmuring something in her ear that sounded like“Break their hearts my pride and hope, break their hearts and have nomercy!”There was a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burdenwas Old Clem. This was not a very ceremonious way of rendering homage to apatron saint, but I believe Old Clem stood in that relation towards smiths. Itwas a song that imitated the measure of beating upon iron, and was a merelyrical excuse for the introduction of Old Clem’s respected name. Thus,you were to hammer boys round—Old Clem! With a thump and asound—Old Clem! Beat it out, beat it out—Old Clem! With a clink forthe stout—Old Clem! Blow the fire, blow the fire—Old Clem! Roaringdryer, soaring higher—Old Clem! One day soon after the appearance of thechair, Miss Havisham suddenly saying to me, with the impatient movement of herfingers, “There, there, there! Sing!” I was surprised into crooningthis ditty as I pushed her over the floor. It happened so to catch her fancythat she took it up in a low brooding voice as if she were singing in hersleep. After that, it became customary with us to have it as we moved about,and Estella would often join in; though the whole strain was so subdued, evenwhen there were three of us, that it made less noise in the grim old house thanthe lightest breath of wind.What could I become with these surroundings? How could my character fail to beinfluenced by them? Is it to be wondered at if my thoughts were dazed, as myeyes were, when I came out into the natural light from the misty yellow rooms?Perhaps I might have told Joe about the pale young gentleman, if I had notpreviously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to which I hadconfessed. Under the circumstances, I felt that Joe could hardly fail todiscern in the pale young gentleman, an appropriate passenger to be put intothe black velvet coach; therefore, I said nothing of him. Besides, thatshrinking from having Miss Havisham and Estella discussed, which had come uponme in the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on. I reposed completeconfidence in no one but Biddy; but I told poor Biddy everything. Why it camenatural to me to do so, and why Biddy had a deep concern in everything I toldher, I did not know then, though I think I know now.Meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught with almostinsupportable aggravation to my exasperated spirit. That ass, Pumblechook, usedoften to come over of a night for the purpose of discussing my prospects withmy sister; and I really do believe (to this hour with less penitence than Iought to feel), that if these hands could have taken a linchpin out of hischaise-cart, they would have done it. The miserable man was a man of thatconfined stolidity of mind, that he could not discuss my prospects withouthaving me before him,—as it were, to operate upon,—and he woulddrag me up from my stool (usually by the collar) where I was quiet in a corner,and, putting me before the fire as if I were going to be cooked, would begin bysaying, “Now, Mum, here is this boy! Here is this boy which you broughtup by hand. Hold up your head, boy, and be forever grateful unto them which sodid do. Now, Mum, with respections to this boy!” And then he would rumplemy hair the wrong way,—which from my earliest remembrance, as alreadyhinted, I have in my soul denied the right of any fellow-creature todo,—and would hold me before him by the sleeve,—a spectacle ofimbecility only to be equalled by himself.Then, he and my sister would pair off in such nonsensical speculations aboutMiss Havisham, and about what she would do with me and for me, that I used towant—quite painfully—to burst into spiteful tears, fly atPumblechook, and pummel him all over. In these dialogues, my sister spoke to meas if she were morally wrenching one of my teeth out at every reference; whilePumblechook himself, self-constituted my patron, would sit supervising me witha depreciatory eye, like the architect of my fortunes who thought himselfengaged on a very unremunerative job.In these discussions, Joe bore no part. But he was often talked at, while theywere in progress, by reason of Mrs. Joe’s perceiving that he was notfavourable to my being taken from the forge. I was fully old enough now to beapprenticed to Joe; and when Joe sat with the poker on his knees thoughtfullyraking out the ashes between the lower bars, my sister would so distinctlyconstrue that innocent action into opposition on his part, that she would diveat him, take the poker out of his hands, shake him, and put it away. There wasa most irritating end to every one of these debates. All in a moment, withnothing to lead up to it, my sister would stop herself in a yawn, and catchingsight of me as it were incidentally, would swoop upon me with, “Come!there’s enough of you! You get along to bed;you’ve given trouble enough for one night, I hope!” As if Ihad besought them as a favour to bother my life out.We went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely that we shouldcontinue to go on in this way for a long time, when one day Miss Havishamstopped short as she and I were walking, she leaning on my shoulder; and saidwith some displeasure,—“You are growing tall, Pip!”I thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look, that thismight be occasioned by circumstances over which I had no control.She said no more at the time; but she presently stopped and looked at me again;and presently again; and after that, looked frowning and moody. On the next dayof my attendance, when our usual exercise was over, and I had landed her at herdressing-table, she stayed me with a movement of her impatient fingers:—“Tell me the name again of that blacksmith of yours.”“Joe Gargery, ma’am.”“Meaning the master you were to be apprenticed to?”“Yes, Miss Havisham.”“You had better be apprenticed at once. Would Gargery come here with you,and bring your indentures, do you think?”I signified that I had no doubt he would take it as an honour to be asked.“Then let him come.”“At any particular time, Miss Havisham?”“There, there! I know nothing about times. Let him come soon, and comealong with you.”When I got home at night, and delivered this message for Joe, my sister“went on the Rampage,” in a more alarming degree than at anyprevious period. She asked me and Joe whether we supposed she was door-matsunder our feet, and how we dared to use her so, and what company we graciouslythought she was fit for? When she had exhausted a torrent of suchinquiries, she threw a candlestick at Joe, burst into a loud sobbing, got outthe dustpan,—which was always a very bad sign,—put on her coarseapron, and began cleaning up to a terrible extent. Not satisfied with a drycleaning, she took to a pail and scrubbing-brush, and cleaned us out of houseand home, so that we stood shivering in the back-yard. It was ten o’clockat night before we ventured to creep in again, and then she asked Joe why hehadn’t married a Negress Slave at once? Joe offered no answer, poorfellow, but stood feeling his whisker and looking dejectedly at me, as if hethought it really might have been a better speculation.Chapter XIII.It wasa trial to my feelings, on the next day but one, to see Joe arraying himself inhis Sunday clothes to accompany me to Miss Havisham’s. However, as hethought his court-suit necessary to the occasion, it was not for me to tell himthat he looked far better in his working-dress; the rather, because I knew hemade himself so dreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on my account, and that itwas for me he pulled up his shirt-collar so very high behind, that it made thehair on the crown of his head stand up like a tuft of feathers.At breakfast-time my sister declared her intention of going to town with us,and being left at Uncle Pumblechook’s and called for “when we haddone with our fine ladies”—a way of putting the case, from whichJoe appeared inclined to augur the worst. The forge was shut up for the day,and Joe inscribed in chalk upon the door (as it was his custom to do on thevery rare occasions when he was not at work) the monosyllableHOUT, accompanied by a sketch of an arrow supposed to be flyingin the direction he had taken.We walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaver bonnet, andcarrying a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited Straw, a pair ofpattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, though it was a fine bright day. I amnot quite clear whether these articles were carried penitentially orostentatiously; but I rather think they were displayed as articles ofproperty,—much as Cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampagemight exhibit her wealth in a pageant or procession.When we came to Pumblechook’s, my sister bounced in and left us. As itwas almost noon, Joe and I held straight on to Miss Havisham’s house.Estella opened the gate as usual, and, the moment she appeared, Joe took hishat off and stood weighing it by the brim in both his hands; as if he had someurgent reason in his mind for being particular to half a quarter of an ounce.Estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that I knew so well.I followed next to her, and Joe came last. When I looked back at Joe in thelong passage, he was still weighing his hat with the greatest care, and wascoming after us in long strides on the tips of his toes.Estella told me we were both to go in, so I took Joe by the coat-cuff andconducted him into Miss Havisham’s presence. She was seated at herdressing-table, and looked round at us immediately.“Oh!” said she to Joe. “You are the husband of the sister ofthis boy?”I could hardly have imagined dear old Joe looking so unlike himself or so likesome extraordinary bird; standing as he did speechless, with his tuft offeathers ruffled, and his mouth open as if he wanted a worm.“You are the husband,” repeated Miss Havisham, “of the sisterof this boy?”It was very aggravating; but, throughout the interview, Joe persisted inaddressing Me instead of Miss Havisham.“Which I meantersay, Pip,” Joe now observed in a manner that was atonce expressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, and greatpoliteness, “as I hup and married your sister, and I were at the timewhat you might call (if you was anyways inclined) a single man.”“Well!” said Miss Havisham. “And you have reared the boy,with the intention of taking him for your apprentice; is that so, Mr.Gargery?”“You know, Pip,” replied Joe, “as you and me were everfriends, and it were looked for’ard to betwixt us, as beingcalc’lated to lead to larks. Not but what, Pip, if you had ever madeobjections to the business,—such as its being open to black and sut, orsuch-like,—not but what they would have been attended to, don’t yousee?”“Has the boy,” said Miss Havisham, “ever made any objection?Does he like the trade?”“Which it is well beknown to yourself, Pip,” returned Joe,strengthening his former mixture of argumentation, confidence, and politeness,“that it were the wish of your own hart.” (I saw the idea suddenlybreak upon him that he would adapt his epitaph to the occasion, before he wenton to say) “And there weren’t no objection on your part, and Pip itwere the great wish of your hart!”It was quite in vain for me to endeavour to make him sensible that he ought tospeak to Miss Havisham. The more I made faces and gestures to him to do it, themore confidential, argumentative, and polite, he persisted in being to Me.“Have you brought his indentures with you?” asked Miss Havisham.“Well, Pip, you know,” replied Joe, as if that were a littleunreasonable, “you yourself see me put ’em in my ’at, andtherefore you know as they are here.” With which he took them out, andgave them, not to Miss Havisham, but to me. I am afraid I was ashamed of thedear good fellow,—I know I was ashamed of him,—when I sawthat Estella stood at the back of Miss Havisham’s chair, and that hereyes laughed mischievously. I took the indentures out of his hand and gave themto Miss Havisham.“You expected,” said Miss Havisham, as she looked them over,“no premium with the boy?”“Joe!” I remonstrated, for he made no reply at all. “Whydon’t you answer—”“Pip,” returned Joe, cutting me short as if he were hurt,“which I meantersay that were not a question requiring a answer betwixtyourself and me, and which you know the answer to be full well No. You know itto be No, Pip, and wherefore should I say it?”Miss Havisham glanced at him as if she understood what he really was betterthan I had thought possible, seeing what he was there; and took up a little bagfrom the table beside her.“Pip has earned a premium here,” she said, “and here it is.There are five-and-twenty guineas in this bag. Give it to your master,Pip.”As if he were absolutely out of his mind with the wonder awakened in him by herstrange figure and the strange room, Joe, even at this pass, persisted inaddressing me.“This is wery liberal on your part, Pip,” said Joe, “and itis as such received and grateful welcome, though never looked for, far nornear, nor nowheres. And now, old chap,” said Joe, conveying to me asensation, first of burning and then of freezing, for I felt as if thatfamiliar expression were applied to Miss Havisham,—“and now, oldchap, may we do our duty! May you and me do our duty, both on us, by one andanother, and by them which your liberal present—have-conweyed—tobe—for the satisfaction of mind-of—them as never—” hereJoe showed that he felt he had fallen into frightful difficulties, until hetriumphantly rescued himself with the words, “and from myself far beit!” These words had such a round and convincing sound for him that hesaid them twice.“Good-bye, Pip!” said Miss Havisham. “Let them out,Estella.”“Am I to come again, Miss Havisham?” I asked.“No. Gargery is your master now. Gargery! One word!”Thus calling him back as I went out of the door, I heard her say to Joe in adistinct emphatic voice, “The boy has been a good boy here, and that ishis reward. Of course, as an honest man, you will expect no other and nomore.”How Joe got out of the room, I have never been able to determine; but I knowthat when he did get out he was steadily proceeding upstairs instead of comingdown, and was deaf to all remonstrances until I went after him and laid hold ofhim. In another minute we were outside the gate, and it was locked, and Estellawas gone. When we stood in the daylight alone again, Joe backed up against awall, and said to me, “Astonishing!” And there he remained so longsaying, “Astonishing” at intervals, so often, that I began to thinkhis senses were never coming back. At length he prolonged his remark into“Pip, I do assure you this is as-TON-ishing!”and so, by degrees, became conversational and able to walk away.I have reason to think that Joe’s intellects were brightened by theencounter they had passed through, and that on our way to Pumblechook’she invented a subtle and deep design. My reason is to be found in what tookplace in Mr. Pumblechook’s parlour: where, on our presenting ourselves,my sister sat in conference with that detested seedsman.“Well?” cried my sister, addressing us both at once. “Andwhat’s happened to you? I wonder you condescend to come back tosuch poor society as this, I am sure I do!”“Miss Havisham,” said Joe, with a fixed look at me, like an effortof remembrance, “made it wery partick’ler that we should giveher—were it compliments or respects, Pip?”“Compliments,” I said.“Which that were my own belief,” answered Joe; “hercompliments to Mrs. J. Gargery—”“Much good they’ll do me!” observed my sister; but rathergratified too.“And wishing,” pursued Joe, with another fixed look at me, likeanother effort of remembrance, “that the state of Miss Havisham’selth were sitch as would have—allowed, were it, Pip?”“Of her having the pleasure,” I added.“Of ladies’ company,” said Joe. And drew a long breath.“Well!” cried my sister, with a mollified glance at Mr.Pumblechook. “She might have had the politeness to send that message atfirst, but it’s better late than never. And what did she give youngRantipole here?”“She giv’ him,” said Joe, “nothing.”Mrs. Joe was going to break out, but Joe went on.“What she giv’,” said Joe, “she giv’ to hisfriends. ‘And by his friends,’ were her explanation, ‘I meaninto the hands of his sister Mrs. J. Gargery.’ Them were her words;‘Mrs. J. Gargery.’ She mayn’t have know’d,” addedJoe, with an appearance of reflection, “whether it were Joe, orJorge.”My sister looked at Pumblechook: who smoothed the elbows of his woodenarm-chair, and nodded at her and at the fire, as if he had known all about itbeforehand.“And how much have you got?” asked my sister, laughing. Positivelylaughing!“What would present company say to ten pound?” demanded Joe.“They’d say,” returned my sister, curtly, “pretty well.Not too much, but pretty well.”“It’s more than that, then,” said Joe.That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, immediately nodded, and said, as he rubbedthe arms of his chair, “It’s more than that, Mum.”“Why, you don’t mean to say—” began my sister.“Yes I do, Mum,” said Pumblechook; “but wait a bit. Go on,Joseph. Good in you! Go on!”“What would present company say,” proceeded Joe, “to twentypound?”“Handsome would be the word,” returned my sister.“Well, then,” said Joe, “It’s more than twentypound.”That abject hypocrite, Pumblechook, nodded again, and said, with a patronizinglaugh, “It’s more than that, Mum. Good again! Follow her up,Joseph!”“Then to make an end of it,” said Joe, delightedly handing the bagto my sister; “it’s five-and-twenty pound.”“It’s five-and-twenty pound, Mum,” echoed that basest ofswindlers, Pumblechook, rising to shake hands with her; “and it’sno more than your merits (as I said when my opinion was asked), and I wish youjoy of the money!”If the villain had stopped here, his case would have been sufficiently awful,but he blackened his guilt by proceeding to take me into custody, with a rightof patronage that left all his former criminality far behind.“Now you see, Joseph and wife,” said Pumblechook, as he took me bythe arm above the elbow, “I am one of them that always go right throughwith what they’ve begun. This boy must be bound, out of hand.That’s my way. Bound out of hand.”“Goodness knows, Uncle Pumblechook,” said my sister (grasping themoney), “we’re deeply beholden to you.”“Never mind me, Mum,” returned that diabolical cornchandler.“A pleasure’s a pleasure all the world over. But this boy, youknow; we must have him bound. I said I’d see to it—to tell you thetruth.”The Justices were sitting in the Town Hall near at hand, and we at once wentover to have me bound apprentice to Joe in the Magisterial presence. I say wewent over, but I was pushed over by Pumblechook, exactly as if I had thatmoment picked a pocket or fired a rick; indeed, it was the general impressionin Court that I had been taken red-handed; for, as Pumblechook shoved me beforehim through the crowd, I heard some people say, “What’s hedone?” and others, “He’s a young ’un, too, but looksbad, don’t he?” One person of mild and benevolent aspect even gaveme a tract ornamented with a woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with aperfect sausage-shop of fetters, and entitled TO BE READ IN MYCELL.The Hall was a queer place, I thought, with higher pews in it than achurch,—and with people hanging over the pews looking on,—and withmighty Justices (one with a powdered head) leaning back in chairs, with foldedarms, or taking snuff, or going to sleep, or writing, or reading thenewspapers,—and with some shining black portraits on the walls, which myunartistic eye regarded as a composition of hardbake and sticking-plaster.Here, in a corner my indentures were duly signed and attested, and I was“bound”; Mr. Pumblechook holding me all the while as if we hadlooked in on our way to the scaffold, to have those little preliminariesdisposed of.When we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who had been put intogreat spirits by the expectation of seeing me publicly tortured, and who weremuch disappointed to find that my friends were merely rallying round me, wewent back to Pumblechook’s. And there my sister became so excited by thetwenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve her but we must have a dinner outof that windfall at the Blue Boar, and that Pumblechook must go over in hischaise-cart, and bring the Hubbles and Mr. Wopsle.It was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day I passed. For, itinscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the whole company,that I was an excrescence on the entertainment. And to make it worse, they allasked me from time to time,—in short, whenever they had nothing else todo,—why I didn’t enjoy myself? And what could I possibly do then,but say I was enjoying myself,—when I wasn’t!However, they were grown up and had their own way, and they made the most ofit. That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of thewhole occasion, actually took the top of the table; and, when he addressed themon the subject of my being bound, and had fiendishly congratulated them on mybeing liable to imprisonment if I played at cards, drank strong liquors, keptlate hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries which the form of myindentures appeared to contemplate as next to inevitable, he placed me standingon a chair beside him to illustrate his remarks.My only other remembrances of the great festival are, That they wouldn’tlet me go to sleep, but whenever they saw me dropping off, woke me up and toldme to enjoy myself. That, rather late in the evening Mr. Wopsle gave usCollins’s ode, and threw his bloodstained sword in thunder down, withsuch effect, that a waiter came in and said, “The Commercials underneathsent up their compliments, and it wasn’t the Tumblers’ Arms.”That, they were all in excellent spirits on the road home, and sang, O LadyFair! Mr. Wopsle taking the bass, and asserting with a tremendously strongvoice (in reply to the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a mostimpertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s privateaffairs) that he was the man with his white locks flowing, and that hewas upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going.Finally, I remember that when I got into my little bedroom, I was trulywretched, and had a strong conviction on me that I should never likeJoe’s trade. I had liked it once, but once was not now.Chapter XIV.It isa most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. There may be black ingratitudein the thing, and the punishment may be retributive and well deserved; but thatit is a miserable thing, I can testify.Home had never been a very pleasant place to me, because of my sister’stemper. But, Joe had sanctified it, and I had believed in it. I had believed inthe best parlour as a most elegant saloon; I had believed in the front door, asa mysterious portal of the Temple of State whose solemn opening was attendedwith a sacrifice of roast fowls; I had believed in the kitchen as a chastethough not magnificent apartment; I had believed in the forge as the glowingroad to manhood and independence. Within a single year all this was changed.Now it was all coarse and common, and I would not have had Miss Havisham andEstella see it on any account.How much of my ungracious condition of mind may have been my own fault, howmuch Miss Havisham’s, how much my sister’s, is now of no moment tome or to any one. The change was made in me; the thing was done. Well or illdone, excusably or inexcusably, it was done.Once, it had seemed to me that when I should at last roll up my shirt-sleevesand go into the forge, Joe’s ’prentice, I should be distinguishedand happy. Now the reality was in my hold, I only felt that I was dusty withthe dust of small-coal, and that I had a weight upon my daily remembrance towhich the anvil was a feather. There have been occasions in my later life (Isuppose as in most lives) when I have felt for a time as if a thick curtain hadfallen on all its interest and romance, to shut me out from anything save dullendurance any more. Never has that curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as whenmy way in life lay stretched out straight before me through the newly enteredroad of apprenticeship to Joe.I remember that at a later period of my “time,” I used to standabout the churchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling, comparing myown perspective with the windy marsh view, and making out some likeness betweenthem by thinking how flat and low both were, and how on both there came anunknown way and a dark mist and then the sea. I was quite as dejected on thefirst working-day of my apprenticeship as in that after-time; but I am glad toknow that I never breathed a murmur to Joe while my indentures lasted. It isabout the only thing I am glad to know of myself in that connection.For, though it includes what I proceed to add, all the merit of what I proceedto add was Joe’s. It was not because I was faithful, but because Joe wasfaithful, that I never ran away and went for a soldier or a sailor. It was notbecause I had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, but because Joe had astrong sense of the virtue of industry, that I worked with tolerable zealagainst the grain. It is not possible to know how far the influence of anyamiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; but it is verypossible to know how it has touched one’s self in going by, and I knowright well that any good that intermixed itself with my apprenticeship came ofplain contented Joe, and not of restlessly aspiring discontented me.What I wanted, who can say? How can I say, when I never knew? What Idreaded was, that in some unlucky hour I, being at my grimiest and commonest,should lift up my eyes and see Estella looking in at one of the wooden windowsof the forge. I was haunted by the fear that she would, sooner or later, findme out, with a black face and hands, doing the coarsest part of my work, andwould exult over me and despise me. Often after dark, when I was pulling thebellows for Joe, and we were singing Old Clem, and when the thought how we usedto sing it at Miss Havisham’s would seem to show me Estella’s facein the fire, with her pretty hair fluttering in the wind and her eyes scorningme,—often at such a time I would look towards those panels of black nightin the wall which the wooden windows then were, and would fancy that I saw herjust drawing her face away, and would believe that she had come at last.After that, when we went in to supper, the place and the meal would have a morehomely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed of home than ever, in myown ungracious breast.Chapter XV.As Iwas getting too big for Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s room, myeducation under that preposterous female terminated. Not, however, until Biddyhad imparted to me everything she knew, from the little catalogue of prices, toa comic song she had once bought for a half-penny. Although the only coherentpart of the latter piece of literature were the opening lines,     When I went to Lunnon town sirs,     Too rul loo rul     Too rul loo rul     Wasn’t I done very brown sirs?     Too rul loo rul     Too rul loo rul—still, in my desire to be wiser, I got this composition by heart withthe utmost gravity; nor do I recollect that I questioned its merit, except thatI thought (as I still do) the amount of Too rul somewhat in excess of thepoetry. In my hunger for information, I made proposals to Mr. Wopsle to bestowsome intellectual crumbs upon me, with which he kindly complied. As it turnedout, however, that he only wanted me for a dramatic lay-figure, to becontradicted and embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbedand knocked about in a variety of ways, I soon declined that course ofinstruction; though not until Mr. Wopsle in his poetic fury had severely mauledme.Whatever I acquired, I tried to impart to Joe. This statement sounds so well,that I cannot in my conscience let it pass unexplained. I wanted to make Joeless ignorant and common, that he might be worthier of my society and less opento Estella’s reproach.The old Battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and a broken slateand a short piece of slate-pencil were our educational implements: to which Joealways added a pipe of tobacco. I never knew Joe to remember anything from oneSunday to another, or to acquire, under my tuition, any piece of informationwhatever. Yet he would smoke his pipe at the Battery with a far more sagaciousair than anywhere else,—even with a learned air,—as if heconsidered himself to be advancing immensely. Dear fellow, I hope he did.It was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river passing beyondthe earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, looking as if theybelonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at the bottom of the water.Whenever I watched the vessels standing out to sea with their white sailsspread, I somehow thought of Miss Havisham and Estella; and whenever the lightstruck aslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hillside or water-line,it was just the same.—Miss Havisham and Estella and the strange house andthe strange life appeared to have something to do with everything that waspicturesque.One Sunday when Joe, greatly enjoying his pipe, had so plumed himself on being“most awful dull,” that I had given him up for the day, I lay onthe earthwork for some time with my chin on my hand, descrying traces of MissHavisham and Estella all over the prospect, in the sky and in the water, untilat last I resolved to mention a thought concerning them that had been much inmy head.“Joe,” said I; “don’t you think I ought to make MissHavisham a visit?”“Well, Pip,” returned Joe, slowly considering. “Whatfor?”“What for, Joe? What is any visit made for?”“There is some wisits p’r’aps,” said Joe, “as forever remains open to the question, Pip. But in regard to wisiting MissHavisham. She might think you wanted something,—expected something ofher.”“Don’t you think I might say that I did not, Joe?”“You might, old chap,” said Joe. “And she might credit it.Similarly she mightn’t.”Joe felt, as I did, that he had made a point there, and he pulled hard at hispipe to keep himself from weakening it by repetition.“You see, Pip,” Joe pursued, as soon as he was past that danger,“Miss Havisham done the handsome thing by you. When Miss Havisham donethe handsome thing by you, she called me back to say to me as that wereall.”“Yes, Joe. I heard her.”“ALL,” Joe repeated, very emphatically.“Yes, Joe. I tell you, I heard her.”“Which I meantersay, Pip, it might be that her meaning were,—Make aend on it!—As you was!—Me to the North, and you to theSouth!—Keep in sunders!”I had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting to me to findthat he had thought of it; for it seemed to render it more probable.“But, Joe.”“Yes, old chap.”“Here am I, getting on in the first year of my time, and, since the dayof my being bound, I have never thanked Miss Havisham, or asked after her, orshown that I remember her.”“That’s true, Pip; and unless you was to turn her out a set ofshoes all four round,—and which I meantersay as even a set of shoes allfour round might not be acceptable as a present, in a total wacancy ofhoofs—”“I don’t mean that sort of remembrance, Joe; I don’t mean apresent.”But Joe had got the idea of a present in his head and must harp upon it.“Or even,” said he, “if you was helped to knocking her up anew chain for the front door,—or say a gross or two of shark-headedscrews for general use,—or some light fancy article, such as atoasting-fork when she took her muffins,—or a gridiron when she took asprat or such like—”“I don’t mean any present at all, Joe,” I interposed.“Well,” said Joe, still harping on it as though I had particularlypressed it, “if I was yourself, Pip, I wouldn’t. No, I wouldnot. For what’s a door-chain when she’s got one always up?And shark-headers is open to misrepresentations. And if it was a toasting-fork,you’d go into brass and do yourself no credit. And the oncommonestworkman can’t show himself oncommon in a gridiron,—for a gridironIS a gridiron,” said Joe, steadfastly impressing it uponme, as if he were endeavouring to rouse me from a fixed delusion, “andyou may haim at what you like, but a gridiron it will come out, either by yourleave or again your leave, and you can’t help yourself—”“My dear Joe,” I cried, in desperation, taking hold of his coat,“don’t go on in that way. I never thought of making Miss Havishamany present.”“No, Pip,” Joe assented, as if he had been contending for that, allalong; “and what I say to you is, you are right, Pip.”“Yes, Joe; but what I wanted to say, was, that as we are rather slackjust now, if you would give me a half-holiday to-morrow, I think I would gouptown and make a call on Miss Est—Havisham.”“Which her name,” said Joe, gravely, “ain’t Estavisham,Pip, unless she have been rechris’ened.”“I know, Joe, I know. It was a slip of mine. What do you think of it,Joe?”In brief, Joe thought that if I thought well of it, he thought well of it. But,he was particular in stipulating that if I were not received with cordiality,or if I were not encouraged to repeat my visit as a visit which had no ulteriorobject but was simply one of gratitude for a favour received, then thisexperimental trip should have no successor. By these conditions I promised toabide.Now, Joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was Orlick. He pretendedthat his Christian name was Dolge,—a clear Impossibility,—but hewas a fellow of that obstinate disposition that I believe him to have been theprey of no delusion in this particular, but wilfully to have imposed that nameupon the village as an affront to its understanding. He was a broadshoulderedloose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry, and alwaysslouching. He never even seemed to come to his work on purpose, but wouldslouch in as if by mere accident; and when he went to the Jolly Bargemen to eathis dinner, or went away at night, he would slouch out, like Cain or theWandering Jew, as if he had no idea where he was going and no intention of evercoming back. He lodged at a sluice-keeper’s out on the marshes, and onworking-days would come slouching from his hermitage, with his hands in hispockets and his dinner loosely tied in a bundle round his neck and dangling onhis back. On Sundays he mostly lay all day on the sluice-gates, or stoodagainst ricks and barns. He always slouched, locomotively, with his eyes on theground; and, when accosted or otherwise required to raise them, he looked up ina half-resentful, half-puzzled way, as though the only thought he ever had was,that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that he should never be thinking.This morose journeyman had no liking for me. When I was very small and timid,he gave me to understand that the Devil lived in a black corner of the forge,and that he knew the fiend very well: also that it was necessary to make up thefire, once in seven years, with a live boy, and that I might consider myselffuel. When I became Joe’s ’prentice, Orlick was perhaps confirmedin some suspicion that I should displace him; howbeit, he liked me still less.Not that he ever said anything, or did anything, openly importing hostility; Ionly noticed that he always beat his sparks in my direction, and that wheneverI sang Old Clem, he came in out of time.Dolge Orlick was at work and present, next day, when I reminded Joe of myhalf-holiday. He said nothing at the moment, for he and Joe had just got apiece of hot iron between them, and I was at the bellows; but by and by hesaid, leaning on his hammer,—“Now, master! Sure you’re not a-going to favour only one of us. IfYoung Pip has a half-holiday, do as much for Old Orlick.” I suppose hewas about five-and-twenty, but he usually spoke of himself as an ancientperson.“Why, what’ll you do with a half-holiday, if you get it?”said Joe.“What’ll I do with it! What’ll he do with it?I’ll do as much with it as him,” said Orlick.“As to Pip, he’s going up town,” said Joe.“Well then, as to Old Orlick, he’s a-going up town,”retorted that worthy. “Two can go up town. Tain’t only one wot cango up town.“Don’t lose your temper,” said Joe.“Shall if I like,” growled Orlick. “Some and their uptowning!Now, master! Come. No favouring in this shop. Be a man!”The master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeyman was in abetter temper, Orlick plunged at the furnace, drew out a red-hot bar, made atme with it as if he were going to run it through my body, whisked it round myhead, laid it on the anvil, hammered it out,—as if it were I, I thought,and the sparks were my spirting blood,—and finally said, when he hadhammered himself hot and the iron cold, and he again leaned on hishammer,—“Now, master!”“Are you all right now?” demanded Joe.“Ah! I am all right,” said gruff Old Orlick.“Then, as in general you stick to your work as well as most men,”said Joe, “let it be a half-holiday for all.”My sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing,—she was amost unscrupulous spy and listener,—and she instantly looked in at one ofthe windows.“Like you, you fool!” said she to Joe, “giving holidays togreat idle hulkers like that. You are a rich man, upon my life, to waste wagesin that way. I wish I was his master!”“You’d be everybody’s master, if you durst,” retortedOrlick, with an ill-favoured grin.(“Let her alone,” said Joe.)“I’d be a match for all noodles and all rogues,” returned mysister, beginning to work herself into a mighty rage. “And Icouldn’t be a match for the noodles, without being a match for yourmaster, who’s the dunder-headed king of the noodles. And I couldn’tbe a match for the rogues, without being a match for you, who are theblackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and France. Now!”“You’re a foul shrew, Mother Gargery,” growled thejourneyman. “If that makes a judge of rogues, you ought to be agood’un.”(“Let her alone, will you?” said Joe.)“What did you say?” cried my sister, beginning to scream.“What did you say? What did that fellow Orlick say to me, Pip? What didhe call me, with my husband standing by? Oh! oh! oh!” Each of theseexclamations was a shriek; and I must remark of my sister, what is equally trueof all the violent women I have ever seen, that passion was no excuse for her,because it is undeniable that instead of lapsing into passion, she consciouslyand deliberately took extraordinary pains to force herself into it, and becameblindly furious by regular stages; “what was the name he gave me beforethe base man who swore to defend me? Oh! Hold me! Oh!”“Ah-h-h!” growled the journeyman, between his teeth,“I’d hold you, if you was my wife. I’d hold you under thepump, and choke it out of you.”(“I tell you, let her alone,” said Joe.)“Oh! To hear him!” cried my sister, with a clap of her hands and ascream together,—which was her next stage. “To hear the nameshe’s giving me! That Orlick! In my own house! Me, a married woman! Withmy husband standing by! Oh! Oh!” Here my sister, after a fit of clappingsand screamings, beat her hands upon her bosom and upon her knees, and threw hercap off, and pulled her hair down,—which were the last stages on her roadto frenzy. Being by this time a perfect Fury and a complete success, she made adash at the door which I had fortunately locked.What could the wretched Joe do now, after his disregarded parentheticalinterruptions, but stand up to his journeyman, and ask him what he meant byinterfering betwixt himself and Mrs. Joe; and further whether he was man enoughto come on? Old Orlick felt that the situation admitted of nothing less thancoming on, and was on his defence straightway; so, without so much as pullingoff their singed and burnt aprons, they went at one another, like two giants.But, if any man in that neighbourhood could stand uplong against Joe, I neversaw the man. Orlick, as if he had been of no more account than the pale younggentleman, was very soon among the coal-dust, and in no hurry to come out ofit. Then Joe unlocked the door and picked up my sister, who had droppedinsensible at the window (but who had seen the fight first, I think), and whowas carried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended to revive,and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands in Joe’s hair.Then came that singular calm and silence which succeed all uproars; and then,with the vague sensation which I have always connected with such alull,—namely, that it was Sunday, and somebody was dead,—I wentupstairs to dress myself. When I came down again, I found Joe and Orlick sweeping up, without any othertraces of discomposure than a slit in one of Orlick’s nostrils, which wasneither expressive nor ornamental. A pot of beer had appeared from the JollyBargemen, and they were sharing it by turns in a peaceable manner. The lull hada sedative and philosophical influence on Joe, who followed me out into theroad to say, as a parting observation that might do me good, “On theRampage, Pip, and off the Rampage, Pip:—such is Life!”With what absurd emotions (for we think the feelings that are very serious in aman quite comical in a boy) I found myself again going to MissHavisham’s, matters little here. Nor, how I passed and repassed the gatemany times before I could make up my mind to ring. Nor, how I debated whether Ishould go away without ringing; nor, how I should undoubtedly have gone, if mytime had been my own, to come back.Miss Sarah Pocket came to the gate. No Estella.“How, then? You here again?” said Miss Pocket. “What do youwant?”When I said that I only came to see how Miss Havisham was, Sarah evidentlydeliberated whether or no she should send me about my business. But unwillingto hazard the responsibility, she let me in, and presently brought the sharpmessage that I was to “come up.”Everything was unchanged, and Miss Havisham was alone.“Well?” said she, fixing her eyes upon me. “I hope you wantnothing? You’ll get nothing.”“No indeed, Miss Havisham. I only wanted you to know that I am doing verywell in my apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to you.”“There, there!” with the old restless fingers. “Come now andthen; come on your birthday.—Ay!” she cried suddenly, turningherself and her chair towards me, “You are looking round for Estella?Hey?”I had been looking round,—in fact, for Estella,—and I stammeredthat I hoped she was well.“Abroad,” said Miss Havisham; “educating for a lady; far outof reach; prettier than ever; admired by all who see her. Do you feel that youhave lost her?”There was such a malignant enjoyment in her utterance of the last words, andshe broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that I was at a loss what to say. Shespared me the trouble of considering, by dismissing me. When the gate wasclosed upon me by Sarah of the walnut-shell countenance, I felt more than everdissatisfied with my home and with my trade and with everything; and that wasall I took by that motion.As I was loitering along the High Street, looking in disconsolately at the shopwindows, and thinking what I would buy if I were a gentleman, who should comeout of the bookshop but Mr. Wopsle. Mr. Wopsle had in his hand the affectingtragedy of George Barnwell, in which he had that moment invested sixpence, withthe view of heaping every word of it on the head of Pumblechook, with whom hewas going to drink tea. No sooner did he see me, than he appeared to considerthat a special Providence had put a ’prentice in his way to be read at;and he laid hold of me, and insisted on my accompanying him to thePumblechookian parlour. As I knew it would be miserable at home, and as thenights were dark and the way was dreary, and almost any companionship on theroad was better than none, I made no great resistance; consequently, we turnedinto Pumblechook’s just as the street and the shops were lighting up.As I never assisted at any other representation of George Barnwell, Idon’t know how long it may usually take; but I know very well that ittook until half-past nine o’ clock that night, and that when Mr. Wopslegot into Newgate, I thought he never would go to the scaffold, he became somuch slower than at any former period of his disgraceful career. I thought it alittle too much that he should complain of being cut short in his flower afterall, as if he had not been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since hiscourse began. This, however, was a mere question of length and wearisomeness.What stung me, was the identification of the whole affair with my unoffendingself. When Barnwell began to go wrong, I declare that I felt positivelyapologetic, Pumblechook’s indignant stare so taxed me with it. Wopsle,too, took pains to present me in the worst light. At once ferocious andmaudlin, I was made to murder my uncle with no extenuating circumstanceswhatever; Millwood put me down in argument, on every occasion; it became sheermonomania in my master’s daughter to care a button for me; and all I cansay for my gasping and procrastinating conduct on the fatal morning, is, thatit was worthy of the general feebleness of my character. Even after I washappily hanged and Wopsle had closed the book, Pumblechook sat staring at me,and shaking his head, and saying, “Take warning, boy, takewarning!” as if it were a well-known fact that I contemplated murdering anear relation, provided I could only induce one to have the weakness to becomemy benefactor.It was a very dark night when it was all over, and when I set out with Mr.Wopsle on the walk home. Beyond town, we found a heavy mist out, and it fellwet and thick. The turnpike lamp was a blur, quite out of the lamp’susual place apparently, and its rays looked solid substance on the fog. We werenoticing this, and saying how that the mist rose with a change of wind from acertain quarter of our marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under thelee of the turnpike house.“Halloa!” we said, stopping. “Orlick there?”“Ah!” he answered, slouching out. “I was standing by aminute, on the chance of company.”“You are late,” I remarked.Orlick not unnaturally answered, “Well? And you’relate.”“We have been,” said Mr. Wopsle, exalted with his lateperformance,—“we have been indulging, Mr. Orlick, in anintellectual evening.”Old Orlick growled, as if he had nothing to say about that, and we all went ontogether. I asked him presently whether he had been spending his half-holidayup and down town?“Yes,” said he, “all of it. I come in behind yourself. Ididn’t see you, but I must have been pretty close behind you. By the by,the guns is going again.”“At the Hulks?” said I.“Ay! There’s some of the birds flown from the cages. The guns havebeen going since dark, about. You’ll hear one presently.”In effect, we had not walked many yards further, when the well-remembered boomcame towards us, deadened by the mist, and heavily rolled away along the lowgrounds by the river, as if it were pursuing and threatening the fugitives.“A good night for cutting off in,” said Orlick. “We’dbe puzzled how to bring down a jail-bird on the wing, to-night.”The subject was a suggestive one to me, and I thought about it in silence. Mr.Wopsle, as the ill-requited uncle of the evening’s tragedy, fell tomeditating aloud in his garden at Camberwell. Orlick, with his hands in hispockets, slouched heavily at my side. It was very dark, very wet, very muddy,and so we splashed along. Now and then, the sound of the signal cannon brokeupon us again, and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river. I keptmyself to myself and my thoughts. Mr. Wopsle died amiably at Camberwell, andexceedingly game on Bosworth Field, and in the greatest agonies at Glastonbury.Orlick sometimes growled, “Beat it out, beat it out,—Old Clem! Witha clink for the stout,—Old Clem!” I thought he had been drinking,but he was not drunk.Thus, we came to the village. The way by which we approached it took us pastthe Three Jolly Bargemen, which we were surprised to find—it being eleveno’clock—in a state of commotion, with the door wide open, andunwonted lights that had been hastily caught up and put down scattered about.Mr. Wopsle dropped in to ask what was the matter (surmising that a convict hadbeen taken), but came running out in a great hurry.“There’s something wrong,” said he, without stopping,“up at your place, Pip. Run all!”“What is it?” I asked, keeping up with him. So did Orlick, at myside.“I can’t quite understand. The house seems to have been violentlyentered when Joe Gargery was out. Supposed by convicts. Somebody has beenattacked and hurt.”We were running too fast to admit of more being said, and we made no stop untilwe got into our kitchen. It was full of people; the whole village was there, orin the yard; and there was a surgeon, and there was Joe, and there were a groupof women, all on the floor in the midst of the kitchen. The unemployedbystanders drew back when they saw me, and so I became aware of mysister,—lying without sense or movement on the bare boards where she hadbeen knocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt by someunknown hand when her face was turned towards the fire,—destined never tobe on the Rampage again, while she was the wife of Joe.Chapter XVI.Withmy head full of George Barnwell, I was at first disposed to believe thatI must have had some hand in the attack upon my sister, or at all eventsthat as her near relation, popularly known to be under obligations to her, Iwas a more legitimate object of suspicion than any one else. But when, in theclearer light of next morning, I began to reconsider the matter and to hear itdiscussed around me on all sides, I took another view of the case, which wasmore reasonable.Joe had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking his pipe, from a quarterafter eight o’clock to a quarter before ten. While he was there, mysister had been seen standing at the kitchen door, and had exchanged Good Nightwith a farm-labourer going home. The man could not be more particular as to thetime at which he saw her (he got into dense confusion when he tried to be),than that it must have been before nine. When Joe went home at five minutesbefore ten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called inassistance. The fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the snuff of thecandle very long; the candle, however, had been blown out.Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house. Neither, beyond theblowing out of the candle,—which stood on a table between the door and mysister, and was behind her when she stood facing the fire and wasstruck,—was there any disarrangement of the kitchen, excepting such asshe herself had made, in falling and bleeding. But, there was one remarkablepiece of evidence on the spot. She had been struck with something blunt andheavy, on the head and spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy hadbeen thrown down at her with considerable violence, as she lay on her face. Andon the ground beside her, when Joe picked her up, was a convict’sleg-iron which had been filed asunder.Now, Joe, examining this iron with a smith’s eye, declared it to havebeen filed asunder some time ago. The hue and cry going off to the Hulks, andpeople coming thence to examine the iron, Joe’s opinion was corroborated.They did not undertake to say when it had left the prison-ships to which itundoubtedly had once belonged; but they claimed to know for certain that thatparticular manacle had not been worn by either of the two convicts who hadescaped last night. Further, one of those two was already retaken, and had notfreed himself of his iron.Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of my own here. I believed the ironto be my convict’s iron,—the iron I had seen and heard him filingat, on the marshes,—but my mind did not accuse him of having put it toits latest use. For I believed one of two other persons to have becomepossessed of it, and to have turned it to this cruel account. Either Orlick, orthe strange man who had shown me the file.Now, as to Orlick; he had gone to town exactly as he told us when we picked himup at the turnpike, he had been seen about town all the evening, he had been indivers companies in several public-houses, and he had come back with myself andMr. Wopsle. There was nothing against him, save the quarrel; and my sister hadquarrelled with him, and with everybody else about her, ten thousand times. Asto the strange man; if he had come back for his two bank-notes there could havebeen no dispute about them, because my sister was fully prepared to restorethem. Besides, there had been no altercation; the assailant had come in sosilently and suddenly, that she had been felled before she could look round.It was horrible to think that I had provided the weapon, however undesignedly,but I could hardly think otherwise. I suffered unspeakable trouble while Iconsidered and reconsidered whether I should at last dissolve that spell of mychildhood and tell Joe all the story. For months afterwards, I every daysettled the question finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued it nextmorning. The contention came, after all, to this;—the secret was such anold one now, had so grown into me and become a part of myself, that I could nottear it away. In addition to the dread that, having led up to so much mischief,it would be now more likely than ever to alienate Joe from me if he believedit, I had a further restraining dread that he would not believe it, but wouldassort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrous invention.However, I temporized with myself, of course—for, was I not waveringbetween right and wrong, when the thing is always done?—and resolved tomake a full disclosure if I should see any such new occasion as a new chance ofhelping in the discovery of the assailant.The Constables and the Bow Street men from London—for, this happened inthe days of the extinct red-waistcoated police—were about the house for aweek or two, and did pretty much what I have heard and read of like authoritiesdoing in other such cases. They took up several obviously wrong people, andthey ran their heads very hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying tofit the circumstances to the ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas from thecircumstances. Also, they stood about the door of the Jolly Bargemen, withknowing and reserved looks that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration;and they had a mysterious manner of taking their drink, that was almost as goodas taking the culprit. But not quite, for they never did it.Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay very ill inbed. Her sight was disturbed, so that she saw objects multiplied, and graspedat visionary teacups and wineglasses instead of the realities; her hearing wasgreatly impaired; her memory also; and her speech was unintelligible. When, atlast, she came round so far as to be helped downstairs, it was still necessaryto keep my slate always by her, that she might indicate in writing what shecould not indicate in speech. As she was (very bad handwriting apart) a morethan indifferent speller, and as Joe was a more than indifferent reader,extraordinary complications arose between them which I was always called in tosolve. The administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution ofTea for Joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of my ownmistakes.However, her temper was greatly improved, and she was patient. A tremulousuncertainty of the action of all her limbs soon became a part of her regularstate, and afterwards, at intervals of two or three months, she would often puther hands to her head, and would then remain for about a week at a time in somegloomy aberration of mind. We were at a loss to find a suitable attendant forher, until a circumstance happened conveniently to relieve us. Mr.Wopsle’s great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which shehad fallen, and Biddy became a part of our establishment.It may have been about a month after my sister’s reappearance in thekitchen, when Biddy came to us with a small speckled box containing the wholeof her worldly effects, and became a blessing to the household. Above all, shewas a blessing to Joe, for the dear old fellow was sadly cut up by the constantcontemplation of the wreck of his wife, and had been accustomed, whileattending on her of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, withhis blue eyes moistened, “Such a fine figure of a woman as she once were,Pip!” Biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of her as though shehad studied her from infancy; Joe became able in some sort to appreciate thegreater quiet of his life, and to get down to the Jolly Bargemen now and thenfor a change that did him good. It was characteristic of the police people thatthey had all more or less suspected poor Joe (though he never knew it), andthat they had to a man concurred in regarding him as one of the deepest spiritsthey had ever encountered.Biddy’s first triumph in her new office, was to solve a difficulty thathad completely vanquished me. I had tried hard at it, but had made nothing ofit. Thus it was:—Again and again and again, my sister had traced upon the slate, a characterthat looked like a curious T, and then with the utmost eagerness had called ourattention to it as something she particularly wanted. I had in vain triedeverything producible that began with a T, from tar to toast and tub. At lengthit had come into my head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on my lustilycalling that word in my sister’s ear, she had begun to hammer on thetable and had expressed a qualified assent. Thereupon, I had brought in all ourhammers, one after another, but without avail. Then I bethought me of a crutch,the shape being much the same, and I borrowed one in the village, and displayedit to my sister with considerable confidence. But she shook her head to thatextent when she was shown it, that we were terrified lest in her weak andshattered state she should dislocate her neck.When my sister found that Biddy was very quick to understand her, thismysterious sign reappeared on the slate. Biddy looked thoughtfully at it, heardmy explanation, looked thoughtfully at my sister, looked thoughtfully at Joe(who was always represented on the slate by his initial letter), and ran intothe forge, followed by Joe and me.“Why, of course!” cried Biddy, with an exultant face.“Don’t you see? It’s him!”Orlick, without a doubt! She had lost his name, and could only signify him byhis hammer. We told him why we wanted him to come into the kitchen, and heslowly laid down his hammer, wiped his brow with his arm, took another wipe atit with his apron, and came slouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bendin the knees that strongly distinguished him.I confess that I expected to see my sister denounce him, and that I wasdisappointed by the different result. She manifested the greatest anxiety to beon good terms with him, was evidently much pleased by his being at lengthproduced, and motioned that she would have him given something to drink. Shewatched his countenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured thathe took kindly to his reception, she showed every possible desire to conciliatehim, and there was an air of humble propitiation in all she did, such as I haveseen pervade the bearing of a child towards a hard master. After that day, aday rarely passed without her drawing the hammer on her slate, and withoutOrlick’s slouching in and standing doggedly before her, as if he knew nomore than I did what to make of it.Chapter XVII.I nowfell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which was varied beyond thelimits of the village and the marshes, by no more remarkable circumstance thanthe arrival of my birthday and my paying another visit to Miss Havisham. Ifound Miss Sarah Pocket still on duty at the gate; I found Miss Havisham justas I had left her, and she spoke of Estella in the very same way, if not in thevery same words. The interview lasted but a few minutes, and she gave me aguinea when I was going, and told me to come again on my next birthday. I maymention at once that this became an annual custom. I tried to decline takingthe guinea on the first occasion, but with no better effect than causing her toask me very angrily, if I expected more? Then, and after that, I took it.So unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in the darkened room,the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-table glass, that I felt as ifthe stopping of the clocks had stopped Time in that mysterious place, and,while I and everything else outside it grew older, it stood still. Daylightnever entered the house as to my thoughts and remembrances of it, any more thanas to the actual fact. It bewildered me, and under its influence I continued atheart to hate my trade and to be ashamed of home.Imperceptibly I became conscious of a change in Biddy, however. Her shoes cameup at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her hands were always clean. Shewas not beautiful,—she was common, and could not be likeEstella,—but she was pleasant and wholesome and sweet-tempered. She hadnot been with us more than a year (I remember her being newly out of mourningat the time it struck me), when I observed to myself one evening that she hadcuriously thoughtful and attentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and verygood.It came of my lifting up my own eyes from a task I was poring at—writingsome passages from a book, to improve myself in two ways at once by a sort ofstratagem—and seeing Biddy observant of what I was about. I laid down mypen, and Biddy stopped in her needlework without laying it down.“Biddy,” said I, “how do you manage it? Either I am verystupid, or you are very clever.”“What is it that I manage? I don’t know,” returned Biddy,smiling.She managed our whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but I did not meanthat, though that made what I did mean more surprising.“How do you manage, Biddy,” said I, “to learn everything thatI learn, and always to keep up with me?” I was beginning to be rathervain of my knowledge, for I spent my birthday guineas on it, and set aside thegreater part of my pocket-money for similar investment; though I have no doubt,now, that the little I knew was extremely dear at the price.“I might as well ask you,” said Biddy, “how youmanage?”“No; because when I come in from the forge of a night, any one can see meturning to at it. But you never turn to at it, Biddy.”“I suppose I must catch it like a cough,” said Biddy, quietly; andwent on with her sewing.Pursuing my idea as I leaned back in my wooden chair, and looked at Biddysewing away with her head on one side, I began to think her rather anextraordinary girl. For I called to mind now, that she was equally accomplishedin the terms of our trade, and the names of our different sorts of work, andour various tools. In short, whatever I knew, Biddy knew. Theoretically, shewas already as good a blacksmith as I, or better.“You are one of those, Biddy,” said I, “who make the most ofevery chance. You never had a chance before you came here, and see how improvedyou are!”Biddy looked at me for an instant, and went on with her sewing. “I wasyour first teacher though; wasn’t I?” said she, as she sewed.“Biddy!” I exclaimed, in amazement. “Why, you arecrying!”“No I am not,” said Biddy, looking up and laughing. “What putthat in your head?”What could have put it in my head but the glistening of a tear as it dropped onher work? I sat silent, recalling what a drudge she had been until Mr.Wopsle’s great-aunt successfully overcame that bad habit of living, sohighly desirable to be got rid of by some people. I recalled the hopelesscircumstances by which she had been surrounded in the miserable little shop andthe miserable little noisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle ofincompetence always to be dragged and shouldered. I reflected that even inthose untoward times there must have been latent in Biddy what was nowdeveloping, for, in my first uneasiness and discontent I had turned to her forhelp, as a matter of course. Biddy sat quietly sewing, shedding no more tears,and while I looked at her and thought about it all, it occurred to me thatperhaps I had not been sufficiently grateful to Biddy. I might have been tooreserved, and should have patronised her more (though I did not use thatprecise word in my meditations) with my confidence.“Yes, Biddy,” I observed, when I had done turning it over,“you were my first teacher, and that at a time when we little thought ofever being together like this, in this kitchen.”“Ah, poor thing!” replied Biddy. It was like her self-forgetfulnessto transfer the remark to my sister, and to get up and be busy about her,making her more comfortable; “that’s sadly true!”“Well!” said I, “we must talk together a little more, as weused to do. And I must consult you a little more, as I used to do. Let us havea quiet walk on the marshes next Sunday, Biddy, and a long chat.”My sister was never left alone now; but Joe more than readily undertook thecare of her on that Sunday afternoon, and Biddy and I went out together. It wassummer-time, and lovely weather. When we had passed the village and the churchand the churchyard, and were out on the marshes and began to see the sails ofthe ships as they sailed on, I began to combine Miss Havisham and Estella withthe prospect, in my usual way. When we came to the river-side and sat down onthe bank, with the water rippling at our feet, making it all more quiet than itwould have been without that sound, I resolved that it was a good time andplace for the admission of Biddy into my inner confidence.“Biddy,” said I, after binding her to secrecy, “I want to bea gentleman.”“O, I wouldn’t, if I was you!” she returned. “Idon’t think it would answer.”“Biddy,” said I, with some severity, “I have particularreasons for wanting to be a gentleman.”“You know best, Pip; but don’t you think you are happier as youare?”“Biddy,” I exclaimed, impatiently, “I am not at all happy asI am. I am disgusted with my calling and with my life. I have never taken toeither, since I was bound. Don’t be absurd.”“Was I absurd?” said Biddy, quietly raising her eyebrows; “Iam sorry for that; I didn’t mean to be. I only want you to do well, andto be comfortable.”“Well, then, understand once for all that I never shall or can becomfortable—or anything but miserable—there, Biddy!—unless Ican lead a very different sort of life from the life I lead now.”“That’s a pity!” said Biddy, shaking her head with asorrowful air.Now, I too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular kind ofquarrel with myself which I was always carrying on, I was half inclined to shedtears of vexation and distress when Biddy gave utterance to her sentiment andmy own. I told her she was right, and I knew it was much to be regretted, butstill it was not to be helped.“If I could have settled down,” I said to Biddy, plucking up theshort grass within reach, much as I had once upon a time pulled my feelings outof my hair and kicked them into the brewery wall,—“if I could havesettled down and been but half as fond of the forge as I was when I was little,I know it would have been much better for me. You and I and Joe would havewanted nothing then, and Joe and I would perhaps have gone partners when I wasout of my time, and I might even have grown up to keep company with you, and wemight have sat on this very bank on a fine Sunday, quite different people. Ishould have been good enough for you; shouldn’t I, Biddy?”Biddy sighed as she looked at the ships sailing on, and returned for answer,“Yes; I am not over-particular.” It scarcely sounded flattering,but I knew she meant well.“Instead of that,” said I, plucking up more grass and chewing ablade or two, “see how I am going on. Dissatisfied, and uncomfortable,and—what would it signify to me, being coarse and common, if nobody hadtold me so!”Biddy turned her face suddenly towards mine, and looked far more attentively atme than she had looked at the sailing ships.“It was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say,” sheremarked, directing her eyes to the ships again. “Who said it?”I was disconcerted, for I had broken away without quite seeing where I wasgoing to. It was not to be shuffled off now, however, and I answered,“The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s, and she’s morebeautiful than anybody ever was, and I admire her dreadfully, and I want to bea gentleman on her account.” Having made this lunatic confession, I beganto throw my torn-up grass into the river, as if I had some thoughts offollowing it.“Do you want to be a gentleman, to spite her or to gain her over?”Biddy quietly asked me, after a pause.“I don’t know,” I moodily answered.“Because, if it is to spite her,” Biddy pursued, “I shouldthink—but you know best—that might be better and more independentlydone by caring nothing for her words. And if it is to gain her over, I shouldthink—but you know best—she was not worth gaining over.”Exactly what I myself had thought, many times. Exactly what was perfectlymanifest to me at the moment. But how could I, a poor dazed village lad, avoidthat wonderful inconsistency into which the best and wisest of men fall everyday?“It may be all quite true,” said I to Biddy, “but I admireher dreadfully.”In short, I turned over on my face when I came to that, and got a good grasp onthe hair on each side of my head, and wrenched it well. All the while knowingthe madness of my heart to be so very mad and misplaced, that I was quiteconscious it would have served my face right, if I had lifted it up by my hair,and knocked it against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such anidiot.Biddy was the wisest of girls, and she tried to reason no more with me. She puther hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened by work, upon my hands,one after another, and gently took them out of my hair. Then she softly pattedmy shoulder in a soothing way, while with my face upon my sleeve I cried alittle,—exactly as I had done in the brewery yard,—and felt vaguelyconvinced that I was very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; Ican’t say which.“I am glad of one thing,” said Biddy, “and that is, that youhave felt you could give me your confidence, Pip. And I am glad of anotherthing, and that is, that of course you know you may depend upon my keeping itand always so far deserving it. If your first teacher (dear! such a poor one,and so much in need of being taught herself!) had been your teacher at thepresent time, she thinks she knows what lesson she would set. But it would be ahard one to learn, and you have got beyond her, and it’s of no usenow.” So, with a quiet sigh for me, Biddy rose from the bank, and said,with a fresh and pleasant change of voice, “Shall we walk a littlefarther, or go home?”“Biddy,” I cried, getting up, putting my arm round her neck, andgiving her a kiss, “I shall always tell you everything.”“Till you’re a gentleman,” said Biddy.“You know I never shall be, so that’s always. Not that I have anyoccasion to tell you anything, for you know everything I know,—as I toldyou at home the other night.”“Ah!” said Biddy, quite in a whisper, as she looked away at theships. And then repeated, with her former pleasant change, “shall we walka little farther, or go home?”I said to Biddy we would walk a little farther, and we did so, and the summerafternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it was very beautiful. Ibegan to consider whether I was not more naturally and wholesomely situated,after all, in these circumstances, than playing beggar my neighbour bycandle-light in the room with the stopped clocks, and being despised byEstella. I thought it would be very good for me if I could get her out of myhead, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, and could go to workdetermined to relish what I had to do, and stick to it, and make the best ofit. I asked myself the question whether I did not surely know that if Estellawere beside me at that moment instead of Biddy, she would make me miserable? Iwas obliged to admit that I did know it for a certainty, and I said to myself,“Pip, what a fool you are!”We talked a good deal as we walked, and all that Biddy said seemed right. Biddywas never insulting, or capricious, or Biddy to-day and somebody elseto-morrow; she would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving mepain; she would far rather have wounded her own breast than mine. How could itbe, then, that I did not like her much the better of the two?“Biddy,” said I, when we were walking homeward, “I wish youcould put me right.”“I wish I could!” said Biddy.“If I could only get myself to fall in love with you,—youdon’t mind my speaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?”“Oh dear, not at all!” said Biddy. “Don’t mindme.”“If I could only get myself to do it, that would be the thing forme.”“But you never will, you see,” said Biddy.It did not appear quite so unlikely to me that evening, as it would have doneif we had discussed it a few hours before. I therefore observed I was not quitesure of that. But Biddy said she was, and she said it decisively. In myheart I believed her to be right; and yet I took it rather ill, too, that sheshould be so positive on the point.When we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment, and get over astile near a sluice-gate. There started up, from the gate, or from the rushes,or from the ooze (which was quite in his stagnant way), Old Orlick.“Halloa!” he growled, “where are you two going?”“Where should we be going, but home?”“Well, then,” said he, “I’m jiggered if I don’tsee you home!”This penalty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case of his. Heattached no definite meaning to the word that I am aware of, but used it, likehis own pretended Christian name, to affront mankind, and convey an idea ofsomething savagely damaging. When I was younger, I had had a general beliefthat if he had jiggered me personally, he would have done it with a sharp andtwisted hook.Biddy was much against his going with us, and said to me in a whisper,“Don’t let him come; I don’t like him.” As I did notlike him either, I took the liberty of saying that we thanked him, but wedidn’t want seeing home. He received that piece of information with ayell of laughter, and dropped back, but came slouching after us at a littledistance.Curious to know whether Biddy suspected him of having had a hand in thatmurderous attack of which my sister had never been able to give any account, Iasked her why she did not like him.“Oh!” she replied, glancing over her shoulder as he slouched afterus, “because I—I am afraid he likes me.”“Did he ever tell you he liked you?” I asked indignantly.“No,” said Biddy, glancing over her shoulder again, “he nevertold me so; but he dances at me, whenever he can catch my eye.”However novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, I did not doubt theaccuracy of the interpretation. I was very hot indeed upon Old Orlick’sdaring to admire her; as hot as if it were an outrage on myself.“But it makes no difference to you, you know,” said Biddy, calmly.“No, Biddy, it makes no difference to me; only I don’t like it; Idon’t approve of it.”“Nor I neither,” said Biddy. “Though that makes nodifference to you.”“Exactly,” said I; “but I must tell you I should have noopinion of you, Biddy, if he danced at you with your own consent.”I kept an eye on Orlick after that night, and, whenever circumstances werefavourable to his dancing at Biddy, got before him to obscure thatdemonstration. He had struck root in Joe’s establishment, by reason of mysister’s sudden fancy for him, or I should have tried to get himdismissed. He quite understood and reciprocated my good intentions, as I hadreason to know thereafter.And now, because my mind was not confused enough before, I complicated itsconfusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states and seasons when I was clearthat Biddy was immeasurably better than Estella, and that the plain honestworking life to which I was born had nothing in it to be ashamed of, butoffered me sufficient means of self-respect and happiness. At those times, Iwould decide conclusively that my disaffection to dear old Joe and the forgewas gone, and that I was growing up in a fair way to be partners with Joe andto keep company with Biddy,—when all in a moment some confoundingremembrance of the Havisham days would fall upon me like a destructive missile,and scatter my wits again. Scattered wits take a long time picking up; andoften before I had got them well together, they would be dispersed in alldirections by one stray thought, that perhaps after all Miss Havisham was goingto make my fortune when my time was out.If my time had run out, it would have left me still at the height of myperplexities, I dare say. It never did run out, however, but was brought to apremature end, as I proceed to relate.Chapter XVIII.It wasin the fourth year of my apprenticeship to Joe, and it was a Saturday night.There was a group assembled round the fire at the Three Jolly Bargemen,attentive to Mr. Wopsle as he read the newspaper aloud. Of that group I wasone.A highly popular murder had been committed, and Mr. Wopsle was imbrued in bloodto the eyebrows. He gloated over every abhorrent adjective in the description,and identified himself with every witness at the Inquest. He faintly moaned,“I am done for,” as the victim, and he barbarously bellowed,“I’ll serve you out,” as the murderer. He gave the medicaltestimony, in pointed imitation of our local practitioner; and he piped andshook, as the aged turnpike-keeper who had heard blows, to an extent so veryparalytic as to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of thatwitness. The coroner, in Mr. Wopsle’s hands, became Timon of Athens; thebeadle, Coriolanus. He enjoyed himself thoroughly, and we all enjoyedourselves, and were delightfully comfortable. In this cosey state of mind wecame to the verdict Wilful Murder.Then, and not sooner, I became aware of a strange gentleman leaning over theback of the settle opposite me, looking on. There was an expression of contempton his face, and he bit the side of a great forefinger as he watched the groupof faces.“Well!” said the stranger to Mr. Wopsle, when the reading was done,“you have settled it all to your own satisfaction, I have nodoubt?”Everybody started and looked up, as if it were the murderer. He looked ateverybody coldly and sarcastically.“Guilty, of course?” said he. “Out with it. Come!”“Sir,” returned Mr. Wopsle, “without having the honour ofyour acquaintance, I do say Guilty.” Upon this we all took courage tounite in a confirmatory murmur.“I know you do,” said the stranger; “I knew you would. I toldyou so. But now I’ll ask you a question. Do you know, or do you not know,that the law of England supposes every man to be innocent, until he isproved—proved—to be guilty?”“Sir,” Mr. Wopsle began to reply, “as an Englishman myself,I—”“Come!” said the stranger, biting his forefinger at him.“Don’t evade the question. Either you know it, or you don’tknow it. Which is it to be?”He stood with his head on one side and himself on one side, in a bullying,interrogative manner, and he threw his forefinger at Mr. Wopsle,—as itwere to mark him out—before biting it again.“Now!” said he. “Do you know it, or don’t you knowit?”“Certainly I know it,” replied Mr. Wopsle.“Certainly you know it. Then why didn’t you say so at first? Now,I’ll ask you another question,”—taking possession of Mr.Wopsle, as if he had a right to him,—“do you know that noneof these witnesses have yet been cross-examined?”Mr. Wopsle was beginning, “I can only say—” when the strangerstopped him.“What? You won’t answer the question, yes or no? Now, I’lltry you again.” Throwing his finger at him again. “Attend to me.Are you aware, or are you not aware, that none of these witnesses have yet beencross-examined? Come, I only want one word from you. Yes, or no?”Mr. Wopsle hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor opinion ofhim.“Come!” said the stranger, “I’ll help you. Youdon’t deserve help, but I’ll help you. Look at that paper you holdin your hand. What is it?”“What is it?” repeated Mr. Wopsle, eyeing it, much at a loss.“Is it,” pursued the stranger in his most sarcastic and suspiciousmanner, “the printed paper you have just been reading from?”“Undoubtedly.”“Undoubtedly. Now, turn to that paper, and tell me whether it distinctlystates that the prisoner expressly said that his legal advisers instructed himaltogether to reserve his defence?”“I read that just now,” Mr. Wopsle pleaded.“Never mind what you read just now, sir; I don’t ask you what youread just now. You may read the Lord’s Prayer backwards, if youlike,—and, perhaps, have done it before to-day. Turn to the paper. No,no, no my friend; not to the top of the column; you know better than that; tothe bottom, to the bottom.” (We all began to think Mr. Wopsle full ofsubterfuge.) “Well? Have you found it?”“Here it is,” said Mr. Wopsle.“Now, follow that passage with your eye, and tell me whether itdistinctly states that the prisoner expressly said that he was instructed byhis legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence? Come! Do you make that ofit?”Mr. Wopsle answered, “Those are not the exact words.”“Not the exact words!” repeated the gentleman bitterly. “Isthat the exact substance?”“Yes,” said Mr. Wopsle.“Yes,” repeated the stranger, looking round at the rest of thecompany with his right hand extended towards the witness, Wopsle. “Andnow I ask you what you say to the conscience of that man who, with that passagebefore his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced afellow-creature guilty, unheard?”We all began to suspect that Mr. Wopsle was not the man we had thought him, andthat he was beginning to be found out.“And that same man, remember,” pursued the gentleman, throwing hisfinger at Mr. Wopsle heavily,—“that same man might be summoned as ajuryman upon this very trial, and, having thus deeply committed himself, mightreturn to the bosom of his family and lay his head upon his pillow, afterdeliberately swearing that he would well and truly try the issue joined betweenOur Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, and would a trueverdict give according to the evidence, so help him God!”We were all deeply persuaded that the unfortunate Wopsle had gone too far, andhad better stop in his reckless career while there was yet time.The strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, and with amanner expressive of knowing something secret about every one of us that wouldeffectually do for each individual if he chose to disclose it, left the back ofthe settle, and came into the space between the two settles, in front of thefire, where he remained standing, his left hand in his pocket, and he bitingthe forefinger of his right.“From information I have received,” said he, looking round at us aswe all quailed before him, “I have reason to believe there is ablacksmith among you, by name Joseph—or Joe—Gargery. Which is theman?”“Here is the man,” said Joe.The strange gentleman beckoned him out of his place, and Joe went.“You have an apprentice,” pursued the stranger, “commonlyknown as Pip? Is he here?”“I am here!” I cried.The stranger did not recognise me, but I recognised him as the gentleman I hadmet on the stairs, on the occasion of my second visit to Miss Havisham. I hadknown him the moment I saw him looking over the settle, and now that I stoodconfronting him with his hand upon my shoulder, I checked off again in detailhis large head, his dark complexion, his deep-set eyes, his bushy blackeyebrows, his large watch-chain, his strong black dots of beard and whisker,and even the smell of scented soap on his great hand.“I wish to have a private conference with you two,” said he, whenhe had surveyed me at his leisure. “It will take a little time. Perhapswe had better go to your place of residence. I prefer not to anticipate mycommunication here; you will impart as much or as little of it as you please toyour friends afterwards; I have nothing to do with that.”Amidst a wondering silence, we three walked out of the Jolly Bargemen, and in awondering silence walked home. While going along, the strange gentlemanoccasionally looked at me, and occasionally bit the side of his finger. As weneared home, Joe vaguely acknowledging the occasion as an impressive andceremonious one, went on ahead to open the front door. Our conference was heldin the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle.It began with the strange gentleman’s sitting down at the table, drawingthe candle to him, and looking over some entries in his pocket-book. He thenput up the pocket-book and set the candle a little aside, after peering roundit into the darkness at Joe and me, to ascertain which was which.“My name,” he said, “is Jaggers, and I am a lawyer in London.I am pretty well known. I have unusual business to transact with you, and Icommence by explaining that it is not of my originating. If my advice had beenasked, I should not have been here. It was not asked, and you see me here. WhatI have to do as the confidential agent of another, I do. No less, nomore.”Finding that he could not see us very well from where he sat, he got up, andthrew one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon it; thus having one footon the seat of the chair, and one foot on the ground.“Now, Joseph Gargery, I am the bearer of an offer to relieve you of thisyoung fellow your apprentice. You would not object to cancel his indentures athis request and for his good? You would want nothing for so doing?”“Lord forbid that I should want anything for not standing in Pip’sway,” said Joe, staring.“Lord forbidding is pious, but not to the purpose,” returned Mr.Jaggers. “The question is, Would you want anything? Do you wantanything?”“The answer is,” returned Joe, sternly, “No.”I thought Mr. Jaggers glanced at Joe, as if he considered him a fool for hisdisinterestedness. But I was too much bewildered between breathless curiosityand surprise, to be sure of it.“Very well,” said Mr. Jaggers. “Recollect the admission youhave made, and don’t try to go from it presently.”“Who’s a-going to try?” retorted Joe.“I don’t say anybody is. Do you keep a dog?”“Yes, I do keep a dog.”“Bear in mind then, that Brag is a good dog, but Holdfast is a better.Bear that in mind, will you?” repeated Mr. Jaggers, shutting his eyes andnodding his head at Joe, as if he were forgiving him something. “Now, Ireturn to this young fellow. And the communication I have got to make is, thathe has great expectations.”Joe and I gasped, and looked at one another.“I am instructed to communicate to him,” said Mr. Jaggers, throwinghis finger at me sideways, “that he will come into a handsome property.Further, that it is the desire of the present possessor of that property, thathe be immediately removed from his present sphere of life and from this place,and be brought up as a gentleman,—in a word, as a young fellow of greatexpectations.”My dream was out; my wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality; Miss Havishamwas going to make my fortune on a grand scale.“Now, Mr. Pip,” pursued the lawyer, “I address the rest ofwhat I have to say, to you. You are to understand, first, that it is therequest of the person from whom I take my instructions that you always bear thename of Pip. You will have no objection, I dare say, to your great expectationsbeing encumbered with that easy condition. But if you have any objection, thisis the time to mention it.”My heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in my ears, that Icould scarcely stammer I had no objection.“I should think not! Now you are to understand, secondly, Mr. Pip, thatthe name of the person who is your liberal benefactor remains a profoundsecret, until the person chooses to reveal it. I am empowered to mention thatit is the intention of the person to reveal it at first hand by word of mouthto yourself. When or where that intention may be carried out, I cannot say; noone can say. It may be years hence. Now, you are distinctly to understand thatyou are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head, or anyallusion or reference, however distant, to any individual whomsoever asthe individual, in all the communications you may have with me. If youhave a suspicion in your own breast, keep that suspicion in your own breast. Itis not the least to the purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are; theymay be the strongest and gravest reasons, or they may be mere whim. This is notfor you to inquire into. The condition is laid down. Your acceptance of it, andyour observance of it as binding, is the only remaining condition that I amcharged with, by the person from whom I take my instructions, and for whom I amnot otherwise responsible. That person is the person from whom you derive yourexpectations, and the secret is solely held by that person and by me. Again,not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune;but if you have any objection to it, this is the time to mention it. Speakout.”Once more, I stammered with difficulty that I had no objection.“I should think not! Now, Mr. Pip, I have done with stipulations.”Though he called me Mr. Pip, and began rather to make up to me, he still couldnot get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; and even now heoccasionally shut his eyes and threw his finger at me while he spoke, as muchas to express that he knew all kinds of things to my disparagement, if he onlychose to mention them. “We come next, to mere details of arrangement. Youmust know that, although I have used the term ‘expectations’ morethan once, you are not endowed with expectations only. There is already lodgedin my hands a sum of money amply sufficient for your suitable education andmaintenance. You will please consider me your guardian. Oh!” for I wasgoing to thank him, “I tell you at once, I am paid for my services, or Ishouldn’t render them. It is considered that you must be better educated,in accordance with your altered position, and that you will be alive to theimportance and necessity of at once entering on that advantage.”I said I had always longed for it.“Never mind what you have always longed for, Mr. Pip,” he retorted;“keep to the record. If you long for it now, that’s enough. Am Ianswered that you are ready to be placed at once under some proper tutor? Isthat it?”I stammered yes, that was it.“Good. Now, your inclinations are to be consulted. I don’t thinkthat wise, mind, but it’s my trust. Have you ever heard of any tutor whomyou would prefer to another?”I had never heard of any tutor but Biddy and Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt; so,I replied in the negative.“There is a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who I thinkmight suit the purpose,” said Mr. Jaggers. “I don’t recommendhim, observe; because I never recommend anybody. The gentleman I speak of isone Mr. Matthew Pocket.”Ah! I caught at the name directly. Miss Havisham’s relation. The Matthewwhom Mr. and Mrs. Camilla had spoken of. The Matthew whose place was to be atMiss Havisham’s head, when she lay dead, in her bride’s dress onthe bride’s table.“You know the name?” said Mr. Jaggers, looking shrewdly at me, andthen shutting up his eyes while he waited for my answer.My answer was, that I had heard of the name.“Oh!” said he. “You have heard of the name. But the questionis, what do you say of it?”I said, or tried to say, that I was much obliged to him for hisrecommendation—“No, my young friend!” he interrupted, shaking his great head veryslowly. “Recollect yourself!”Not recollecting myself, I began again that I was much obliged to him for hisrecommendation—“No, my young friend,” he interrupted, shaking his head andfrowning and smiling both at once,—“no, no, no; it’s verywell done, but it won’t do; you are too young to fix me with it.Recommendation is not the word, Mr. Pip. Try another.”Correcting myself, I said that I was much obliged to him for his mention of Mr.Matthew Pocket—“That’s more like it!” cried Mr. Jaggers.—And (Iadded), I would gladly try that gentleman.“Good. You had better try him in his own house. The way shall be preparedfor you, and you can see his son first, who is in London. When will you come toLondon?”I said (glancing at Joe, who stood looking on, motionless), that I supposed Icould come directly.“First,” said Mr. Jaggers, “you should have some new clothesto come in, and they should not be working-clothes. Say this day week.You’ll want some money. Shall I leave you twenty guineas?”He produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and counted them out onthe table and pushed them over to me. This was the first time he had taken hisleg from the chair. He sat astride of the chair when he had pushed the moneyover, and sat swinging his purse and eyeing Joe.“Well, Joseph Gargery? You look dumbfoundered?”“I am!” said Joe, in a very decided manner.“It was understood that you wanted nothing for yourself, remember?”“It were understood,” said Joe. “And it are understood. Andit ever will be similar according.”“But what,” said Mr. Jaggers, swinging his purse,—“whatif it was in my instructions to make you a present, as compensation?”“As compensation what for?” Joe demanded.“For the loss of his services.”Joe laid his hand upon my shoulder with the touch of a woman. I have oftenthought him since, like the steam-hammer that can crush a man or pat anegg-shell, in his combination of strength with gentleness. “Pip is thathearty welcome,” said Joe, “to go free with his services, to honourand fortun’, as no words can tell him. But if you think as Money can makecompensation to me for the loss of the little child—what come to theforge—and ever the best of friends!—”O dear good Joe, whom I was so ready to leave and so unthankful to, I see youagain, with your muscular blacksmith’s arm before your eyes, and yourbroad chest heaving, and your voice dying away. O dear good faithful tenderJoe, I feel the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm, as solemnly this dayas if it had been the rustle of an angel’s wing!But I encouraged Joe at the time. I was lost in the mazes of my futurefortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden together. I beggedJoe to be comforted, for (as he said) we had ever been the best of friends, and(as I said) we ever would be so. Joe scooped his eyes with his disengagedwrist, as if he were bent on gouging himself, but said not another word.Mr. Jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognised in Joe the villageidiot, and in me his keeper. When it was over, he said, weighing in his handthe purse he had ceased to swing:—“Now, Joseph Gargery, I warn you this is your last chance. No halfmeasures with me. If you mean to take a present that I have it in charge tomake you, speak out, and you shall have it. If on the contrary you mean tosay—” Here, to his great amazement, he was stopped by Joe’ssuddenly working round him with every demonstration of a fell pugilisticpurpose.“Which I meantersay,” cried Joe, “that if you come into myplace bull-baiting and badgering me, come out! Which I meantersay as sech ifyou’re a man, come on! Which I meantersay that what I say, I meantersayand stand or fall by!”I drew Joe away, and he immediately became placable; merely stating to me, inan obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom itmight happen to concern, that he were not a-going to be bull-baited andbadgered in his own place. Mr. Jaggers had risen when Joe demonstrated, and hadbacked near the door. Without evincing any inclination to come in again, hethere delivered his valedictory remarks. They were these.“Well, Mr. Pip, I think the sooner you leave here—as you are to bea gentleman—the better. Let it stand for this day week, and you shallreceive my printed address in the meantime. You can take a hackney-coach at thestage-coach office in London, and come straight to me. Understand, that Iexpress no opinion, one way or other, on the trust I undertake. I am paid forundertaking it, and I do so. Now, understand that, finally. Understandthat!”He was throwing his finger at both of us, and I think would have gone on, butfor his seeming to think Joe dangerous, and going off.Something came into my head which induced me to run after him, as he was goingdown to the Jolly Bargemen, where he had left a hired carriage.“I beg your pardon, Mr. Jaggers.”“Halloa!” said he, facing round, “what’s thematter?”“I wish to be quite right, Mr. Jaggers, and to keep to your directions;so I thought I had better ask. Would there be any objection to my taking leaveof any one I know, about here, before I go away?”“No,” said he, looking as if he hardly understood me.“I don’t mean in the village only, but up town?”“No,” said he. “No objection.”I thanked him and ran home again, and there I found that Joe had already lockedthe front door and vacated the state parlour, and was seated by the kitchenfire with a hand on each knee, gazing intently at the burning coals. I too satdown before the fire and gazed at the coals, and nothing was said for a longtime.My sister was in her cushioned chair in her corner, and Biddy sat at herneedle-work before the fire, and Joe sat next Biddy, and I sat next Joe in thecorner opposite my sister. The more I looked into the glowing coals, the moreincapable I became of looking at Joe; the longer the silence lasted, the moreunable I felt to speak.At length I got out, “Joe, have you told Biddy?”“No, Pip,” returned Joe, still looking at the fire, and holding hisknees tight, as if he had private information that they intended to make offsomewhere, “which I left it to yourself, Pip.”“I would rather you told, Joe.”“Pip’s a gentleman of fortun’ then,” said Joe,“and God bless him in it!”Biddy dropped her work, and looked at me. Joe held his knees and looked at me.I looked at both of them. After a pause, they both heartily congratulated me;but there was a certain touch of sadness in their congratulations that I ratherresented.I took it upon myself to impress Biddy (and through Biddy, Joe) with the graveobligation I considered my friends under, to know nothing and say nothing aboutthe maker of my fortune. It would all come out in good time, I observed, and inthe meanwhile nothing was to be said, save that I had come into greatexpectations from a mysterious patron. Biddy nodded her head thoughtfully atthe fire as she took up her work again, and said she would be very particular;and Joe, still detaining his knees, said, “Ay, ay, I’ll beekervally partickler, Pip;” and then they congratulated me again, andwent on to express so much wonder at the notion of my being a gentleman that Ididn’t half like it.Infinite pains were then taken by Biddy to convey to my sister some idea ofwhat had happened. To the best of my belief, those efforts entirely failed. Shelaughed and nodded her head a great many times, and even repeated after Biddy,the words “Pip” and “Property.” But I doubt if they hadmore meaning in them than an election cry, and I cannot suggest a darkerpicture of her state of mind.I never could have believed it without experience, but as Joe and Biddy becamemore at their cheerful ease again, I became quite gloomy. Dissatisfied with myfortune, of course I could not be; but it is possible that I may have been,without quite knowing it, dissatisfied with myself.Anyhow, I sat with my elbow on my knee and my face upon my hand, looking intothe fire, as those two talked about my going away, and about what they shoulddo without me, and all that. And whenever I caught one of them looking at me,though never so pleasantly (and they often looked at me,—particularlyBiddy), I felt offended: as if they were expressing some mistrust of me. ThoughHeaven knows they never did by word or sign.At those times I would get up and look out at the door; for our kitchen dooropened at once upon the night, and stood open on summer evenings to air theroom. The very stars to which I then raised my eyes, I am afraid I took to bebut poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which Ihad passed my life.“Saturday night,” said I, when we sat at our supper of bread andcheese and beer. “Five more days, and then the day before the day!They’ll soon go.”“Yes, Pip,” observed Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in hisbeer-mug. “They’ll soon go.”“Soon, soon go,” said Biddy.“I have been thinking, Joe, that when I go down town on Monday, and ordermy new clothes, I shall tell the tailor that I’ll come and put them onthere, or that I’ll have them sent to Mr. Pumblechook’s. It wouldbe very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people here.”“Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see you in your new gen-teel figuretoo, Pip,” said Joe, industriously cutting his bread, with his cheese onit, in the palm of his left hand, and glancing at my untasted supper as if hethought of the time when we used to compare slices. “So might Wopsle. Andthe Jolly Bargemen might take it as a compliment.”“That’s just what I don’t want, Joe. They would make such abusiness of it,—such a coarse and common business,—that Icouldn’t bear myself.”“Ah, that indeed, Pip!” said Joe. “If you couldn’tabear yourself—”Biddy asked me here, as she sat holding my sister’s plate, “Haveyou thought about when you’ll show yourself to Mr. Gargery, and yoursister and me? You will show yourself to us; won’t you?”“Biddy,” I returned with some resentment, “you are soexceedingly quick that it’s difficult to keep up with you.”(“She always were quick,” observed Joe.)“If you had waited another moment, Biddy, you would have heard me saythat I shall bring my clothes here in a bundle one evening,—most likelyon the evening before I go away.”Biddy said no more. Handsomely forgiving her, I soon exchanged an affectionategood night with her and Joe, and went up to bed. When I got into my littleroom, I sat down and took a long look at it, as a mean little room that Ishould soon be parted from and raised above, for ever. It was furnished withfresh young remembrances too, and even at the same moment I fell into much thesame confused division of mind between it and the better rooms to which I wasgoing, as I had been in so often between the forge and Miss Havisham’s,and Biddy and Estella.The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of my attic, and the roomwas warm. As I put the window open and stood looking out, I saw Joe come slowlyforth at the dark door, below, and take a turn or two in the air; and then Isaw Biddy come, and bring him a pipe and light it for him. He never smoked solate, and it seemed to hint to me that he wanted comforting, for some reason orother.He presently stood at the door immediately beneath me, smoking his pipe, andBiddy stood there too, quietly talking to him, and I knew that they talked ofme, for I heard my name mentioned in an endearing tone by both of them morethan once. I would not have listened for more, if I could have heard more; so Idrew away from the window, and sat down in my one chair by the bedside, feelingit very sorrowful and strange that this first night of my bright fortunesshould be the loneliest I had ever known.Looking towards the open window, I saw light wreaths from Joe’s pipefloating there, and I fancied it was like a blessing from Joe,—notobtruded on me or paraded before me, but pervading the air we shared together.I put my light out, and crept into bed; and it was an uneasy bed now, and Inever slept the old sound sleep in it any more.Chapter XIX.Morning made a considerable difference in my general prospect ofLife, and brightened it so much that it scarcely seemed the same. What layheaviest on my mind was, the consideration that six days intervened between meand the day of departure; for I could not divest myself of a misgiving thatsomething might happen to London in the meanwhile, and that, when I got there,it would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone.Joe and Biddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke of ourapproaching separation; but they only referred to it when I did. Afterbreakfast, Joe brought out my indentures from the press in the best parlour,and we put them in the fire, and I felt that I was free. With all the noveltyof my emancipation on me, I went to church with Joe, and thought perhaps theclergyman wouldn’t have read that about the rich man and the kingdom ofHeaven, if he had known all.After our early dinner, I strolled out alone, purposing to finish off themarshes at once, and get them done with. As I passed the church, I felt (as Ihad felt during service in the morning) a sublime compassion for the poorcreatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all their livesthrough, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds. I promisedmyself that I would do something for them one of these days, and formed a planin outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and plum-pudding, a pint ofale, and a gallon of condescension, upon everybody in the village.If I had often thought before, with something allied to shame, of mycompanionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among thosegraves, what were my thoughts on this Sunday, when the place recalled thewretch, ragged and shivering, with his felon iron and badge! My comfort was,that it happened a long time ago, and that he had doubtless been transported along way off, and that he was dead to me, and might be veritably dead into thebargain.No more low, wet grounds, no more dikes and sluices, no more of these grazingcattle,—though they seemed, in their dull manner, to wear a morerespectful air now, and to face round, in order that they might stare as longas possible at the possessor of such great expectations,—farewell,monotonous acquaintances of my childhood, henceforth I was for London andgreatness; not for smith’s work in general, and for you! I made myexultant way to the old Battery, and, lying down there to consider the questionwhether Miss Havisham intended me for Estella, fell asleep.When I awoke, I was much surprised to find Joe sitting beside me, smoking hispipe. He greeted me with a cheerful smile on my opening my eyes, andsaid,—“As being the last time, Pip, I thought I’d foller.”“And Joe, I am very glad you did so.”“Thankee, Pip.”“You may be sure, dear Joe,” I went on, after we had shaken hands,“that I shall never forget you.”“No, no, Pip!” said Joe, in a comfortable tone,“I’m sure of that. Ay, ay, old chap! Bless you, it were onlynecessary to get it well round in a man’s mind, to be certain on it. Butit took a bit of time to get it well round, the change come so oncommon plump;didn’t it?”Somehow, I was not best pleased with Joe’s being so mightily secure ofme. I should have liked him to have betrayed emotion, or to have said,“It does you credit, Pip,” or something of that sort. Therefore, Imade no remark on Joe’s first head; merely saying as to his second, thatthe tidings had indeed come suddenly, but that I had always wanted to be agentleman, and had often and often speculated on what I would do, if I wereone.“Have you though?” said Joe. “Astonishing!”“It’s a pity now, Joe,” said I, “that you did not geton a little more, when we had our lessons here; isn’t it?”“Well, I don’t know,” returned Joe. “I’m so awfuldull. I’m only master of my own trade. It were always a pity as I was soawful dull; but it’s no more of a pity now, than it was—this daytwelvemonth—don’t you see?”What I had meant was, that when I came into my property and was able to dosomething for Joe, it would have been much more agreeable if he had been betterqualified for a rise in station. He was so perfectly innocent of my meaning,however, that I thought I would mention it to Biddy in preference.So, when we had walked home and had had tea, I took Biddy into our littlegarden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in a general way forthe elevation of her spirits, that I should never forget her, said I had afavour to ask of her.“And it is, Biddy,” said I, “that you will not omit anyopportunity of helping Joe on, a little.”“How helping him on?” asked Biddy, with a steady sort of glance.“Well! Joe is a dear good fellow,—in fact, I think he is thedearest fellow that ever lived,—but he is rather backward in some things.For instance, Biddy, in his learning and his manners.”Although I was looking at Biddy as I spoke, and although she opened her eyesvery wide when I had spoken, she did not look at me.“O, his manners! won’t his manners do then?” asked Biddy,plucking a black-currant leaf.“My dear Biddy, they do very well here—”“O! they do very well here?” interrupted Biddy, lookingclosely at the leaf in her hand.“Hear me out,—but if I were to remove Joe into a higher sphere, asI shall hope to remove him when I fully come into my property, they wouldhardly do him justice.”“And don’t you think he knows that?” asked Biddy.It was such a very provoking question (for it had never in the most distantmanner occurred to me), that I said, snappishly,—“Biddy, what do you mean?”Biddy, having rubbed the leaf to pieces between her hands,—and the smellof a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that evening in thelittle garden by the side of the lane,—said, “Have you neverconsidered that he may be proud?”“Proud?” I repeated, with disdainful emphasis.“O! there are many kinds of pride,” said Biddy, looking full at meand shaking her head; “pride is not all of one kind—”“Well? What are you stopping for?” said I.“Not all of one kind,” resumed Biddy. “He may be too proud tolet any one take him out of a place that he is competent to fill, and fillswell and with respect. To tell you the truth, I think he is; though it soundsbold in me to say so, for you must know him far better than I do.”“Now, Biddy,” said I, “I am very sorry to see this in you. Idid not expect to see this in you. You are envious, Biddy, and grudging. Youare dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune, and you can’t helpshowing it.”“If you have the heart to think so,” returned Biddy, “say so.Say so over and over again, if you have the heart to think so.”“If you have the heart to be so, you mean, Biddy,” said I, in avirtuous and superior tone; “don’t put it off upon me. I am verysorry to see it, and it’s a—it’s a bad side of human nature.I did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might have after Iwas gone, of improving dear Joe. But after this I ask you nothing. I amextremely sorry to see this in you, Biddy,” I repeated. “It’sa—it’s a bad side of human nature.”“Whether you scold me or approve of me,” returned poor Biddy,“you may equally depend upon my trying to do all that lies in my power,here, at all times. And whatever opinion you take away of me, shall make nodifference in my remembrance of you. Yet a gentleman should not be unjustneither,” said Biddy, turning away her head.I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (in whichsentiment, waiving its application, I have since seen reason to think I wasright), and I walked down the little path away from Biddy, and Biddy went intothe house, and I went out at the garden gate and took a dejected stroll untilsupper-time; again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this, the secondnight of my bright fortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as thefirst.But, morning once more brightened my view, and I extended my clemency to Biddy,and we dropped the subject. Putting on the best clothes I had, I went into townas early as I could hope to find the shops open, and presented myself beforeMr. Trabb, the tailor, who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind hisshop, and who did not think it worth his while to come out to me, but called mein to him.“Well!” said Mr. Trabb, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way.“How are you, and what can I do for you?”Mr. Trabb had sliced his hot roll into three feather-beds, and was slippingbutter in between the blankets, and covering it up. He was a prosperous oldbachelor, and his open window looked into a prosperous little garden andorchard, and there was a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side ofhis fireplace, and I did not doubt that heaps of his prosperity were put awayin it in bags.“Mr. Trabb,” said I, “it’s an unpleasant thing to haveto mention, because it looks like boasting; but I have come into a handsomeproperty.”A change passed over Mr. Trabb. He forgot the butter in bed, got up from thebedside, and wiped his fingers on the tablecloth, exclaiming, “Lord blessmy soul!”“I am going up to my guardian in London,” said I, casually drawingsome guineas out of my pocket and looking at them; “and I want afashionable suit of clothes to go in. I wish to pay for them,” Iadded—otherwise I thought he might only pretend to make them, “withready money.”“My dear sir,” said Mr. Trabb, as he respectfully bent his body,opened his arms, and took the liberty of touching me on the outside of eachelbow, “don’t hurt me by mentioning that. May I venture tocongratulate you? Would you do me the favour of stepping into the shop?”Mr. Trabb’s boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side. WhenI had entered he was sweeping the shop, and he had sweetened his labours bysweeping over me. He was still sweeping when I came out into the shop with Mr.Trabb, and he knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles, toexpress (as I understood it) equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead.“Hold that noise,” said Mr. Trabb, with the greatest sternness,“or I’ll knock your head off!—Do me the favour to be seated,sir. Now, this,” said Mr. Trabb, taking down a roll of cloth, and tidingit out in a flowing manner over the counter, preparatory to getting his handunder it to show the gloss, “is a very sweet article. I can recommend itfor your purpose, sir, because it really is extra super. But you shall see someothers. Give me Number Four, you!” (To the boy, and with a dreadfullysevere stare; foreseeing the danger of that miscreant’s brushing me withit, or making some other sign of familiarity.)Mr. Trabb never removed his stern eye from the boy until he had depositednumber four on the counter and was at a safe distance again. Then he commandedhim to bring number five, and number eight. “And let me have none of yourtricks here,” said Mr. Trabb, “or you shall repent it, you youngscoundrel, the longest day you have to live.”Mr. Trabb then bent over number four, and in a sort of deferential confidencerecommended it to me as a light article for summer wear, an article much invogue among the nobility and gentry, an article that it would ever be an honourto him to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman’s (if he mightclaim me for a fellow-townsman) having worn. “Are you bringing numbersfive and eight, you vagabond,” said Mr. Trabb to the boy after that,“or shall I kick you out of the shop and bring them myself?”I selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of Mr. Trabb’sjudgment, and re-entered the parlour to be measured. For although Mr. Trabb hadmy measure already, and had previously been quite contented with it, he saidapologetically that it “wouldn’t do under existing circumstances,sir,—wouldn’t do at all.” So, Mr. Trabb measured andcalculated me in the parlour, as if I were an estate and he the finest speciesof surveyor, and gave himself such a world of trouble that I felt that no suitof clothes could possibly remunerate him for his pains. When he had at lastdone and had appointed to send the articles to Mr. Pumblechook’s on theThursday evening, he said, with his hand upon the parlour lock, “I know,sir, that London gentlemen cannot be expected to patronise local work, as arule; but if you would give me a turn now and then in the quality of atownsman, I should greatly esteem it. Good-morning, sir, muchobliged.—Door!”The last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant.But I saw him collapse as his master rubbed me out with his hands, and my firstdecided experience of the stupendous power of money was, that it had morallylaid upon his back Trabb’s boy.After this memorable event, I went to the hatter’s, and thebootmaker’s, and the hosier’s, and felt rather like MotherHubbard’s dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades. Ialso went to the coach-office and took my place for seven o’clock onSaturday morning. It was not necessary to explain everywhere that I had comeinto a handsome property; but whenever I said anything to that effect, itfollowed that the officiating tradesman ceased to have his attention divertedthrough the window by the High Street, and concentrated his mind upon me. WhenI had ordered everything I wanted, I directed my steps towardsPumblechook’s, and, as I approached that gentleman’s place ofbusiness, I saw him standing at his door.He was waiting for me with great impatience. He had been out early with thechaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard the news. He had prepared acollation for me in the Barnwell parlour, and he too ordered his shopman to“come out of the gangway” as my sacred person passed.“My dear friend,” said Mr. Pumblechook, taking me by both hands,when he and I and the collation were alone, “I give you joy of your goodfortune. Well deserved, well deserved!”This was coming to the point, and I thought it a sensible way of expressinghimself.“To think,” said Mr. Pumblechook, after snorting admiration at mefor some moments, “that I should have been the humble instrument ofleading up to this, is a proud reward.”I begged Mr. Pumblechook to remember that nothing was to be ever said orhinted, on that point.“My dear young friend,” said Mr. Pumblechook; “if you willallow me to call you so—”I murmured “Certainly,” and Mr. Pumblechook took me by both handsagain, and communicated a movement to his waistcoat, which had an emotionalappearance, though it was rather low down, “My dear young friend, relyupon my doing my little all in your absence, by keeping the fact before themind of Joseph.—Joseph!” said Mr. Pumblechook, in the way of acompassionate adjuration. “Joseph!! Joseph!!!” Thereupon he shookhis head and tapped it, expressing his sense of deficiency in Joseph.“But my dear young friend,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “you mustbe hungry, you must be exhausted. Be seated. Here is a chicken had round fromthe Boar, here is a tongue had round from the Boar, here’s one or twolittle things had round from the Boar, that I hope you may not despise. But doI,” said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again the moment after he had satdown, “see afore me, him as I ever sported with in his times of happyinfancy? And may I—may I—?”This May I, meant might he shake hands? I consented, and he was fervent, andthen sat down again.“Here is wine,” said Mr. Pumblechook. “Let us drink, Thanksto Fortune, and may she ever pick out her favourites with equal judgment! Andyet I cannot,” said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again, “see aforeme One—and likewise drink to One—without again expressing—MayI—may I—?”I said he might, and he shook hands with me again, and emptied his glass andturned it upside down. I did the same; and if I had turned myself upside downbefore drinking, the wine could not have gone more direct to my head.Mr. Pumblechook helped me to the liver wing, and to the best slice of tongue(none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Pork now), and took,comparatively speaking, no care of himself at all. “Ah! poultry, poultry!You little thought,” said Mr. Pumblechook, apostrophising the fowl in thedish, “when you was a young fledgling, what was in store for you. Youlittle thought you was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for oneas—Call it a weakness, if you will,” said Mr. Pumblechook, gettingup again, “but may I? may I—?”It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying he might, so he did itat once. How he ever did it so often without wounding himself with my knife, Idon’t know.“And your sister,” he resumed, after a little steady eating,“which had the honour of bringing you up by hand! It’s a sadpicter, to reflect that she’s no longer equal to fully understanding thehonour. May—”I saw he was about to come at me again, and I stopped him.“We’ll drink her health,” said I.“Ah!” cried Mr. Pumblechook, leaning back in his chair, quiteflaccid with admiration, “that’s the way you know ’em,sir!” (I don’t know who Sir was, but he certainly was not I, andthere was no third person present); “that’s the way you know thenoble-minded, sir! Ever forgiving and ever affable. It might,” said theservile Pumblechook, putting down his untasted glass in a hurry and getting upagain, “to a common person, have the appearance of repeating—butmay I—?”When he had done it, he resumed his seat and drank to my sister. “Let usnever be blind,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “to her faults of temper,but it is to be hoped she meant well.”At about this time, I began to observe that he was getting flushed in the face;as to myself, I felt all face, steeped in wine and smarting.I mentioned to Mr. Pumblechook that I wished to have my new clothes sent to hishouse, and he was ecstatic on my so distinguishing him. I mentioned my reasonfor desiring to avoid observation in the village, and he lauded it to theskies. There was nobody but himself, he intimated, worthy of my confidence,and—in short, might he? Then he asked me tenderly if I remembered ourboyish games at sums, and how we had gone together to have me bound apprentice,and, in effect, how he had ever been my favourite fancy and my chosen friend?If I had taken ten times as many glasses of wine as I had, I should have knownthat he never had stood in that relation towards me, and should in my heart ofhearts have repudiated the idea. Yet for all that, I remember feeling convincedthat I had been much mistaken in him, and that he was a sensible, practical,good-hearted prime fellow.By degrees he fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to ask my advicein reference to his own affairs. He mentioned that there was an opportunity fora great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises,if enlarged, such as had never occurred before in that or any otherneighbourhood. What alone was wanting to the realisation of a vast fortune, heconsidered to be More Capital. Those were the two little words, more capital.Now it appeared to him (Pumblechook) that if that capital were got into thebusiness, through a sleeping partner, sir,—which sleeping partner wouldhave nothing to do but walk in, by self or deputy, whenever he pleased, andexamine the books,—and walk in twice a year and take his profits away inhis pocket, to the tune of fifty per cent,—it appeared to him that thatmight be an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property,which would be worthy of his attention. But what did I think? He had greatconfidence in my opinion, and what did I think? I gave it as my opinion.“Wait a bit!” The united vastness and distinctness of this view sostruck him, that he no longer asked if he might shake hands with me, but saidhe really must,—and did.We drank all the wine, and Mr. Pumblechook pledged himself over and over againto keep Joseph up to the mark (I don’t know what mark), and to render meefficient and constant service (I don’t know what service). He also madeknown to me for the first time in my life, and certainly after having kept hissecret wonderfully well, that he had always said of me, “That boy is nocommon boy, and mark me, his fortun’ will be no commonfortun’.” He said with a tearful smile that it was a singular thingto think of now, and I said so too. Finally, I went out into the air, with adim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of thesunshine, and found that I had slumberously got to the turnpike without havingtaken any account of the road.There, I was roused by Mr. Pumblechook’s hailing me. He was a long waydown the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures for me to stop. Istopped, and he came up breathless.“No, my dear friend,” said he, when he had recovered wind forspeech. “Not if I can help it. This occasion shall not entirely passwithout that affability on your part.—May I, as an old friend andwell-wisher? May I?”We shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and he ordered a young carterout of my way with the greatest indignation. Then, he blessed me and stoodwaving his hand to me until I had passed the crook in the road; and then Iturned into a field and had a long nap under a hedge before I pursued my wayhome.I had scant luggage to take with me to London, for little of the little Ipossessed was adapted to my new station. But I began packing that sameafternoon, and wildly packed up things that I knew I should want next morning,in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost.So, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, passed; and on Friday morning I went toMr. Pumblechook’s, to put on my new clothes and pay my visit to MissHavisham. Mr. Pumblechook’s own room was given up to me to dress in, andwas decorated with clean towels expressly for the event. My clothes were rathera disappointment, of course. Probably every new and eagerly expected garmentever put on since clothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer’sexpectation. But after I had had my new suit on some half an hour, and had gonethrough an immensity of posturing with Mr. Pumblechook’s very limiteddressing-glass, in the futile endeavour to see my legs, it seemed to fit mebetter. It being market morning at a neighbouring town some ten miles off, Mr.Pumblechook was not at home. I had not told him exactly when I meant to leave,and was not likely to shake hands with him again before departing. This was allas it should be, and I went out in my new array, fearfully ashamed of having topass the shopman, and suspicious after all that I was at a personaldisadvantage, something like Joe’s in his Sunday suit.I went circuitously to Miss Havisham’s by all the back ways, and rang atthe bell constrainedly, on account of the stiff long fingers of my gloves.Sarah Pocket came to the gate, and positively reeled back when she saw me sochanged; her walnut-shell countenance likewise turned from brown to green andyellow.“You?” said she. “You? Good gracious! What do youwant?”“I am going to London, Miss Pocket,” said I, “and want to saygood-bye to Miss Havisham.”I was not expected, for she left me locked in the yard, while she went to askif I were to be admitted. After a very short delay, she returned and took meup, staring at me all the way.Miss Havisham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table,leaning on her crutch stick. The room was lighted as of yore, and at the soundof our entrance, she stopped and turned. She was then just abreast of therotted bride-cake.“Don’t go, Sarah,” she said. “Well, Pip?”“I start for London, Miss Havisham, to-morrow,” I was exceedinglycareful what I said, “and I thought you would kindly not mind my takingleave of you.”“This is a gay figure, Pip,” said she, making her crutch stick playround me, as if she, the fairy godmother who had changed me, were bestowing thefinishing gift.“I have come into such good fortune since I saw you last, MissHavisham,” I murmured. “And I am so grateful for it, MissHavisham!”“Ay, ay!” said she, looking at the discomfited and envious Sarah,with delight. “I have seen Mr. Jaggers. I have heard about it,Pip. So you go to-morrow?”“Yes, Miss Havisham.”“And you are adopted by a rich person?”“Yes, Miss Havisham.”“Not named?”“No, Miss Havisham.”“And Mr. Jaggers is made your guardian?”“Yes, Miss Havisham.”She quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was her enjoyment ofSarah Pocket’s jealous dismay. “Well!” she went on;“you have a promising career before you. Be good—deserveit—and abide by Mr. Jaggers’s instructions.” She looked atme, and looked at Sarah, and Sarah’s countenance wrung out of herwatchful face a cruel smile. “Good-bye, Pip!—you will always keepthe name of Pip, you know.”“Yes, Miss Havisham.”“Good-bye, Pip!”She stretched out her hand, and I went down on my knee and put it to my lips. Ihad not considered how I should take leave of her; it came naturally to me atthe moment to do this. She looked at Sarah Pocket with triumph in her weirdeyes, and so I left my fairy godmother, with both her hands on her crutchstick, standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rottenbride-cake that was hidden in cobwebs.Sarah Pocket conducted me down, as if I were a ghost who must be seen out. Shecould not get over my appearance, and was in the last degree confounded. I said“Good-bye, Miss Pocket;” but she merely stared, and did not seemcollected enough to know that I had spoken. Clear of the house, I made the bestof my way back to Pumblechook’s, took off my new clothes, made them intoa bundle, and went back home in my older dress, carrying it—to speak thetruth—much more at my ease too, though I had the bundle to carry.And now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, had run out fastand were gone, and to-morrow looked me in the face more steadily than I couldlook at it. As the six evenings had dwindled away, to five, to four, to three,to two, I had become more and more appreciative of the society of Joe andBiddy. On this last evening, I dressed myself out in my new clothes for theirdelight, and sat in my splendour	 until bedtime. We had a hot supper on theoccasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and we had some flip to finishwith. We were all very low, and none the higher for pretending to be inspirits.I was to leave our village at five in the morning, carrying my littlehand-portmanteau, and I had told Joe that I wished to walk away all alone. I amafraid—sore afraid—that this purpose originated in my sense of thecontrast there would be between me and Joe, if we went to the coach together. Ihad pretended with myself that there was nothing of this taint in thearrangement; but when I went up to my little room on this last night, I feltcompelled to admit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon me to go downagain and entreat Joe to walk with me in the morning. I did not.All night there were coaches in my broken sleep, going to wrong places insteadof to London, and having in the traces, now dogs, now cats, now pigs, nowmen,—never horses. Fantastic failures of journeys occupied me until theday dawned and the birds were singing. Then, I got up and partly dressed, andsat at the window to take a last look out, and in taking it fell asleep.Biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although I did not sleep atthe window an hour, I smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when I started upwith a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon. But long afterthat, and long after I had heard the clinking of the teacups and was quiteready, I wanted the resolution to go downstairs. After all, I remained upthere, repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my small portmanteau and lockingand strapping it up again, until Biddy called to me that I was late.It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it. I got up from the meal, sayingwith a sort of briskness, as if it had only just occurred to me, “Well! Isuppose I must be off!” and then I kissed my sister who was laughing andnodding and shaking in her usual chair, and kissed Biddy, and threw my armsaround Joe’s neck. Then I took up my little portmanteau and walked out.The last I saw of them was, when I presently heard a scuffle behind me, andlooking back, saw Joe throwing an old shoe after me and Biddy throwing anotherold shoe. I stopped then, to wave my hat, and dear old Joe waved his strongright arm above his head, crying huskily “Hooroar!” and Biddy puther apron to her face.I walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than I had supposedit would be, and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an oldshoe thrown after the coach, in sight of all the High Street. I whistled andmade nothing of going. But the village was very peaceful and quiet, and thelight mists were solemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and I had been soinnocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great, that in amoment with a strong heave and sob I broke into tears. It was by thefinger-post at the end of the village, and I laid my hand upon it, and said,“Good-bye, O my dear, dear friend!”Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of our tears, for they are rain upon theblinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts. I was better after I hadcried than before,—more sorry, more aware of my own ingratitude, moregentle. If I had cried before, I should have had Joe with me then.So subdued I was by those tears, and by their breaking out again in the courseof the quiet walk, that when I was on the coach, and it was clear of the town,I deliberated with an aching heart whether I would not get down when we changedhorses and walk back, and have another evening at home, and a better parting.We changed, and I had not made up my mind, and still reflected for my comfortthat it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when we changedagain. And while I was occupied with these deliberations, I would fancy anexact resemblance to Joe in some man coming along the road towards us, and myheart would beat high.—As if he could possibly be there!We changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too far to goback, and I went on. And the mists had all solemnly risen now, and the worldlay spread before me.This is the end of the first stage of Pip’s expectations.Chapter XX.Thejourney from our town to the metropolis was a journey of about five hours. Itwas a little past midday when the four-horse stage-coach by which I was apassenger, got into the ravel of traffic frayed out about the Cross Keys, WoodStreet, Cheapside, London.We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it was treasonable todoubt our having and our being the best of everything: otherwise, while I wasscared by the immensity of London, I think I might have had some faint doubtswhether it was not rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty.Mr. Jaggers had duly sent me his address; it was, Little Britain, and he hadwritten after it on his card, “just out of Smithfield, and close by thecoach-office.” Nevertheless, a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have asmany capes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old, packed me up in hiscoach and hemmed me in with a folding and jingling barrier of steps, as if hewere going to take me fifty miles. His getting on his box, which I remember tohave been decorated with an old weather-stained pea-green hammerclothmoth-eaten into rags, was quite a work of time. It was a wonderful equipage,with six great coronets outside, and ragged things behind for I don’tknow how many footmen to hold on by, and a harrow below them, to preventamateur footmen from yielding to the temptation.I had scarcely had time to enjoy the coach and to think how like a straw-yardit was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder why the horses’nose-bags were kept inside, when I observed the coachman beginning to get down,as if we were going to stop presently. And stop we presently did, in a gloomystreet, at certain offices with an open door, whereon was paintedMR. JAGGERS.“How much?” I asked the coachman.The coachman answered, “A shilling—unless you wish to make itmore.”I naturally said I had no wish to make it more.“Then it must be a shilling,” observed the coachman. “Idon’t want to get into trouble. I know him!” Hedarkly closed an eye at Mr. Jaggers’s name, and shook his head.When he had got his shilling, and had in course of time completed the ascent tohis box, and had got away (which appeared to relieve his mind), I went into thefront office with my little portmanteau in my hand and asked, Was Mr. Jaggersat home?“He is not,” returned the clerk. “He is in Court at present.Am I addressing Mr. Pip?”I signified that he was addressing Mr. Pip.“Mr. Jaggers left word, would you wait in his room. He couldn’t sayhow long he might be, having a case on. But it stands to reason, his time beingvaluable, that he won’t be longer than he can help.”With those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered me into an inner chamberat the back. Here, we found a gentleman with one eye, in a velveteen suit andknee-breeches, who wiped his nose with his sleeve on being interrupted in theperusal of the newspaper.“Go and wait outside, Mike,” said the clerk.I began to say that I hoped I was not interrupting, when the clerk shoved thisgentleman out with as little ceremony as I ever saw used, and tossing his furcap out after him, left me alone.Mr. Jaggers’s room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a most dismalplace; the skylight, eccentrically pitched like a broken head, and thedistorted adjoining houses looking as if they had twisted themselves to peepdown at me through it. There were not so many papers about, as I should haveexpected to see; and there were some odd objects about, that I should not haveexpected to see,—such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard,several strange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on a shelf,of faces peculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose. Mr. Jaggers’sown high-backed chair was of deadly black horsehair, with rows of brass nailsround it, like a coffin; and I fancied I could see how he leaned back in it,and bit his forefinger at the clients. The room was but small, and the clientsseemed to have had a habit of backing up against the wall; the wall, especiallyopposite to Mr. Jaggers’s chair, being greasy with shoulders. I recalled,too, that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when I wasthe innocent cause of his being turned out.I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr. Jaggers’s chair,and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of the place. I called to mindthat the clerk had the same air of knowing something to everybody else’sdisadvantage, as his master had. I wondered how many other clerks there wereupstairs, and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery oftheir fellow-creatures. I wondered what was the history of all the odd litterabout the room, and how it came there. I wondered whether the two swollen faceswere of Mr. Jaggers’s family, and, if he were so unfortunate as to havehad a pair of such ill-looking relations, why he stuck them on that dusty perchfor the blacks and flies to settle on, instead of giving them a place at home.Of course I had no experience of a London summer day, and my spirits may havebeen oppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit that laythick on everything. But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr. Jaggers’sclose room, until I really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above Mr.Jaggers’s chair, and got up and went out.When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while I waited, headvised me to go round the corner and I should come into Smithfield. So I cameinto Smithfield; and the shameful place, being all asmear with filth and fatand blood and foam, seemed to stick to me. So, I rubbed it off with allpossible speed by turning into a street where I saw the great black dome ofSaint Paul’s bulging at me from behind a grim stone building which abystander said was Newgate Prison. Following the wall of the jail, I found theroadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles; and fromthis, and from the quantity of people standing about smelling strongly ofspirits and beer, I inferred that the trials were on.While I looked about me here, an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk ministerof justice asked me if I would like to step in and hear a trial or so:informing me that he could give me a front place for half a crown, whence Ishould command a full view of the Lord Chief Justice in his wig androbes,—mentioning that awful personage like waxwork, and presentlyoffering him at the reduced price of eighteen-pence. As I declined the proposalon the plea of an appointment, he was so good as to take me into a yard andshow me where the gallows was kept, and also where people were publiclywhipped, and then he showed me the Debtors’ Door, out of which culpritscame to be hanged; heightening the interest of that dreadful portal by givingme to understand that “four on ’em” would come out at thatdoor the day after to-morrow at eight in the morning, to be killed in a row.This was horrible, and gave me a sickening idea of London; the more so as theLord Chief Justice’s proprietor wore (from his hat down to his boots andup again to his pocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes which hadevidently not belonged to him originally, and which I took it into my head hehad bought cheap of the executioner. Under these circumstances I thought myselfwell rid of him for a shilling.I dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Jaggers had come in yet, and I found hehad not, and I strolled out again. This time, I made the tour of LittleBritain, and turned into Bartholomew Close; and now I became aware that otherpeople were waiting about for Mr. Jaggers, as well as I. There were two men ofsecret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting theirfeet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together, one of whom saidto the other when they first passed me, that “Jaggers would do it if itwas to be done.” There was a knot of three men and two women standing ata corner, and one of the women was crying on her dirty shawl, and the othercomforted her by saying, as she pulled her own shawl over her shoulders,“Jaggers is for him, ’Melia, and what more could youhave?” There was a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while Iwas loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon anerrand; and while the messenger was gone, I remarked this Jew, who was of ahighly excitable temperament, performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post andaccompanying himself, in a kind of frenzy, with the words, “O Jaggerth,Jaggerth, Jaggerth! all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth, give me Jaggerth!”These testimonies to the popularity of my guardian made a deep impression onme, and I admired and wondered more than ever.At length, as I was looking out at the iron gate of Bartholomew Close intoLittle Britain, I saw Mr. Jaggers coming across the road towards me. All theothers who were waiting saw him at the same time, and there was quite a rush athim. Mr. Jaggers, putting a hand on my shoulder and walking me on at his sidewithout saying anything to me, addressed himself to his followers.First, he took the two secret men.“Now, I have nothing to say to you,” said Mr. Jaggers,throwing his finger at them. “I want to know no more than I know. As tothe result, it’s a toss-up. I told you from the first it was a toss-up.Have you paid Wemmick?”“We made the money up this morning, sir,” said one of the men,submissively, while the other perused Mr. Jaggers’s face.“I don’t ask you when you made it up, or where, or whether you madeit up at all. Has Wemmick got it?”“Yes, sir,” said both the men together.“Very well; then you may go. Now, I won’t have it!” said MrJaggers, waving his hand at them to put them behind him. “If you say aword to me, I’ll throw up the case.”“We thought, Mr. Jaggers—” one of the men began, pulling offhis hat.“That’s what I told you not to do,” said Mr. Jaggers.“You thought! I think for you; that’s enough for you. If Iwant you, I know where to find you; I don’t want you to find me. Now Iwon’t have it. I won’t hear a word.”The two men looked at one another as Mr. Jaggers waved them behind again, andhumbly fell back and were heard no more.“And now you!” said Mr. Jaggers, suddenly stopping, andturning on the two women with the shawls, from whom the three men had meeklyseparated,—“Oh! Amelia, is it?”“Yes, Mr. Jaggers.”“And do you remember,” retorted Mr. Jaggers, “that but for meyou wouldn’t be here and couldn’t be here?”“O yes, sir!” exclaimed both women together. “Lord bless you,sir, well we knows that!”“Then why,” said Mr. Jaggers, “do you come here?”“My Bill, sir!” the crying woman pleaded.“Now, I tell you what!” said Mr. Jaggers. “Once for all. Ifyou don’t know that your Bill’s in good hands, I know it. And ifyou come here bothering about your Bill, I’ll make an example of bothyour Bill and you, and let him slip through my fingers. Have you paidWemmick?”“O yes, sir! Every farden.”“Very well. Then you have done all you have got to do. Say anotherword—one single word—and Wemmick shall give you your moneyback.”This terrible threat caused the two women to fall off immediately. No oneremained now but the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr.Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times.“I don’t know this man!” said Mr. Jaggers, in the samedevastating strain: “What does this fellow want?”“Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth. Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth?”“Who’s he?” said Mr. Jaggers. “Let go of mycoat.”The suitor, kissing the hem of the garment again before relinquishing it,replied, “Habraham Latharuth, on thuthpithion of plate.”“You’re too late,” said Mr. Jaggers. “I am over theway.”“Holy father, Mithter Jaggerth!” cried my excitable acquaintance,turning white, “don’t thay you’re again HabrahamLatharuth!”“I am,” said Mr. Jaggers, “and there’s an end of it.Get out of the way.”“Mithter Jaggerth! Half a moment! My hown cuthen’th gone to MithterWemmick at thith prethent minute, to hoffer him hany termth. Mithter Jaggerth!Half a quarter of a moment! If you’d have the condethenthun to be boughtoff from the t’other thide—at hany thuperior prithe!—money noobject!—Mithter Jaggerth—Mithter—!”My guardian threw his supplicant off with supreme indifference, and left himdancing on the pavement as if it were red hot. Without further interruption, wereached the front office, where we found the clerk and the man in velveteenwith the fur cap.“Here’s Mike,” said the clerk, getting down from his stool,and approaching Mr. Jaggers confidentially.“Oh!” said Mr. Jaggers, turning to the man, who was pulling a lockof hair in the middle of his forehead, like the Bull in Cock Robin pulling atthe bell-rope; “your man comes on this afternoon. Well?”“Well, Mas’r Jaggers,” returned Mike, in the voice of asufferer from a constitutional cold; “arter a deal o’ trouble,I’ve found one, sir, as might do.”“What is he prepared to swear?”“Well, Mas’r Jaggers,” said Mike, wiping his nose on his furcap this time; “in a general way, anythink.”Mr. Jaggers suddenly became most irate. “Now, I warned you before,”said he, throwing his forefinger at the terrified client, “that if youever presumed to talk in that way here, I’d make an example of you. Youinfernal scoundrel, how dare you tell ME that?”The client looked scared, but bewildered too, as if he were unconscious what hehad done.“Spooney!” said the clerk, in a low voice, giving him a stir withhis elbow. “Soft Head! Need you say it face to face?”“Now, I ask you, you blundering booby,” said my guardian, verysternly, “once more and for the last time, what the man you have broughthere is prepared to swear?”Mike looked hard at my guardian, as if he were trying to learn a lesson fromhis face, and slowly replied, “Ayther to character, or to having been inhis company and never left him all the night in question.”“Now, be careful. In what station of life is this man?”Mike looked at his cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at the ceiling, andlooked at the clerk, and even looked at me, before beginning to reply in anervous manner, “We’ve dressed him up like—” when myguardian blustered out,—“What? You WILL, will you?”(“Spooney!” added the clerk again, with another stir.)After some helpless casting about, Mike brightened and began again:—“He is dressed like a ’spectable pieman. A sort of apastry-cook.”“Is he here?” asked my guardian.“I left him,” said Mike, “a setting on some doorsteps roundthe corner.”“Take him past that window, and let me see him.”The window indicated was the office window. We all three went to it, behind thewire blind, and presently saw the client go by in an accidental manner, with amurderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a papercap. This guileless confectioner was not by any means sober, and had a blackeye in the green stage of recovery, which was painted over.“Tell him to take his witness away directly,” said my guardian tothe clerk, in extreme disgust, “and ask him what he means by bringingsuch a fellow as that.”My guardian then took me into his own room, and while he lunched, standing,from a sandwich-box and a pocket-flask of sherry (he seemed to bully his verysandwich as he ate it), informed me what arrangements he had made for me. I wasto go to “Barnard’s Inn,” to young Mr. Pocket’s rooms,where a bed had been sent in for my accommodation; I was to remain with youngMr. Pocket until Monday; on Monday I was to go with him to his father’shouse on a visit, that I might try how I liked it. Also, I was told what myallowance was to be,—it was a very liberal one,—and had handed tome from one of my guardian’s drawers, the cards of certain tradesmen withwhom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes, and such other things as I couldin reason want. “You will find your credit good, Mr. Pip,” said myguardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastilyrefreshed himself, “but I shall by this means be able to check yourbills, and to pull you up if I find you outrunning the constable. Of courseyou’ll go wrong somehow, but that’s no fault of mine.”After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, I asked Mr.Jaggers if I could send for a coach? He said it was not worth while, I was sonear my destination; Wemmick should walk round with me, if I pleased.I then found that Wemmick was the clerk in the next room. Another clerk wasrung down from upstairs to take his place while he was out, and I accompaniedhim into the street, after shaking hands with my guardian. We found a new setof people lingering outside, but Wemmick made a way among them by saying coollyyet decisively, “I tell you it’s no use; he won’t have a wordto say to one of you;” and we soon got clear of them, and went on side byside.Chapter XXI.Casting my eyes on Mr. Wemmick as we went along, to see what hewas like in the light of day, I found him to be a dry man, rather short instature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed to have beenimperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel. There were some marks in itthat might have been dimples, if the material had been softer and theinstrument finer, but which, as it was, were only dints. The chisel had madethree or four of these attempts at embellishment over his nose, but had giventhem up without an effort to smooth them off. I judged him to be a bachelorfrom the frayed condition of his linen, and he appeared to have sustained agood many bereavements; for he wore at least four mourning rings, besides abrooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it. Inoticed, too, that several rings and seals hung at his watch-chain, as if hewere quite laden with remembrances of departed friends. He had glitteringeyes,—small, keen, and black,—and thin wide mottled lips. He hadhad them, to the best of my belief, from forty to fifty years.“So you were never in London before?” said Mr. Wemmick to me.“No,” said I.“I was new here once,” said Mr. Wemmick. “Rum to thinkof now!”“You are well acquainted with it now?”“Why, yes,” said Mr. Wemmick. “I know the moves of it.”“Is it a very wicked place?” I asked, more for the sake of sayingsomething than for information.“You may get cheated, robbed, and murdered in London. But there areplenty of people anywhere, who’ll do that for you.”“If there is bad blood between you and them,” said I, to soften itoff a little.“O! I don’t know about bad blood,” returned Mr. Wemmick;“there’s not much bad blood about. They’ll do it, ifthere’s anything to be got by it.”“That makes it worse.”“You think so?” returned Mr. Wemmick. “Much about the same, Ishould say.”He wore his hat on the back of his head, and looked straight before him:walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in the streets toclaim his attention. His mouth was such a post-office of a mouth that he had amechanical appearance of smiling. We had got to the top of Holborn Hill beforeI knew that it was merely a mechanical appearance, and that he was not smilingat all.“Do you know where Mr. Matthew Pocket lives?” I asked Mr. Wemmick.“Yes,” said he, nodding in the direction. “At Hammersmith,west of London.”“Is that far?”“Well! Say five miles.”“Do you know him?”“Why, you’re a regular cross-examiner!” said Mr. Wemmick,looking at me with an approving air. “Yes, I know him. I knowhim!”There was an air of toleration or depreciation about his utterance of thesewords that rather depressed me; and I was still looking sideways at his blockof a face in search of any encouraging note to the text, when he said here wewere at Barnard’s Inn. My depression was not alleviated by theannouncement, for, I had supposed that establishment to be an hotel kept by Mr.Barnard, to which the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house. Whereas Inow found Barnard to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and his inn thedingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corneras a club for Tom-cats.We entered this haven through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged by anintroductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to me like aflat burying-ground. I thought it had the most dismal trees in it, and the mostdismal sparrows, and the most dismal cats, and the most dismal houses (innumber half a dozen or so), that I had ever seen. I thought the windows of thesets of chambers into which those houses were divided were in every stage ofdilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass, dusty decay,and miserable makeshift; while To Let, To Let, To Let, glared at me from emptyrooms, as if no new wretches ever came there, and the vengeance of the soul ofBarnard were being slowly appeased by the gradual suicide of the presentoccupants and their unholy interment under the gravel. A frowzy mourning ofsoot and smoke attired this forlorn creation of Barnard, and it had strewnashes on its head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a meredust-hole. Thus far my sense of sight; while dry rot and wet rot and all thesilent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar,—rot of rat and mouseand bug and coaching-stables near at hand besides—addressed themselvesfaintly to my sense of smell, and moaned, “Try Barnard’sMixture.”So imperfect was this realisation of the first of my great expectations, that Ilooked in dismay at Mr. Wemmick. “Ah!” said he, mistaking me;“the retirement reminds you of the country. So it does me.”He led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs,—whichappeared to me to be slowly collapsing into sawdust, so that one of those daysthe upper lodgers would look out at their doors and find themselves without themeans of coming down,—to a set of chambers on the top floor.MR. POCKET, JUN., was painted onthe door, and there was a label on the letter-box, “Returnshortly.”“He hardly thought you’d come so soon,” Mr. Wemmickexplained. “You don’t want me any more?”“No, thank you,” said I.“As I keep the cash,” Mr. Wemmick observed, “we shall mostlikely meet pretty often. Good day.”“Good day.”I put out my hand, and Mr. Wemmick at first looked at it as if he thought Iwanted something. Then he looked at me, and said, correcting himself,—“To be sure! Yes. You’re in the habit of shaking hands?”I was rather confused, thinking it must be out of the London fashion, but saidyes.“I have got so out of it!” said Mr. Wemmick,—“except atlast. Very glad, I’m sure, to make your acquaintance. Good day!”When we had shaken hands and he was gone, I opened the staircase window and hadnearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rotted away, and it came down likethe guillotine. Happily it was so quick that I had not put my head out. Afterthis escape, I was content to take a foggy view of the Inn through thewindow’s encrusting dirt, and to stand dolefully looking out, saying tomyself that London was decidedly overrated.Mr. Pocket, Junior’s, idea of Shortly was not mine, for I had nearlymaddened myself with looking out for half an hour, and had written my name withmy finger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window, before I heardfootsteps on the stairs. Gradually there arose before me the hat, head,neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, boots, of a member of society of about my ownstanding. He had a paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in onehand, and was out of breath.“Mr. Pip?” said he.“Mr. Pocket?” said I.“Dear me!” he exclaimed. “I am extremely sorry; but I knewthere was a coach from your part of the country at midday, and I thought youwould come by that one. The fact is, I have been out on your account,—notthat that is any excuse,—for I thought, coming from the country, youmight like a little fruit after dinner, and I went to Covent Garden Market toget it good.”For a reason that I had, I felt as if my eyes would start out of my head. Iacknowledged his attention incoherently, and began to think this was a dream.“Dear me!” said Mr. Pocket, Junior. “This door sticksso!”As he was fast making jam of his fruit by wrestling with the door while thepaper-bags were under his arms, I begged him to allow me to hold them. Herelinquished them with an agreeable smile, and combated with the door as if itwere a wild beast. It yielded so suddenly at last, that he staggered back uponme, and I staggered back upon the opposite door, and we both laughed. But stillI felt as if my eyes must start out of my head, and as if this must be a dream.“Pray come in,” said Mr. Pocket, Junior. “Allow me to leadthe way. I am rather bare here, but I hope you’ll be able to make outtolerably well till Monday. My father thought you would get on more agreeablythrough to-morrow with me than with him, and might like to take a walk aboutLondon. I am sure I shall be very happy to show London to you. As to our table,you won’t find that bad, I hope, for it will be supplied from ourcoffee-house here, and (it is only right I should add) at your expense, suchbeing Mr. Jaggers’s directions. As to our lodging, it’s not by anymeans splendid, because I have my own bread to earn, and my father hasn’tanything to give me, and I shouldn’t be willing to take it, if he had.This is our sitting-room,—just such chairs and tables and carpet and soforth, you see, as they could spare from home. You mustn’t give me creditfor the tablecloth and spoons and castors, because they come for you from thecoffee-house. This is my little bedroom; rather musty, but Barnard’sis musty. This is your bedroom; the furniture’s hired for theoccasion, but I trust it will answer the purpose; if you should want anything,I’ll go and fetch it. The chambers are retired, and we shall be alonetogether, but we shan’t fight, I dare say. But dear me, I beg yourpardon, you’re holding the fruit all this time. Pray let me take thesebags from you. I am quite ashamed.”As I stood opposite to Mr. Pocket, Junior, delivering him the bags, One, Two, Isaw the starting appearance come into his own eyes that I knew to be in mine,and he said, falling back,—“Lord bless me, you’re the prowling boy!”“And you,” said I, “are the pale young gentleman!”Chapter XXII.Thepale young gentleman and I stood contemplating one another in Barnard’sInn, until we both burst out laughing. “The idea of its being you!”said he. “The idea of its being you!” said I. And then wecontemplated one another afresh, and laughed again. “Well!” saidthe pale young gentleman, reaching out his hand good-humouredly,“it’s all over now, I hope, and it will be magnanimous in you ifyou’ll forgive me for having knocked you about so.”I derived from this speech that Mr. Herbert Pocket (for Herbert was the paleyoung gentleman’s name) still rather confounded his intention with hisexecution. But I made a modest reply, and we shook hands warmly.“You hadn’t come into your good fortune at that time?” saidHerbert Pocket.“No,” said I.“No,” he acquiesced: “I heard it had happened very lately.I was rather on the lookout for good fortune then.”“Indeed?”“Yes. Miss Havisham had sent for me, to see if she could take a fancy tome. But she couldn’t,—at all events, she didn’t.”I thought it polite to remark that I was surprised to hear that.“Bad taste,” said Herbert, laughing, “but a fact. Yes, shehad sent for me on a trial visit, and if I had come out of it successfully, Isuppose I should have been provided for; perhaps I should have beenwhat-you-may-called it to Estella.”“What’s that?” I asked, with sudden gravity.He was arranging his fruit in plates while we talked, which divided hisattention, and was the cause of his having made this lapse of a word.“Affianced,” he explained, still busy with the fruit.“Betrothed. Engaged. What’s-his-named. Any word of thatsort.”“How did you bear your disappointment?” I asked.“Pooh!” said he, “I didn’t care much for it.She’s a Tartar.”“Miss Havisham?”“I don’t say no to that, but I meant Estella. That girl’shard and haughty and capricious to the last degree, and has been brought up byMiss Havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex.”“What relation is she to Miss Havisham?”“None,” said he. “Only adopted.”“Why should she wreak revenge on all the male sex? What revenge?”“Lord, Mr. Pip!” said he. “Don’t you know?”“No,” said I.“Dear me! It’s quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time.And now let me take the liberty of asking you a question. How did you comethere, that day?”I told him, and he was attentive until I had finished, and then burst outlaughing again, and asked me if I was sore afterwards? I didn’t ask himif he was, for my conviction on that point was perfectly established.“Mr. Jaggers is your guardian, I understand?” he went on.“Yes.”“You know he is Miss Havisham’s man of business and solicitor, andhas her confidence when nobody else has?”This was bringing me (I felt) towards dangerous ground. I answered with aconstraint I made no attempt to disguise, that I had seen Mr. Jaggers in MissHavisham’s house on the very day of our combat, but never at any othertime, and that I believed he had no recollection of having ever seen me there.“He was so obliging as to suggest my father for your tutor, and he calledon my father to propose it. Of course he knew about my father from hisconnection with Miss Havisham. My father is Miss Havisham’s cousin; notthat that implies familiar intercourse between them, for he is a bad courtierand will not propitiate her.”Herbert Pocket had a frank and easy way with him that was very taking. I hadnever seen any one then, and I have never seen any one since, who more stronglyexpressed to me, in every look and tone, a natural incapacity to do anythingsecret and mean. There was something wonderfully hopeful about his general air,and something that at the same time whispered to me he would never be verysuccessful or rich. I don’t know how this was. I became imbued with thenotion on that first occasion before we sat down to dinner, but I cannot defineby what means.He was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered languor abouthim in the midst of his spirits and briskness, that did not seem indicative ofnatural strength. He had not a handsome face, but it was better than handsome:being extremely amiable and cheerful. His figure was a little ungainly, as inthe days when my knuckles had taken such liberties with it, but it looked as ifit would always be light and young. Whether Mr. Trabb’s local work wouldhave sat more gracefully on him than on me, may be a question; but I amconscious that he carried off his rather old clothes much better than I carriedoff my new suit.As he was so communicative, I felt that reserve on my part would be a badreturn unsuited to our years. I therefore told him my small story, and laidstress on my being forbidden to inquire who my benefactor was. I furthermentioned that as I had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place, andknew very little of the ways of politeness, I would take it as a great kindnessin him if he would give me a hint whenever he saw me at a loss or going wrong.“With pleasure,” said he, “though I venture to prophesy thatyou’ll want very few hints. I dare say we shall be often together, and Ishould like to banish any needless restraint between us. Will you do me thefavour to begin at once to call me by my Christian name, Herbert?”I thanked him and said I would. I informed him in exchange that my Christianname was Philip.“I don’t take to Philip,” said he, smiling, “for itsounds like a moral boy out of the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fellinto a pond, or so fat that he couldn’t see out of his eyes, or soavaricious that he locked up his cake till the mice ate it, or so determined togo a bird’s-nesting that he got himself eaten by bears who lived handy inthe neighbourhood. I tell you what I should like. We are so harmonious, and youhave been a blacksmith,—would you mind it?”“I shouldn’t mind anything that you propose,” I answered,“but I don’t understand you.”“Would you mind Handel for a familiar name? There’s a charmingpiece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith.”“I should like it very much.”“Then, my dear Handel,” said he, turning round as the door opened,“here is the dinner, and I must beg of you to take the top of the table,because the dinner is of your providing.”This I would not hear of, so he took the top, and I faced him. It was a nicelittle dinner,—seemed to me then a very Lord Mayor’sFeast,—and it acquired additional relish from being eaten under thoseindependent circumstances, with no old people by, and with London all aroundus. This again was heightened by a certain gypsy character that set the banquetoff; for while the table was, as Mr. Pumblechook might have said, the lap ofluxury,—being entirely furnished forth from the coffee-house,—thecircumjacent region of sitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless andshifty character; imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting thecovers on the floor (where he fell over them), the melted butter in thearm-chair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese in the coal-scuttle, andthe boiled fowl into my bed in the next room,—where I found much of itsparsley and butter in a state of congelation when I retired for the night. Allthis made the feast delightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me,my pleasure was without alloy.We had made some progress in the dinner, when I reminded Herbert of his promiseto tell me about Miss Havisham.“True,” he replied. “I’ll redeem it at once. Let meintroduce the topic, Handel, by mentioning that in London it is not the customto put the knife in the mouth,—for fear of accidents,—and thatwhile the fork is reserved for that use, it is not put further in thannecessary. It is scarcely worth mentioning, only it’s as well to do asother people do. Also, the spoon is not generally used over-hand, but under.This has two advantages. You get at your mouth better (which after all is theobject), and you save a good deal of the attitude of opening oysters, on thepart of the right elbow.”He offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that we bothlaughed and I scarcely blushed.“Now,” he pursued, “concerning Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham,you must know, was a spoilt child. Her mother died when she was a baby, and herfather denied her nothing. Her father was a country gentleman down in your partof the world, and was a brewer. I don’t know why it should be a crackthing to be a brewer; but it is indisputable that while you cannot possibly begenteel and bake, you may be as genteel as never was and brew. You see it everyday.”“Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may he?” said I.“Not on any account,” returned Herbert; “but a public-housemay keep a gentleman. Well! Mr. Havisham was very rich and very proud. So washis daughter.”“Miss Havisham was an only child?” I hazarded.“Stop a moment, I am coming to that. No, she was not an only child; shehad a half-brother. Her father privately married again—his cook, I ratherthink.”“I thought he was proud,” said I.“My good Handel, so he was. He married his second wife privately, becausehe was proud, and in course of time she died. When she was dead, Iapprehend he first told his daughter what he had done, and then the son becamea part of the family, residing in the house you are acquainted with. As the songrew a young man, he turned out riotous, extravagant,undutiful,—altogether bad. At last his father disinherited him; but hesoftened when he was dying, and left him well off, though not nearly so welloff as Miss Havisham.—Take another glass of wine, and excuse mymentioning that society as a body does not expect one to be so strictlyconscientious in emptying one’s glass, as to turn it bottom upwards withthe rim on one’s nose.”I had been doing this, in an excess of attention to his recital. I thanked him,and apologised. He said, “Not at all,” and resumed.“Miss Havisham was now an heiress, and you may suppose was looked afteras a great match. Her half-brother had now ample means again, but what withdebts and what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again. There werestronger differences between him and her than there had been between him andhis father, and it is suspected that he cherished a deep and mortal grudgeagainst her as having influenced the father’s anger. Now, I come to thecruel part of the story,—merely breaking off, my dear Handel, to remarkthat a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler.”Why I was trying to pack mine into my tumbler, I am wholly unable to say. Ionly know that I found myself, with a perseverance worthy of a much bettercause, making the most strenuous exertions to compress it within those limits.Again I thanked him and apologised, and again he said in the cheerfullestmanner, “Not at all, I am sure!” and resumed.“There appeared upon the scene—say at the races, or the publicballs, or anywhere else you like—a certain man, who made love to MissHavisham. I never saw him (for this happened five-and-twenty years ago, beforeyou and I were, Handel), but I have heard my father mention that he was a showyman, and the kind of man for the purpose. But that he was not to be, withoutignorance or prejudice, mistaken for a gentleman, my father most stronglyasseverates; because it is a principle of his that no man who was not a truegentleman at heart ever was, since the world began, a true gentleman in manner.He says, no varnish can hide the grain of the wood; and that the more varnishyou put on, the more the grain will express itself. Well! This man pursued MissHavisham closely, and professed to be devoted to her. I believe she had notshown much susceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility shepossessed certainly came out then, and she passionately loved him. There is nodoubt that she perfectly idolized him. He practised on her affection in thatsystematic way, that he got great sums of money from her, and he induced her tobuy her brother out of a share in the brewery (which had been weakly left himby his father) at an immense price, on the plea that when he was her husband hemust hold and manage it all. Your guardian was not at that time in MissHavisham’s counsels, and she was too haughty and too much in love to beadvised by any one. Her relations were poor and scheming, with the exception ofmy father; he was poor enough, but not time-serving or jealous. The onlyindependent one among them, he warned her that she was doing too much for thisman, and was placing herself too unreservedly in his power. She took the firstopportunity of angrily ordering my father out of the house, in his presence,and my father has never seen her since.”I thought of her having said, “Matthew will come and see me at last whenI am laid dead upon that table;” and I asked Herbert whether his fatherwas so inveterate against her?“It’s not that,” said he, “but she charged him, in thepresence of her intended husband, with being disappointed in the hope offawning upon her for his own advancement, and, if he were to go to her now, itwould look true—even to him—and even to her. To return to the manand make an end of him. The marriage day was fixed, the wedding dresses werebought, the wedding tour was planned out, the wedding guests were invited. Theday came, but not the bridegroom. He wrote her a letter—”“Which she received,” I struck in, “when she was dressing forher marriage? At twenty minutes to nine?”“At the hour and minute,” said Herbert, nodding, “at whichshe afterwards stopped all the clocks. What was in it, further than that itmost heartlessly broke the marriage off, I can’t tell you, because Idon’t know. When she recovered from a bad illness that she had, she laidthe whole place waste, as you have seen it, and she has never since looked uponthe light of day.”“Is that all the story?” I asked, after considering it.“All I know of it; and indeed I only know so much, through piecing it outfor myself; for my father always avoids it, and, even when Miss Havishaminvited me to go there, told me no more of it than it was absolutely requisiteI should understand. But I have forgotten one thing. It has been supposed thatthe man to whom she gave her misplaced confidence acted throughout in concertwith her half-brother; that it was a conspiracy between them; and that theyshared the profits.”“I wonder he didn’t marry her and get all the property,” saidI.“He may have been married already, and her cruel mortification may havebeen a part of her half-brother’s scheme,” said Herbert.“Mind! I don’t know that.”“What became of the two men?” I asked, after again considering thesubject.“They fell into deeper shame and degradation—if there can bedeeper—and ruin.”“Are they alive now?”“I don’t know.”“You said just now that Estella was not related to Miss Havisham, butadopted. When adopted?”Herbert shrugged his shoulders. “There has always been an Estella, sinceI have heard of a Miss Havisham. I know no more. And now, Handel,” saidhe, finally throwing off the story as it were, “there is a perfectly openunderstanding between us. All that I know about Miss Havisham, you know.”“And all that I know,” I retorted, “you know.”“I fully believe it. So there can be no competition or perplexity betweenyou and me. And as to the condition on which you hold your advancement inlife,—namely, that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you oweit,—you may be very sure that it will never be encroached upon, or evenapproached, by me, or by any one belonging to me.”In truth, he said this with so much delicacy, that I felt the subject donewith, even though I should be under his father’s roof for years and yearsto come. Yet he said it with so much meaning, too, that I felt he as perfectlyunderstood Miss Havisham to be my benefactress, as I understood the factmyself.It had not occurred to me before, that he had led up to the theme for thepurpose of clearing it out of our way; but we were so much the lighter andeasier for having broached it, that I now perceived this to be the case. Wewere very gay and sociable, and I asked him, in the course of conversation,what he was? He replied, “A capitalist,—an Insurer of Ships.”I suppose he saw me glancing about the room in search of some tokens ofShipping, or capital, for he added, “In the City.”I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Ships in theCity, and I began to think with awe of having laid a young Insurer on his back,blackened his enterprising eye, and cut his responsible head open. But againthere came upon me, for my relief, that odd impression that Herbert Pocketwould never be very successful or rich.“I shall not rest satisfied with merely employing my capital in insuringships. I shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares, and cut into theDirection. I shall also do a little in the mining way. None of these thingswill interfere with my chartering a few thousand tons on my own account. Ithink I shall trade,” said he, leaning back in his chair, “to theEast Indies, for silks, shawls, spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods.It’s an interesting trade.”“And the profits are large?” said I.“Tremendous!” said he.I wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations than my own. “I think I shall trade, also,” said he, putting his thumbs in hiswaist-coat pockets, “to the West Indies, for sugar, tobacco, and rum.Also to Ceylon, especially for elephants’ tusks.”“You will want a good many ships,” said I.“A perfect fleet,” said he.Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, I asked him wherethe ships he insured mostly traded to at present?“I haven’t begun insuring yet,” he replied. “I amlooking about me.”Somehow, that pursuit seemed more in keeping with Barnard’s Inn. I said(in a tone of conviction), “Ah-h!”“Yes. I am in a counting-house, and looking about me.”“Is a counting-house profitable?” I asked.“To—do you mean to the young fellow who’s in it?” heasked, in reply.“Yes; to you.”“Why, n-no; not to me.” He said this with the air of one carefullyreckoning up and striking a balance. “Not directly profitable. That is,it doesn’t pay me anything, and I have to—keep myself.”This certainly had not a profitable appearance, and I shook my head as if Iwould imply that it would be difficult to lay by much accumulative capital fromsuch a source of income.“But the thing is,” said Herbert Pocket, “that you look aboutyou. That’s the grand thing. You are in a counting-house, youknow, and you look about you.”It struck me as a singular implication that you couldn’t be out of acounting-house, you know, and look about you; but I silently deferred to hisexperience.“Then the time comes,” said Herbert, “when you see youropening. And you go in, and you swoop upon it and you make your capital, andthen there you are! When you have once made your capital, you have nothing todo but employ it.”This was very like his way of conducting that encounter in the garden; verylike. His manner of bearing his poverty, too, exactly corresponded to hismanner of bearing that defeat. It seemed to me that he took all blows andbuffets now with just the same air as he had taken mine then. It was evidentthat he had nothing around him but the simplest necessaries, for everythingthat I remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on my account from thecoffee-house or somewhere else.Yet, having already made his fortune in his own mind, he was so unassuming withit that I felt quite grateful to him for not being puffed up. It was a pleasantaddition to his naturally pleasant ways, and we got on famously. In the eveningwe went out for a walk in the streets, and went half-price to the Theatre; andnext day we went to church at Westminster Abbey, and in the afternoon we walkedin the Parks; and I wondered who shod all the horses there, and wished Joe did.On a moderate computation, it was many months, that Sunday, since I had leftJoe and Biddy. The space interposed between myself and them partook of thatexpansion, and our marshes were any distance off. That I could have been at ourold church in my old church-going clothes, on the very last Sunday that everwas, seemed a combination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solarand lunar. Yet in the London streets so crowded with people and so brilliantlylighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressing hints of reproaches forthat I had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away; and in the dead ofnight, the footsteps of some incapable impostor of a porter mooning aboutBarnard’s Inn, under pretence of watching it, fell hollow on my heart.On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine, Herbert went to thecounting-house to report himself,—to look about him, too, Isuppose,—and I bore him company. He was to come away in an hour or two toattend me to Hammersmith, and I was to wait about for him. It appeared to methat the eggs from which young Insurers were hatched were incubated in dust andheat, like the eggs of ostriches, judging from the places to which thoseincipient giants repaired on a Monday morning. Nor did the counting-house whereHerbert assisted, show in my eyes as at all a good Observatory; being a backsecond floor up a yard, of a grimy presence in all particulars, and with a lookinto another back second floor, rather than a look out.I waited about until it was noon, and I went upon ’Change, and I sawfluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping, whom I took to be greatmerchants, though I couldn’t understand why they should all be out ofspirits. When Herbert came, we went and had lunch at a celebrated house which Ithen quite venerated, but now believe to have been the most abject superstitionin Europe, and where I could not help noticing, even then, that there was muchmore gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters’ clothes, than inthe steaks. This collation disposed of at a moderate price (considering thegrease, which was not charged for), we went back to Barnard’s Inn and gotmy little portmanteau, and then took coach for Hammersmith. We arrived there attwo or three o’clock in the afternoon, and had very little way to walk toMr. Pocket’s house. Lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into alittle garden overlooking the river, where Mr. Pocket’s children wereplaying about. And unless I deceive myself on a point where my interests orprepossessions are certainly not concerned, I saw that Mr. and Mrs.Pocket’s children were not growing up or being brought up, but weretumbling up.Mrs. Pocket was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading, with her legsupon another garden chair; and Mrs. Pocket’s two nurse-maids were lookingabout them while the children played. “Mamma,” said Herbert,“this is young Mr. Pip.” Upon which Mrs. Pocket received me with anappearance of amiable dignity.“Master Alick and Miss Jane,” cried one of the nurses to two of thechildren, “if you go a bouncing up against them bushes you’ll fallover into the river and be drownded, and what’ll your pa say then?”At the same time this nurse picked up Mrs. Pocket’s handkerchief, andsaid, “If that don’t make six times you’ve dropped it,Mum!” Upon which Mrs. Pocket laughed and said, “Thank you,Flopson,” and settling herself in one chair only, resumed her book. Hercountenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as if she hadbeen reading for a week, but before she could have read half a dozen lines, shefixed her eyes upon me, and said, “I hope your mamma is quitewell?” This unexpected inquiry put me into such a difficulty that I begansaying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such person I had nodoubt she would have been quite well and would have been very much obliged andwould have sent her compliments, when the nurse came to my rescue.“Well!” she cried, picking up the pocket-handkerchief, “ifthat don’t make seven times! What ARE you a-doing of thisafternoon, Mum!” Mrs. Pocket received her property, at first with a lookof unutterable surprise as if she had never seen it before, and then with alaugh of recognition, and said, “Thank you, Flopson,” and forgotme, and went on reading.I found, now I had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer than sixlittle Pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up. I had scarcelyarrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in the region of air, wailingdolefully.“If there ain’t Baby!” said Flopson, appearing to think itmost surprising. “Make haste up, Millers.”Millers, who was the other nurse, retired into the house, and by degrees thechild’s wailing was hushed and stopped, as if it were a youngventriloquist with something in its mouth. Mrs. Pocket read all the time, and Iwas curious to know what the book could be.We were waiting, I supposed, for Mr. Pocket to come out to us; at any rate wewaited there, and so I had an opportunity of observing the remarkable familyphenomenon that whenever any of the children strayed near Mrs. Pocket in theirplay, they always tripped themselves up and tumbled over her,—always verymuch to her momentary astonishment, and their own more enduring lamentation. Iwas at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, and could not helpgiving my mind to speculations about it, until by and by Millers came down withthe baby, which baby was handed to Flopson, which Flopson was handing it toMrs. Pocket, when she too went fairly head foremost over Mrs. Pocket, baby andall, and was caught by Herbert and myself.“Gracious me, Flopson!” said Mrs. Pocket, looking off her book fora moment, “everybody’s tumbling!”“Gracious you, indeed, Mum!” returned Flopson, very red in theface; “what have you got there?”“I got here, Flopson?” asked Mrs. Pocket.“Why, if it ain’t your footstool!” cried Flopson. “Andif you keep it under your skirts like that, who’s to help tumbling? Here!Take the baby, Mum, and give me your book.”Mrs. Pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the infant a little inher lap, while the other children played about it. This had lasted but a veryshort time, when Mrs. Pocket issued summary orders that they were all to betaken into the house for a nap. Thus I made the second discovery on that firstoccasion, that the nurture of the little Pockets consisted of alternatelytumbling up and lying down.Under these circumstances, when Flopson and Millers had got the children intothe house, like a little flock of sheep, and Mr. Pocket came out of it to makemy acquaintance, I was not much surprised to find that Mr. Pocket was agentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face, and with his very greyhair disordered on his head, as if he didn’t quite see his way to puttinganything straight.Chapter XXIII.Mr.Pocket said he was glad to see me, and he hoped I was not sorry to see him.“For, I really am not,” he added, with his son’s smile,“an alarming personage.” He was a young-looking man, in spite ofhis perplexities and his very grey hair, and his manner seemed quite natural. Iuse the word natural, in the sense of its being unaffected; there was somethingcomic in his distraught way, as though it would have been downright ludicrousbut for his own perception that it was very near being so. When he had talkedwith me a little, he said to Mrs. Pocket, with a rather anxious contraction ofhis eyebrows, which were black and handsome, “Belinda, I hope you havewelcomed Mr. Pip?” And she looked up from her book, and said,“Yes.” She then smiled upon me in an absent state of mind, andasked me if I liked the taste of orange-flower water? As the question had nobearing, near or remote, on any foregone or subsequent transaction, I considerit to have been thrown out, like her previous approaches, in generalconversational condescension.I found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that Mrs. Pocket wasthe only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight, who hadinvented for himself a conviction that his deceased father would have been madea Baronet but for somebody’s determined opposition arising out ofentirely personal motives,—I forget whose, if I ever knew,—theSovereign’s, the Prime Minister’s, the Lord Chancellor’s, theArchbishop of Canterbury’s, anybody’s,—and had tacked himselfon to the nobles of the earth in right of this quite supposititious fact. Ibelieve he had been knighted himself for storming the English grammar at thepoint of the pen, in a desperate address engrossed on vellum, on the occasionof the laying of the first stone of some building or other, and for handingsome Royal Personage either the trowel or the mortar. Be that as it may, he haddirected Mrs. Pocket to be brought up from her cradle as one who in the natureof things must marry a title, and who was to be guarded from the acquisition ofplebeian domestic knowledge.So successful a watch and ward had been established over the young lady by thisjudicious parent, that she had grown up highly ornamental, but perfectlyhelpless and useless. With her character thus happily formed, in the firstbloom of her youth she had encountered Mr. Pocket: who was also in the firstbloom of youth, and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack, or toroof himself in with a mitre. As his doing the one or the other was a merequestion of time, he and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the forelock (when, tojudge from its length, it would seem to have wanted cutting), and had marriedwithout the knowledge of the judicious parent. The judicious parent, havingnothing to bestow or withhold but his blessing, had handsomely settled thatdower upon them after a short struggle, and had informed Mr. Pocket that hiswife was “a treasure for a Prince.” Mr. Pocket had invested thePrince’s treasure in the ways of the world ever since, and it wassupposed to have brought him in but indifferent interest. Still, Mrs. Pocketwas in general the object of a queer sort of respectful pity, because she hadnot married a title; while Mr. Pocket was the object of a queer sort offorgiving reproach, because he had never got one.Mr. Pocket took me into the house and showed me my room: which was a pleasantone, and so furnished as that I could use it with comfort for my own privatesitting-room. He then knocked at the doors of two other similar rooms, andintroduced me to their occupants, by name Drummle and Startop. Drummle, anold-looking young man of a heavy order of architecture, was whistling. Startop,younger in years and appearance, was reading and holding his head, as if hethought himself in danger of exploding it with too strong a charge ofknowledge.Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had such a noticeable air of being in somebodyelse’s hands, that I wondered who really was in possession of the houseand let them live there, until I found this unknown power to be the servants.It was a smooth way of going on, perhaps, in respect of saving trouble; but ithad the appearance of being expensive, for the servants felt it a duty theyowed to themselves to be nice in their eating and drinking, and to keep a dealof company downstairs. They allowed a very liberal table to Mr. and Mrs.Pocket, yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house tohave boarded in would have been the kitchen,—always supposing the boardercapable of self-defence, for, before I had been there a week, a neighbouringlady with whom the family were personally unacquainted, wrote in to say thatshe had seen Millers slapping the baby. This greatly distressed Mrs. Pocket,who burst into tears on receiving the note, and said that it was anextraordinary thing that the neighbours couldn’t mind their own business.By degrees I learnt, and chiefly from Herbert, that Mr. Pocket had beeneducated at Harrow and at Cambridge, where he had distinguished himself; butthat when he had had the happiness of marrying Mrs. Pocket very early in life,he had impaired his prospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder. Aftergrinding a number of dull blades,—of whom it was remarkable that theirfathers, when influential, were always going to help him to preferment, butalways forgot to do it when the blades had left the Grindstone,—he hadwearied of that poor work and had come to London. Here, after gradually failingin loftier hopes, he had “read” with divers who had lackedopportunities or neglected them, and had refurbished divers others for specialoccasions, and had turned his acquirements to the account of literarycompilation and correction, and on such means, added to some very moderateprivate resources, still maintained the house I saw.Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had a toady neighbour; a widow lady of that highlysympathetic nature that she agreed with everybody, blessed everybody, and shedsmiles and tears on everybody, according to circumstances. This lady’sname was Mrs. Coiler, and I had the honour of taking her down to dinner on theday of my installation. She gave me to understand on the stairs, that it was ablow to dear Mrs. Pocket that dear Mr. Pocket should be under the necessity ofreceiving gentlemen to read with him. That did not extend to me, she told me ina gush of love and confidence (at that time, I had known her something lessthan five minutes); if they were all like Me, it would be quite another thing.“But dear Mrs. Pocket,” said Mrs. Coiler, “after her earlydisappointment (not that dear Mr. Pocket was to blame in that), requires somuch luxury and elegance—”“Yes, ma’am,” I said, to stop her, for I was afraid she wasgoing to cry.“And she is of so aristocratic a disposition—”“Yes, ma’am,” I said again, with the same object as before.“—That it is hard,” said Mrs. Coiler, “to havedear Mr. Pocket’s time and attention diverted from dear Mrs.Pocket.”I could not help thinking that it might be harder if the butcher’s timeand attention were diverted from dear Mrs. Pocket; but I said nothing, andindeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon my company manners.It came to my knowledge, through what passed between Mrs. Pocket and Drummlewhile I was attentive to my knife and fork, spoon, glasses, and otherinstruments of self-destruction, that Drummle, whose Christian name wasBentley, was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy. It further appearedthat the book I had seen Mrs. Pocket reading in the garden was all abouttitles, and that she knew the exact date at which her grandpapa would have comeinto the book, if he ever had come at all. Drummle didn’t say much, butin his limited way (he struck me as a sulky kind of fellow) he spoke as one ofthe elect, and recognised Mrs. Pocket as a woman and a sister. No one butthemselves and Mrs. Coiler the toady neighbour showed any interest in this partof the conversation, and it appeared to me that it was painful to Herbert; butit promised to last a long time, when the page came in with the announcement ofa domestic affliction. It was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid the beef.To my unutterable amazement, I now, for the first time, saw Mr. Pocket relievehis mind by going through a performance that struck me as very extraordinary,but which made no impression on anybody else, and with which I soon became asfamiliar as the rest. He laid down the carving-knife and fork,—beingengaged in carving, at the moment,—put his two hands into his disturbedhair, and appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift himself up by it.When he had done this, and had not lifted himself up at all, he quietly went onwith what he was about.Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me. I liked it for afew moments, but she flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soonover. She had a serpentine way of coming close at me when she pretended to bevitally interested in the friends and localities I had left, which wasaltogether snaky and fork-tongued; and when she made an occasional bounce uponStartop (who said very little to her), or upon Drummle (who said less), Irather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table.After dinner the children were introduced, and Mrs. Coiler made admiringcomments on their eyes, noses, and legs,—a sagacious way of improvingtheir minds. There were four little girls, and two little boys, besides thebaby who might have been either, and the baby’s next successor who was asyet neither. They were brought in by Flopson and Millers, much as though thosetwo non-commissioned officers had been recruiting somewhere for children andhad enlisted these, while Mrs. Pocket looked at the young Nobles that ought tohave been as if she rather thought she had had the pleasure of inspecting thembefore, but didn’t quite know what to make of them.“Here! Give me your fork, Mum, and take the baby,” said Flopson.“Don’t take it that way, or you’ll get its head under thetable.”Thus advised, Mrs. Pocket took it the other way, and got its head upon thetable; which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion.“Dear, dear! Give it me back, Mum,” said Flopson; “and MissJane, come and dance to baby, do!”One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken uponherself some charge of the others, stepped out of her place by me, and dancedto and from the baby until it left off crying, and laughed. Then, all thechildren laughed, and Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured tolift himself up by the hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad.Flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutch doll, then gotit safely into Mrs. Pocket’s lap, and gave it the nut-crackers to playwith; at the same time recommending Mrs. Pocket to take notice that the handlesof that instrument were not likely to agree with its eyes, and sharply chargingMiss Jane to look after the same. Then, the two nurses left the room, and had alively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had waited atdinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the gaming-table.I was made very uneasy in my mind by Mrs. Pocket’s falling into adiscussion with Drummle respecting two baronetcies, while she ate a slicedorange steeped in sugar and wine, and, forgetting all about the baby on herlap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers. At length littleJane, perceiving its young brains to be imperilled, softly left her place, andwith many small artifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away. Mrs. Pocketfinishing her orange at about the same time, and not approving of this, said toJane,—“You naughty child, how dare you? Go and sit down this instant!”“Mamma dear,” lisped the little girl, “baby ood have put hitheyeth out.”“How dare you tell me so?” retorted Mrs. Pocket. “Go and sitdown in your chair this moment!”Mrs. Pocket’s dignity was so crushing, that I felt quite abashed, as if Imyself had done something to rouse it.“Belinda,” remonstrated Mr. Pocket, from the other end of thetable, “how can you be so unreasonable? Jane only interfered for theprotection of baby.”“I will not allow anybody to interfere,” said Mrs. Pocket. “Iam surprised, Matthew, that you should expose me to the affront ofinterference.”“Good God!” cried Mr. Pocket, in an outbreak of desolatedesperation. “Are infants to be nut-crackered into their tombs, and isnobody to save them?”“I will not be interfered with by Jane,” said Mrs. Pocket, with amajestic glance at that innocent little offender. “I hope I know my poorgrandpapa’s position. Jane, indeed!”Mr. Pocket got his hands in his hair again, and this time really did lifthimself some inches out of his chair. “Hear this!” he helplesslyexclaimed to the elements. “Babies are to be nut-crackered dead, forpeople’s poor grandpapa’s positions!” Then he let himselfdown again, and became silent.We all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on. A pausesucceeded, during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series ofleaps and crows at little Jane, who appeared to me to be the only member of thefamily (irrespective of servants) with whom it had any decided acquaintance.“Mr. Drummle,” said Mrs. Pocket, “will you ring for Flopson?Jane, you undutiful little thing, go and lie down. Now, baby darling, come withma!”The baby was the soul of honour, and protested with all its might. It doubleditself up the wrong way over Mrs. Pocket’s arm, exhibited a pair ofknitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of its soft face, andwas carried out in the highest state of mutiny. And it gained its point afterall, for I saw it through the window within a few minutes, being nursed bylittle Jane.It happened that the other five children were left behind at the dinner-table,through Flopson’s having some private engagement, and their not beinganybody else’s business. I thus became aware of the mutual relationsbetween them and Mr. Pocket, which were exemplified in the following manner.Mr. Pocket, with the normal perplexity of his face heightened and his hairrumpled, looked at them for some minutes, as if he couldn’t make out howthey came to be boarding and lodging in that establishment, and why theyhadn’t been billeted by Nature on somebody else. Then, in a distantMissionary way he asked them certain questions,—as why little Joe hadthat hole in his frill, who said, Pa, Flopson was going to mend it when she hadtime,—and how little Fanny came by that whitlow, who said, Pa, Millerswas going to poultice it when she didn’t forget. Then, he melted intoparental tenderness, and gave them a shilling apiece and told them to go andplay; and then as they went out, with one very strong effort to lift himself upby the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject.In the evening there was rowing on the river. As Drummle and Startop had each aboat, I resolved to set up mine, and to cut them both out. I was pretty good atmost exercises in which country boys are adepts, but as I was conscious ofwanting elegance of style for the Thames,—not to say for otherwaters,—I at once engaged to place myself under the tuition of the winnerof a prize-wherry who plied at our stairs, and to whom I was introduced by mynew allies. This practical authority confused me very much by saying I had thearm of a blacksmith. If he could have known how nearly the compliment lost himhis pupil, I doubt if he would have paid it.There was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and I think we should allhave enjoyed ourselves, but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence. Mr.Pocket was in good spirits, when a housemaid came in, and said, “If youplease, sir, I should wish to speak to you.”“Speak to your master?” said Mrs. Pocket, whose dignity was rousedagain. “How can you think of such a thing? Go and speak to Flopson. Orspeak to me—at some other time.”“Begging your pardon, ma’am,” returned the housemaid,“I should wish to speak at once, and to speak to master.”Hereupon, Mr. Pocket went out of the room, and we made the best of ourselvesuntil he came back.“This is a pretty thing, Belinda!” said Mr. Pocket, returning witha countenance expressive of grief and despair. “Here’s the cooklying insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of freshbutter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease!”Mrs. Pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, “This isthat odious Sophia’s doing!”“What do you mean, Belinda?” demanded Mr. Pocket.“Sophia has told you,” said Mrs. Pocket. “Did I not see herwith my own eyes and hear her with my own ears, come into the room just now andask to speak to you?”“But has she not taken me downstairs, Belinda,” returned Mr.Pocket, “and shown me the woman, and the bundle too?”“And do you defend her, Matthew,” said Mrs. Pocket, “formaking mischief?”Mr. Pocket uttered a dismal groan.“Am I, grandpapa’s granddaughter, to be nothing in thehouse?” said Mrs. Pocket. “Besides, the cook has always been a verynice respectful woman, and said in the most natural manner when she came tolook after the situation, that she felt I was born to be a Duchess.”There was a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood, and he dropped upon it in the attitudeof the Dying Gladiator. Still in that attitude he said, with a hollow voice,“Good night, Mr. Pip,” when I deemed it advisable to go to bed andleave him.Chapter XXIV.Aftertwo or three days, when I had established myself in my room and had gonebackwards and forwards to London several times, and had ordered all I wanted ofmy tradesmen, Mr. Pocket and I had a long talk together. He knew more of myintended career than I knew myself, for he referred to his having been told byMr. Jaggers that I was not designed for any profession, and that I should bewell enough educated for my destiny if I could “hold my own” withthe average of young men in prosperous circumstances. I acquiesced, of course,knowing nothing to the contrary.He advised my attending certain places in London, for the acquisition of suchmere rudiments as I wanted, and my investing him with the functions ofexplainer and director of all my studies. He hoped that with intelligentassistance I should meet with little to discourage me, and should soon be ableto dispense with any aid but his. Through his way of saying this, and much moreto similar purpose, he placed himself on confidential terms with me in anadmirable manner; and I may state at once that he was always so zealous andhonourable in fulfilling his compact with me, that he made me zealous andhonourable in fulfilling mine with him. If he had shown indifference as amaster, I have no doubt I should have returned the compliment as a pupil; hegave me no such excuse, and each of us did the other justice. Nor did I everregard him as having anything ludicrous about him—or anything but whatwas serious, honest, and good—in his tutor communication with me.When these points were settled, and so far carried out as that I had begun towork in earnest, it occurred to me that if I could retain my bedroom inBarnard’s Inn, my life would be agreeably varied, while my manners wouldbe none the worse for Herbert’s society. Mr. Pocket did not object tothis arrangement, but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in it,it must be submitted to my guardian. I felt that this delicacy arose out of theconsideration that the plan would save Herbert some expense, so I went off toLittle Britain and imparted my wish to Mr. Jaggers.“If I could buy the furniture now hired for me,” said I, “andone or two other little things, I should be quite at home there.”“Go it!” said Mr. Jaggers, with a short laugh. “I told youyou’d get on. Well! How much do you want?”I said I didn’t know how much.“Come!” retorted Mr. Jaggers. “How much? Fifty pounds?”“O, not nearly so much.”“Five pounds?” said Mr. Jaggers.This was such a great fall, that I said in discomfiture, “O, more thanthat.”“More than that, eh!” retorted Mr. Jaggers, lying in wait for me,with his hands in his pockets, his head on one side, and his eyes on the wallbehind me; “how much more?”“It is so difficult to fix a sum,” said I, hesitating.“Come!” said Mr. Jaggers. “Let’s get at it. Twice five;will that do? Three times five; will that do? Four times five; will thatdo?”I said I thought that would do handsomely.“Four times five will do handsomely, will it?” said Mr. Jaggers,knitting his brows. “Now, what do you make of four times five?”“What do I make of it?”“Ah!” said Mr. Jaggers; “how much?”“I suppose you make it twenty pounds,” said I, smiling.“Never mind what I make it, my friend,” observed Mr.Jaggers, with a knowing and contradictory toss of his head. “I want toknow what you make it.”“Twenty pounds, of course.”“Wemmick!” said Mr. Jaggers, opening his office door. “TakeMr. Pip’s written order, and pay him twenty pounds.”This strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly marked impression onme, and that not of an agreeable kind. Mr. Jaggers never laughed; but he woregreat bright creaking boots, and, in poising himself on these boots, with hislarge head bent down and his eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, hesometimes caused the boots to creak, as if they laughed in a dry andsuspicious way. As he happened to go out now, and as Wemmick was brisk andtalkative, I said to Wemmick that I hardly knew what to make of Mr.Jaggers’s manner.“Tell him that, and he’ll take it as a compliment,” answeredWemmick; “he don’t mean that you should know what to make ofit.—Oh!” for I looked surprised, “it’s not personal;it’s professional: only professional.”Wemmick was at his desk, lunching—and crunching—on a dry hardbiscuit; pieces of which he threw from time to time into his slit of a mouth,as if he were posting them.“Always seems to me,” said Wemmick, “as if he had set aman-trap and was watching it. Suddenly—click—you’recaught!”Without remarking that man-traps were not among the amenities of life, I said Isupposed he was very skilful?“Deep,” said Wemmick, “as Australia.” Pointing with hispen at the office floor, to express that Australia was understood, for thepurposes of the figure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot of the globe.“If there was anything deeper,” added Wemmick, bringing his pen topaper, “he’d be it.”Then, I said I supposed he had a fine business, and Wemmick said,“Ca-pi-tal!” Then I asked if there were many clerks? to which hereplied,—“We don’t run much into clerks, because there’s only oneJaggers, and people won’t have him at second hand. There are only four ofus. Would you like to see ’em? You are one of us, as I may say.”I accepted the offer. When Mr. Wemmick had put all the biscuit into the post,and had paid me my money from a cash-box in a safe, the key of which safe hekept somewhere down his back and produced from his coat-collar like aniron-pigtail, we went upstairs. The house was dark and shabby, and the greasyshoulders that had left their mark in Mr. Jaggers’s room seemed to havebeen shuffling up and down the staircase for years. In the front first floor, aclerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a largepale, puffed, swollen man—was attentively engaged with three or fourpeople of shabby appearance, whom he treated as unceremoniously as everybodyseemed to be treated who contributed to Mr. Jaggers’s coffers.“Getting evidence together,” said Mr. Wemmick, as we came out,“for the Bailey.” In the room over that, a little flabby terrier ofa clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when hewas a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes, whom Mr. Wemmickpresented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always boiling, and who wouldmelt me anything I pleased,—and who was in an excessivewhite-perspiration, as if he had been trying his art on himself. In a backroom, a high-shouldered man with a face-ache tied up in dirty flannel, who wasdressed in old black clothes that bore the appearance of having been waxed, wasstooping over his work of making fair copies of the notes of the other twogentlemen, for Mr. Jaggers’s own use.This was all the establishment. When we went downstairs again, Wemmick led meinto my guardian’s room, and said, “This you’ve seenalready.”“Pray,” said I, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer uponthem caught my sight again, “whose likenesses are those?”“These?” said Wemmick, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dustoff the horrible heads before bringing them down. “These are twocelebrated ones. Famous clients of ours that got us a world of credit. Thischap (why you must have come down in the night and been peeping into theinkstand, to get this blot upon your eyebrow, you old rascal!) murdered hismaster, and, considering that he wasn’t brought up to evidence,didn’t plan it badly.”“Is it like him?” I asked, recoiling from the brute, as Wemmickspat upon his eyebrow and gave it a rub with his sleeve.“Like him? It’s himself, you know. The cast was made in Newgate,directly after he was taken down. You had a particular fancy for me,hadn’t you, Old Artful?” said Wemmick. He then explained thisaffectionate apostrophe, by touching his brooch representing the lady and theweeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, and saying, “Had it madefor me, express!”“Is the lady anybody?” said I.“No,” returned Wemmick. “Only his game. (You liked your bitof game, didn’t you?) No; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, Mr. Pip,except one,—and she wasn’t of this slender lady-like sort, and youwouldn’t have caught her looking after this urn, unless there wassomething to drink in it.” Wemmick’s attention being thus directedto his brooch, he put down the cast, and polished the brooch with hispocket-handkerchief.“Did that other creature come to the same end?” I asked. “Hehas the same look.”“You’re right,” said Wemmick; “it’s the genuinelook. Much as if one nostril was caught up with a horse-hair and a littlefish-hook. Yes, he came to the same end; quite the natural end here, I assureyou. He forged wills, this blade did, if he didn’t also put the supposedtestators to sleep too. You were a gentlemanly Cove, though” (Mr. Wemmickwas again apostrophising), “and you said you could write Greek. Yah,Bounceable! What a liar you were! I never met such a liar as you!” Beforeputting his late friend on his shelf again, Wemmick touched the largest of hismourning rings and said, “Sent out to buy it for me, only the daybefore.”While he was putting up the other cast and coming down from the chair, thethought crossed my mind that all his personal jewelry was derived from likesources. As he had shown no diffidence on the subject, I ventured on theliberty of asking him the question, when he stood before me, dusting his hands.“O yes,” he returned, “these are all gifts of that kind. Onebrings another, you see; that’s the way of it. I always take ’em.They’re curiosities. And they’re property. They may not be worthmuch, but, after all, they’re property and portable. It don’tsignify to you with your brilliant lookout, but as to myself, my guiding-staralways is, ‘Get hold of portable property’.”When I had rendered homage to this light, he went on to say, in a friendlymanner:—“If at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, youwouldn’t mind coming over to see me at Walworth, I could offer you a bed,and I should consider it an honour. I have not much to show you; but such twoor three curiosities as I have got you might like to look over; and I am fondof a bit of garden and a summer-house.”I said I should be delighted to accept his hospitality.“Thankee,” said he; “then we’ll consider thatit’s to come off, when convenient to you. Have you dined with Mr. Jaggersyet?”“Not yet.”“Well,” said Wemmick, “he’ll give you wine, and goodwine. I’ll give you punch, and not bad punch. And now I’ll tell yousomething. When you go to dine with Mr. Jaggers, look at hishousekeeper.”“Shall I see something very uncommon?”“Well,” said Wemmick, “you’ll see a wild beast tamed.Not so very uncommon, you’ll tell me. I reply, that depends on theoriginal wildness of the beast, and the amount of taming. It won’t loweryour opinion of Mr. Jaggers’s powers. Keep your eye on it.”I told him I would do so, with all the interest and curiosity that hispreparation awakened. As I was taking my departure, he asked me if I would liketo devote five minutes to seeing Mr. Jaggers “at it?”For several reasons, and not least because I didn’t clearly know what Mr.Jaggers would be found to be “at,” I replied in the affirmative. Wedived into the City, and came up in a crowded police-court, where ablood-relation (in the murderous sense) of the deceased, with the fancifultaste in brooches, was standing at the bar, uncomfortably chewing something;while my guardian had a woman under examination or cross-examination,—Idon’t know which,—and was striking her, and the bench, andeverybody present, with awe. If anybody, of whatsoever degree, said a word thathe didn’t approve of, he instantly required to have it “takendown.” If anybody wouldn’t make an admission, he said,“I’ll have it out of you!” and if anybody made an admission,he said, “Now I have got you!” The magistrates shivered under asingle bite of his finger. Thieves and thief-takers hung in dread rapture onhis words, and shrank when a hair of his eyebrows turned in their direction.Which side he was on I couldn’t make out, for he seemed to me to begrinding the whole place in a mill; I only know that when I stole out ontiptoe, he was not on the side of the bench; for, he was making the legs of theold gentleman who presided, quite convulsive under the table, by hisdenunciations of his conduct as the representative of British law and justicein that chair that day.Chapter XXV.Bentley Drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took upa book as if its writer had done him an injury, did not take up an acquaintancein a more agreeable spirit. Heavy in figure, movement, andcomprehension,—in the sluggish complexion of his face, and in the large,awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his mouth as he himself lolledabout in a room,—he was idle, proud, niggardly, reserved, and suspicious.He came of rich people down in Somersetshire, who had nursed this combinationof qualities until they made the discovery that it was just of age and ablockhead. Thus, Bentley Drummle had come to Mr. Pocket when he was a headtaller than that gentleman, and half a dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen.Startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when he ought to havebeen at school, but he was devotedly attached to her, and admired her beyondmeasure. He had a woman’s delicacy of feature, and was—“asyou may see, though you never saw her,” said Herbert tome—“exactly like his mother.” It was but natural that Ishould take to him much more kindly than to Drummle, and that, even in theearliest evenings of our boating, he and I should pull homeward abreast of oneanother, conversing from boat to boat, while Bentley Drummle came up in ourwake alone, under the overhanging banks and among the rushes. He would alwayscreep in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, even when the tidewould have sent him fast upon his way; and I always think of him as comingafter us in the dark or by the back-water, when our own two boats were breakingthe sunset or the moonlight in mid-stream.Herbert was my intimate companion and friend. I presented him with a half-sharein my boat, which was the occasion of his often coming down to Hammersmith; andmy possession of a half-share in his chambers often took me up to London. Weused to walk between the two places at all hours. I have an affection for theroad yet (though it is not so pleasant a road as it was then), formed in theimpressibility of untried youth and hope.When I had been in Mr. Pocket’s family a month or two, Mr. and Mrs.Camilla turned up. Camilla was Mr. Pocket’s sister. Georgiana, whom I hadseen at Miss Havisham’s on the same occasion, also turned up. She was acousin,—an indigestive single woman, who called her rigidity religion,and her liver love. These people hated me with the hatred of cupidity anddisappointment. As a matter of course, they fawned upon me in my prosperitywith the basest meanness. Towards Mr. Pocket, as a grown-up infant with nonotion of his own interests, they showed the complacent forbearance I had heardthem express. Mrs. Pocket they held in contempt; but they allowed the poor soulto have been heavily disappointed in life, because that shed a feeble reflectedlight upon themselves.These were the surroundings among which I settled down, and applied myself tomy education. I soon contracted expensive habits, and began to spend an amountof money that within a few short months I should have thought almost fabulous;but through good and evil I stuck to my books. There was no other merit inthis, than my having sense enough to feel my deficiencies. Between Mr. Pocketand Herbert I got on fast; and, with one or the other always at my elbow togive me the start I wanted, and clear obstructions out of my road, I must havebeen as great a dolt as Drummle if I had done less.I had not seen Mr. Wemmick for some weeks, when I thought I would write him anote and propose to go home with him on a certain evening. He replied that itwould give him much pleasure, and that he would expect me at the office at sixo’clock. Thither I went, and there I found him, putting the key of hissafe down his back as the clock struck.“Did you think of walking down to Walworth?” said he.“Certainly,” said I, “if you approve.”“Very much,” was Wemmick’s reply, “for I have had mylegs under the desk all day, and shall be glad to stretch them. Now, I’lltell you what I have got for supper, Mr. Pip. I have got a stewedsteak,—which is of home preparation,—and a cold roastfowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop. I think it’s tender,because the master of the shop was a Juryman in some cases of ours the otherday, and we let him down easy. I reminded him of it when I bought the fowl, andI said, “Pick us out a good one, old Briton, because if we had chosen tokeep you in the box another day or two, we could easily have done it.” Hesaid to that, “Let me make you a present of the best fowl in theshop.” I let him, of course. As far as it goes, it’s property andportable. You don’t object to an aged parent, I hope?”I really thought he was still speaking of the fowl, until he added,“Because I have got an aged parent at my place.” I then said whatpoliteness required.“So, you haven’t dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?” he pursued, aswe walked along.“Not yet.”“He told me so this afternoon when he heard you were coming. I expectyou’ll have an invitation to-morrow. He’s going to ask your pals,too. Three of ’em; ain’t there?”Although I was not in the habit of counting Drummle as one of my intimateassociates, I answered, “Yes.”“Well, he’s going to ask the whole gang,”—I hardly feltcomplimented by the word,—“and whatever he gives you, he’llgive you good. Don’t look forward to variety, but you’ll haveexcellence. And there’s another rum thing in his house,” proceededWemmick, after a moment’s pause, as if the remark followed on thehousekeeper understood; “he never lets a door or window be fastened atnight.”“Is he never robbed?”“That’s it!” returned Wemmick. “He says, and gives itout publicly, “I want to see the man who’ll rob me.”Lord bless you, I have heard him, a hundred times, if I have heard him once,say to regular cracksmen in our front office, “You know where I live;now, no bolt is ever drawn there; why don’t you do a stroke of businesswith me? Come; can’t I tempt you?” Not a man of them, sir, would bebold enough to try it on, for love or money.”“They dread him so much?” said I.“Dread him,” said Wemmick. “I believe you they dread him. Notbut what he’s artful, even in his defiance of them. No silver, sir.Britannia metal, every spoon.”“So they wouldn’t have much,” I observed, “even ifthey—”“Ah! But he would have much,” said Wemmick, cutting meshort, “and they know it. He’d have their lives, and the lives ofscores of ’em. He’d have all he could get. And it’simpossible to say what he couldn’t get, if he gave his mind to it.”I was falling into meditation on my guardian’s greatness, when Wemmickremarked:—“As to the absence of plate, that’s only his natural depth, youknow. A river’s its natural depth, and he’s his natural depth. Lookat his watch-chain. That’s real enough.”“It’s very massive,” said I.“Massive?” repeated Wemmick. “I think so. And his watch is agold repeater, and worth a hundred pound if it’s worth a penny. Mr. Pip,there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know all about thatwatch; there’s not a man, a woman, or a child, among them, whowouldn’t identify the smallest link in that chain, and drop it as if itwas red hot, if inveigled into touching it.”At first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of a moregeneral nature, did Mr. Wemmick and I beguile the time and the road, until hegave me to understand that we had arrived in the district of Walworth.It appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and little gardens, andto present the aspect of a rather dull retirement. Wemmick’s house was alittle wooden cottage in the midst of plots of garden, and the top of it wascut out and painted like a battery mounted with guns.“My own doing,” said Wemmick. “Looks pretty; don’tit?”I highly commended it, I think it was the smallest house I ever saw; with thequeerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of them sham), and a gothicdoor almost too small to get in at.“That’s a real flagstaff, you see,” said Wemmick, “andon Sundays I run up a real flag. Then look here. After I have crossed thisbridge, I hoist it up—so—and cut off the communication.”The bridge was a plank, and it crossed a chasm about four feet wide and twodeep. But it was very pleasant to see the pride with which he hoisted it up andmade it fast; smiling as he did so, with a relish and not merely mechanically.“At nine o’clock every night, Greenwich time,” said Wemmick,“the gun fires. There he is, you see! And when you hear him go, I thinkyou’ll say he’s a Stinger.”The piece of ordnance referred to, was mounted in a separate fortress,constructed of lattice-work. It was protected from the weather by an ingeniouslittle tarpaulin contrivance in the nature of an umbrella.“Then, at the back,” said Wemmick, “out of sight, so as notto impede the idea of fortifications,—for it’s a principle with me,if you have an idea, carry it out and keep it up,—I don’t knowwhether that’s your opinion—”I said, decidedly.“—At the back, there’s a pig, and there are fowls andrabbits; then, I knock together my own little frame, you see, and growcucumbers; and you’ll judge at supper what sort of a salad I can raise.So, sir,” said Wemmick, smiling again, but seriously too, as he shook hishead, “if you can suppose the little place besieged, it would hold out adevil of a time in point of provisions.”Then, he conducted me to a bower about a dozen yards off, but which wasapproached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite a long time toget at; and in this retreat our glasses were already set forth. Our punch wascooling in an ornamental lake, on whose margin the bower was raised. This pieceof water (with an island in the middle which might have been the salad forsupper) was of a circular form, and he had constructed a fountain in it, which,when you set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, played to thatpowerful extent that it made the back of your hand quite wet.“I am my own engineer, and my own carpenter, and my own plumber, and myown gardener, and my own Jack of all Trades,” said Wemmick, inacknowledging my compliments. “Well; it’s a good thing, you know.It brushes the Newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the Aged. You wouldn’tmind being at once introduced to the Aged, would you? It wouldn’t put youout?”I expressed the readiness I felt, and we went into the castle. There we found,sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful,comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf.“Well aged parent,” said Wemmick, shaking hands with him in acordial and jocose way, “how am you?”“All right, John; all right!” replied the old man.“Here’s Mr. Pip, aged parent,” said Wemmick, “and Iwish you could hear his name. Nod away at him, Mr. Pip; that’s what helikes. Nod away at him, if you please, like winking!”“This is a fine place of my son’s, sir,” cried the old man,while I nodded as hard as I possibly could. “This is a prettypleasure-ground, sir. This spot and these beautiful works upon it ought to bekept together by the Nation, after my son’s time, for the people’senjoyment.”“You’re as proud of it as Punch; ain’t you, Aged?” saidWemmick, contemplating the old man, with his hard face really softened;“there’s a nod for you;” giving him a tremendous one;“there’s another for you;” giving him a still moretremendous one; “you like that, don’t you? If you’re nottired, Mr. Pip—though I know it’s tiring to strangers—willyou tip him one more? You can’t think how it pleases him.”I tipped him several more, and he was in great spirits. We left him bestirringhimself to feed the fowls, and we sat down to our punch in the arbour; whereWemmick told me, as he smoked a pipe, that it had taken him a good many yearsto bring the property up to its present pitch of perfection.“Is it your own, Mr. Wemmick?”“O yes,” said Wemmick, “I have got hold of it, a bit at atime. It’s a freehold, by George!”“Is it indeed? I hope Mr. Jaggers admires it?”“Never seen it,” said Wemmick. “Never heard of it. Never seenthe Aged. Never heard of him. No; the office is one thing, and private life isanother. When I go into the office, I leave the Castle behind me, and when Icome into the Castle, I leave the office behind me. If it’s not in anyway disagreeable to you, you’ll oblige me by doing the same. Idon’t wish it professionally spoken about.”Of course I felt my good faith involved in the observance of his request. Thepunch being very nice, we sat there drinking it and talking, until it wasalmost nine o’clock. “Getting near gun-fire,” said Wemmickthen, as he laid down his pipe; “it’s the Aged’streat.”Proceeding into the Castle again, we found the Aged heating the poker, withexpectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance of this great nightlyceremony. Wemmick stood with his watch in his hand until the moment was comefor him to take the red-hot poker from the Aged, and repair to the battery. Hetook it, and went out, and presently the Stinger went off with a Bang thatshook the crazy little box of a cottage as if it must fall to pieces, and madeevery glass and teacup in it ring. Upon this, the Aged—who I believewould have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by theelbows—cried out exultingly, “He’s fired! I heerd him!”and I nodded at the old gentleman until it is no figure of speech to declarethat I absolutely could not see him.The interval between that time and supper Wemmick devoted to showing me hiscollection of curiosities. They were mostly of a felonious character;comprising the pen with which a celebrated forgery had been committed, adistinguished razor or two, some locks of hair, and several manuscriptconfessions written under condemnation,—upon which Mr. Wemmick setparticular value as being, to use his own words, “every one of ’emLies, sir.” These were agreeably dispersed among small specimens of chinaand glass, various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and sometobacco-stoppers carved by the Aged. They were all displayed in that chamber ofthe Castle into which I had been first inducted, and which served, not only asthe general sitting-room but as the kitchen too, if I might judge from asaucepan on the hob, and a brazen bijou over the fireplace designed for thesuspension of a roasting-jack.There was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in theday. When she had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge was lowered to give hermeans of egress, and she withdrew for the night. The supper was excellent; andthough the Castle was rather subject to dry-rot insomuch that it tasted like abad nut, and though the pig might have been farther off, I was heartily pleasedwith my whole entertainment. Nor was there any drawback on my little turretbedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceiling between me and theflagstaff, that when I lay down on my back in bed, it seemed as if I had tobalance that pole on my forehead all night.Wemmick was up early in the morning, and I am afraid I heard him cleaning myboots. After that, he fell to gardening, and I saw him from my gothic windowpretending to employ the Aged, and nodding at him in a most devoted manner. Ourbreakfast was as good as the supper, and at half-past eight precisely westarted for Little Britain. By degrees, Wemmick got dryer and harder as we wentalong, and his mouth tightened into a post-office again. At last, when we gotto his place of business and he pulled out his key from his coat-collar, helooked as unconscious of his Walworth property as if the Castle and thedrawbridge and the arbour and the lake and the fountain and the Aged, had allbeen blown into space together by the last discharge of the Stinger.Chapter XXVI.Itfell out as Wemmick had told me it would, that I had an early opportunity ofcomparing my guardian’s establishment with that of his cashier and clerk.My guardian was in his room, washing his hands with his scented soap, when Iwent into the office from Walworth; and he called me to him, and gave me theinvitation for myself and friends which Wemmick had prepared me to receive.“No ceremony,” he stipulated, “and no dinner dress, and sayto-morrow.” I asked him where we should come to (for I had no idea wherehe lived), and I believe it was in his general objection to make anything likean admission, that he replied, “Come here, and I’ll take you homewith me.” I embrace this opportunity of remarking that he washed hisclients off, as if he were a surgeon or a dentist. He had a closet in his room,fitted up for the purpose, which smelt of the scented soap like aperfumer’s shop. It had an unusually large jack-towel on a roller insidethe door, and he would wash his hands, and wipe them and dry them all over thistowel, whenever he came in from a police court or dismissed a client from hisroom. When I and my friends repaired to him at six o’clock next day, heseemed to have been engaged on a case of a darker complexion than usual, for wefound him with his head butted into this closet, not only washing his hands,but laving his face and gargling his throat. And even when he had done allthat, and had gone all round the jack-towel, he took out his penknife andscraped the case out of his nails before he put his coat on.There were some people slinking about as usual when we passed out into thestreet, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; but there was somethingso conclusive in the halo of scented soap which encircled his presence, thatthey gave it up for that day. As we walked along westward, he was recognisedever and again by some face in the crowd of the streets, and whenever thathappened he talked louder to me; but he never otherwise recognised anybody, ortook notice that anybody recognised him.He conducted us to Gerrard Street, Soho, to a house on the south side of thatstreet. Rather a stately house of its kind, but dolefully in want of painting,and with dirty windows. He took out his key and opened the door, and we allwent into a stone hall, bare, gloomy, and little used. So, up a dark brownstaircase into a series of three dark brown rooms on the first floor. Therewere carved garlands on the panelled walls, and as he stood among them givingus welcome, I know what kind of loops I thought they looked like.Dinner was laid in the best of these rooms; the second was his dressing-room;the third, his bedroom. He told us that he held the whole house, but rarelyused more of it than we saw. The table was comfortably laid—no silver inthe service, of course—and at the side of his chair was a capaciousdumb-waiter, with a variety of bottles and decanters on it, and four dishes offruit for dessert. I noticed throughout, that he kept everything under his ownhand, and distributed everything himself.There was a bookcase in the room; I saw from the backs of the books, that theywere about evidence, criminal law, criminal biography, trials, acts ofParliament, and such things. The furniture was all very solid and good, likehis watch-chain. It had an official look, however, and there was nothing merelyornamental to be seen. In a corner was a little table of papers with a shadedlamp: so that he seemed to bring the office home with him in that respect too,and to wheel it out of an evening and fall to work.As he had scarcely seen my three companions until now,—for he and I hadwalked together,—he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringing the bell, andtook a searching look at them. To my surprise, he seemed at once to beprincipally if not solely interested in Drummle.“Pip,” said he, putting his large hand on my shoulder and moving meto the window, “I don’t know one from the other. Who’s theSpider?”“The spider?” said I.“The blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow.”“That’s Bentley Drummle,” I replied; “the one with thedelicate face is Startop.”Not making the least account of “the one with the delicate face,”he returned, “Bentley Drummle is his name, is it? I like the look of thatfellow.”He immediately began to talk to Drummle: not at all deterred by his replying inhis heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by it to screw discourse out ofhim. I was looking at the two, when there came between me and them thehousekeeper, with the first dish for the table.She was a woman of about forty, I supposed,—but I may have thought heryounger than she was. Rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, extremely pale,with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaming hair. I cannot say whetherany diseased affection of the heart caused her lips to be parted as if she werepanting, and her face to bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter;but I know that I had been to see Macbeth at the theatre, a night or twobefore, and that her face looked to me as if it were all disturbed by fieryair, like the faces I had seen rise out of the Witches’ caldron.She set the dish on, touched my guardian quietly on the arm with a finger tonotify that dinner was ready, and vanished. We took our seats at the roundtable, and my guardian kept Drummle on one side of him, while Startop sat onthe other. It was a noble dish of fish that the housekeeper had put on table,and we had a joint of equally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equallychoice bird. Sauces, wines, all the accessories we wanted, and all of the best,were given out by our host from his dumb-waiter; and when they had made thecircuit of the table, he always put them back again. Similarly, he dealt usclean plates and knives and forks, for each course, and dropped those justdisused into two baskets on the ground by his chair. No other attendant thanthe housekeeper appeared. She set on every dish; and I always saw in her face,a face rising out of the caldron. Years afterwards, I made a dreadful likenessof that woman, by causing a face that had no other natural resemblance to itthan it derived from flowing hair to pass behind a bowl of flaming spirits in adark room.Induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by her own strikingappearance and by Wemmick’s preparation, I observed that whenever she wasin the room she kept her eyes attentively on my guardian, and that she wouldremove her hands from any dish she put before him, hesitatingly, as if shedreaded his calling her back, and wanted him to speak when she was nigh, if hehad anything to say. I fancied that I could detect in his manner aconsciousness of this, and a purpose of always holding her in suspense.Dinner went off gayly, and although my guardian seemed to follow rather thanoriginate subjects, I knew that he wrenched the weakest part of ourdispositions out of us. For myself, I found that I was expressing my tendencyto lavish expenditure, and to patronise Herbert, and to boast of my greatprospects, before I quite knew that I had opened my lips. It was so with all ofus, but with no one more than Drummle: the development of whose inclination togird in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out of himbefore the fish was taken off.It was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that our conversationturned upon our rowing feats, and that Drummle was rallied for coming up behindof a night in that slow amphibious way of his. Drummle upon this, informed ourhost that he much preferred our room to our company, and that as to skill hewas more than our master, and that as to strength he could scatter us likechaff. By some invisible agency, my guardian wound him up to a pitch littleshort of ferocity about this trifle; and he fell to baring and spanning his armto show how muscular it was, and we all fell to baring and spanning our arms ina ridiculous manner.Now the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; my guardian, taking noheed of her, but with the side of his face turned from her, was leaning back inhis chair biting the side of his forefinger and showing an interest in Drummle,that, to me, was quite inexplicable. Suddenly, he clapped his large hand on thehousekeeper’s, like a trap, as she stretched it across the table. Sosuddenly and smartly did he do this, that we all stopped in our foolishcontention.“If you talk of strength,” said Mr. Jaggers,“I’ll show you a wrist. Molly, let them see yourwrist.”Her entrapped hand was on the table, but she had already put her other handbehind her waist. “Master,” she said, in a low voice, with her eyesattentively and entreatingly fixed upon him. “Don’t.”“I’ll show you a wrist,” repeated Mr. Jaggers, with animmovable determination to show it. “Molly, let them see yourwrist.”“Master,” she again murmured. “Please!”“Molly,” said Mr. Jaggers, not looking at her, but obstinatelylooking at the opposite side of the room, “let them see both yourwrists. Show them. Come!”He took his hand from hers, and turned that wrist up on the table. She broughther other hand from behind her, and held the two out side by side. The lastwrist was much disfigured,—deeply scarred and scarred across and across.When she held her hands out she took her eyes from Mr. Jaggers, and turned themwatchfully on every one of the rest of us in succession.“There’s power here,” said Mr. Jaggers, coolly tracing outthe sinews with his forefinger. “Very few men have the power of wristthat this woman has. It’s remarkable what mere force of grip there is inthese hands. I have had occasion to notice many hands; but I never saw strongerin that respect, man’s or woman’s, than these.”While he said these words in a leisurely, critical style, she continued to lookat every one of us in regular succession as we sat. The moment he ceased, shelooked at him again. “That’ll do, Molly,” said Mr. Jaggers,giving her a slight nod; “you have been admired, and can go.” Shewithdrew her hands and went out of the room, and Mr. Jaggers, putting thedecanters on from his dumb-waiter, filled his glass and passed round the wine.“At half-past nine, gentlemen,” said he, “we must break up.Pray make the best use of your time. I am glad to see you all. Mr. Drummle, Idrink to you.”If his object in singling out Drummle were to bring him out still more, itperfectly succeeded. In a sulky triumph, Drummle showed his morose depreciationof the rest of us, in a more and more offensive degree, until he becamedownright intolerable. Through all his stages, Mr. Jaggers followed him withthe same strange interest. He actually seemed to serve as a zest to Mr.Jaggers’s wine.In our boyish want of discretion I dare say we took too much to drink, and Iknow we talked too much. We became particularly hot upon some boorish sneer ofDrummle’s, to the effect that we were too free with our money. It led tomy remarking, with more zeal than discretion, that it came with a bad gracefrom him, to whom Startop had lent money in my presence but a week or sobefore.“Well,” retorted Drummle; “he’ll be paid.”“I don’t mean to imply that he won’t,” said I,“but it might make you hold your tongue about us and our money, I shouldthink.”“You should think!” retorted Drummle. “Oh Lord!”“I dare say,” I went on, meaning to be very severe, “that youwouldn’t lend money to any of us if we wanted it.”“You are right,” said Drummle. “I wouldn’t lend one ofyou a sixpence. I wouldn’t lend anybody a sixpence.”“Rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, I should say.”“You should say,” repeated Drummle. “Oh Lord!”This was so very aggravating—the more especially as I found myself makingno way against his surly obtuseness—that I said, disregardingHerbert’s efforts to check me,—“Come, Mr. Drummle, since we are on the subject, I’ll tell you whatpassed between Herbert here and me, when you borrowed that money.”“I don’t want to know what passed between Herbert there andyou,” growled Drummle. And I think he added in a lower growl, that wemight both go to the devil and shake ourselves.“I’ll tell you, however,” said I, “whether you want toknow or not. We said that as you put it in your pocket very glad to get it, youseemed to be immensely amused at his being so weak as to lend it.”Drummle laughed outright, and sat laughing in our faces, with his hands in hispockets and his round shoulders raised; plainly signifying that it was quitetrue, and that he despised us as asses all.Hereupon Startop took him in hand, though with a much better grace than I hadshown, and exhorted him to be a little more agreeable. Startop, being a lively,bright young fellow, and Drummle being the exact opposite, the latter wasalways disposed to resent him as a direct personal affront. He now retorted ina coarse, lumpish way, and Startop tried to turn the discussion aside with somesmall pleasantry that made us all laugh. Resenting this little success morethan anything, Drummle, without any threat or warning, pulled his hands out ofhis pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore, took up a large glass, andwould have flung it at his adversary’s head, but for ourentertainer’s dexterously seizing it at the instant when it was raisedfor that purpose.“Gentlemen,” said Mr. Jaggers, deliberately putting down the glass,and hauling out his gold repeater by its massive chain, “I am exceedinglysorry to announce that it’s half past nine.”On this hint we all rose to depart. Before we got to the street door, Startopwas cheerily calling Drummle “old boy,” as if nothing had happened.But the old boy was so far from responding, that he would not even walk toHammersmith on the same side of the way; so Herbert and I, who remained intown, saw them going down the street on opposite sides; Startop leading, andDrummle lagging behind in the shadow of the houses, much as he was wont tofollow in his boat.As the door was not yet shut, I thought I would leave Herbert there for amoment, and run upstairs again to say a word to my guardian. I found him in hisdressing-room surrounded by his stock of boots, already hard at it, washing hishands of us.I told him I had come up again to say how sorry I was that anythingdisagreeable should have occurred, and that I hoped he would not blame me much.“Pooh!” said he, sluicing his face, and speaking through thewater-drops; “it’s nothing, Pip. I like that Spider though.”He had turned towards me now, and was shaking his head, and blowing, andtowelling himself.“I am glad you like him, sir,” said I—“but Idon’t.”“No, no,” my guardian assented; “don’t have too much todo with him. Keep as clear of him as you can. But I like the fellow, Pip; he isone of the true sort. Why, if I was a fortune-teller—”Looking out of the towel, he caught my eye.“But I am not a fortune-teller,” he said, letting his head dropinto a festoon of towel, and towelling away at his two ears. “You knowwhat I am, don’t you? Good night, Pip.”“Good night, sir.”In about a month after that, the Spider’s time with Mr. Pocket was up forgood, and, to the great relief of all the house but Mrs. Pocket, he went hometo the family hole.Chapter XXVII.“MY DEAR MRPIP:—“I write this by request of Mr. Gargery, for to let you know that he isgoing to London in company with Mr. Wopsle and would be glad if agreeable to beallowed to see you. He would call at Barnard’s Hotel Tuesday morning atnine o’clock, when if not agreeable please leave word. Your poor sisteris much the same as when you left. We talk of you in the kitchen every night,and wonder what you are saying and doing. If now considered in the light of aliberty, excuse it for the love of poor old days. No more, dear Mr. Pip, from“Your ever obliged, and affectionate servant,        “BIDDY.”“P.S. He wishes me most particular to write what larks. He saysyou will understand. I hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see him,even though a gentleman, for you had ever a good heart, and he is a worthy,worthy man. I have read him all, excepting only the last little sentence, andhe wishes me most particular to write again what larks.”I received this letter by the post on Monday morning, and therefore itsappointment was for next day. Let me confess exactly with what feelings Ilooked forward to Joe’s coming.Not with pleasure, though I was bound to him by so many ties; no; withconsiderable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen sense of incongruity.If I could have kept him away by paying money, I certainly would have paidmoney. My greatest reassurance was that he was coming to Barnard’s Inn,not to Hammersmith, and consequently would not fall in Bentley Drummle’sway. I had little objection to his being seen by Herbert or his father, forboth of whom I had a respect; but I had the sharpest sensitiveness as to hisbeing seen by Drummle, whom I held in contempt. So, throughout life, our worstweaknesses and meannesses are usually committed for the sake of the people whomwe most despise.I had begun to be always decorating the chambers in some quite unnecessary andinappropriate way or other, and very expensive those wrestles with Barnardproved to be. By this time, the rooms were vastly different from what I hadfound them, and I enjoyed the honour of occupying a few prominent pages in thebooks of a neighbouring upholsterer. I had got on so fast of late, that I hadeven started a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery towhom I might have been said to pass my days. For, after I had made the monster(out of the refuse of my washerwoman’s family), and had clothed him witha blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat, creamy breeches, and the bootsalready mentioned, I had to find him a little to do and a great deal to eat;and with both of those horrible requirements he haunted my existence.This avenging phantom was ordered to be on duty at eight on Tuesday morning inthe hall, (it was two feet square, as charged for floorcloth,) and Herbertsuggested certain things for breakfast that he thought Joe would like. While Ifelt sincerely obliged to him for being so interested and considerate, I had anodd half-provoked sense of suspicion upon me, that if Joe had been coming tosee him, he wouldn’t have been quite so brisk about it.However, I came into town on the Monday night to be ready for Joe, and I got upearly in the morning, and caused the sitting-room and breakfast-table to assumetheir most splendid appearance. Unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and anangel could not have concealed the fact that Barnard was shedding sooty tearsoutside the window, like some weak giant of a Sweep.As the time approached I should have liked to run away, but the Avengerpursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently I heard Joe on the staircase.I knew it was Joe, by his clumsy manner of coming upstairs,—his stateboots being always too big for him,—and by the time it took him to readthe names on the other floors in the course of his ascent. When at last hestopped outside our door, I could hear his finger tracing over the paintedletters of my name, and I afterwards distinctly heard him breathing in at thekeyhole. Finally he gave a faint single rap, and Pepper—such was thecompromising name of the avenging boy—announced “Mr.Gargery!” I thought he never would have done wiping his feet, and that Imust have gone out to lift him off the mat, but at last he came in.“Joe, how are you, Joe?”“Pip, how AIR you, Pip?”With his good honest face all glowing and shining, and his hat put down on thefloor between us, he caught both my hands and worked them straight up and down,as if I had been the last-patented Pump.“I am glad to see you, Joe. Give me your hat.”But Joe, taking it up carefully with both hands, like a bird’s-nest witheggs in it, wouldn’t hear of parting with that piece of property, andpersisted in standing talking over it in a most uncomfortable way.“Which you have that growed,” said Joe, “and that swelled,and that gentle-folked;” Joe considered a little before he discoveredthis word; “as to be sure you are a honour to your king andcountry.”“And you, Joe, look wonderfully well.”“Thank God,” said Joe, “I’m ekerval to most. And yoursister, she’s no worse than she were. And Biddy, she’s ever rightand ready. And all friends is no backerder, if not no forarder. ’CeptinWopsle; he’s had a drop.”All this time (still with both hands taking great care of thebird’s-nest), Joe was rolling his eyes round and round the room, andround and round the flowered pattern of my dressing-gown.“Had a drop, Joe?”“Why yes,” said Joe, lowering his voice, “he’s left theChurch and went into the playacting. Which the playacting have likeways broughthim to London along with me. And his wish were,” said Joe, getting thebird’s-nest under his left arm for the moment, and groping in it for anegg with his right; “if no offence, as I would ’and youthat.”I took what Joe gave me, and found it to be the crumpled play-bill of a smallmetropolitan theatre, announcing the first appearance, in that very week, of“the celebrated Provincial Amateur of Roscian renown, whose uniqueperformance in the highest tragic walk of our National Bard has latelyoccasioned so great a sensation in local dramatic circles.”“Were you at his performance, Joe?” I inquired.“I were,” said Joe, with emphasis and solemnity.“Was there a great sensation?”“Why,” said Joe, “yes, there certainly were a peck oforange-peel. Partickler when he see the ghost. Though I put it to yourself,sir, whether it were calc’lated to keep a man up to his work with a goodhart, to be continiwally cutting in betwixt him and the Ghost with“Amen!” A man may have had a misfortun’ and been in theChurch,” said Joe, lowering his voice to an argumentative and feelingtone, “but that is no reason why you should put him out at such a time.Which I meantersay, if the ghost of a man’s own father cannot be allowedto claim his attention, what can, Sir? Still more, when his mourning ’atis unfortunately made so small as that the weight of the black feathers bringsit off, try to keep it on how you may.”A ghost-seeing effect in Joe’s own countenance informed me that Herberthad entered the room. So, I presented Joe to Herbert, who held out his hand;but Joe backed from it, and held on by the bird’s-nest.“Your servant, Sir,” said Joe, “which I hope as you andPip”—here his eye fell on the Avenger, who was putting some toaston table, and so plainly denoted an intention to make that young gentleman oneof the family, that I frowned it down and confused him more—“Imeantersay, you two gentlemen,—which I hope as you get your elths in thisclose spot? For the present may be a werry good inn, according to Londonopinions,” said Joe, confidentially, “and I believe its characterdo stand it; but I wouldn’t keep a pig in it myself,—not in thecase that I wished him to fatten wholesome and to eat with a meller flavour onhim.”Having borne this flattering testimony to the merits of our dwelling-place, andhaving incidentally shown this tendency to call me “sir,” Joe,being invited to sit down to table, looked all round the room for a suitablespot on which to deposit his hat,—as if it were only on some very fewrare substances in nature that it could find a resting place,—andultimately stood it on an extreme corner of the chimney-piece, from which itever afterwards fell off at intervals.“Do you take tea, or coffee, Mr. Gargery?” asked Herbert, whoalways presided of a morning.“Thankee, Sir,” said Joe, stiff from head to foot,“I’ll take whichever is most agreeable to yourself.”“What do you say to coffee?”“Thankee, Sir,” returned Joe, evidently dispirited by the proposal,“since you are so kind as make chice of coffee, I will not runcontrairy to your own opinions. But don’t you never find it a little’eating?”“Say tea then,” said Herbert, pouring it out.Here Joe’s hat tumbled off the mantel-piece, and he started out of hischair and picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot. As if it were anabsolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off again soon.“When did you come to town, Mr. Gargery?”“Were it yesterday afternoon?” said Joe, after coughing behind hishand, as if he had had time to catch the whooping-cough since he came.“No it were not. Yes it were. Yes. It were yesterday afternoon”(with an appearance of mingled wisdom, relief, and strict impartiality).“Have you seen anything of London yet?”“Why, yes, Sir,” said Joe, “me and Wopsle went off straightto look at the Blacking Ware’us. But we didn’t find that it come upto its likeness in the red bills at the shop doors; which I meantersay,”added Joe, in an explanatory manner, “as it is there drawd tooarchitectooralooral.”I really believe Joe would have prolonged this word (mightily expressive to mymind of some architecture that I know) into a perfect Chorus, but for hisattention being providentially attracted by his hat, which was toppling.Indeed, it demanded from him a constant attention, and a quickness of eye andhand, very like that exacted by wicket-keeping. He made extraordinary play withit, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it and catching it neatly asit dropped; now, merely stopping it midway, beating it up, and humouring it invarious parts of the room and against a good deal of the pattern of the paperon the wall, before he felt it safe to close with it; finally splashing it intothe slop-basin, where I took the liberty of laying hands upon it. As to his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar, they were perplexing to reflectupon,—insoluble mysteries both. Why should a man scrape himself to thatextent, before he could consider himself full dressed? Why should he suppose itnecessary to be purified by suffering for his holiday clothes? Then he fellinto such unaccountable fits of meditation, with his fork midway between hisplate and his mouth; had his eyes attracted in such strange directions; wasafflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so far from the table, and droppedso much more than he ate, and pretended that he hadn’t dropped it; that Iwas heartily glad when Herbert left us for the City.I had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this was all myfault, and that if I had been easier with Joe, Joe would have been easier withme. I felt impatient of him and out of temper with him; in which condition heheaped coals of fire on my head.“Us two being now alone, sir,”—began Joe.“Joe,” I interrupted, pettishly, “how can you call me,sir?”Joe looked at me for a single instant with something faintly like reproach.Utterly preposterous as his cravat was, and as his collars were, I wasconscious of a sort of dignity in the look.“Us two being now alone,” resumed Joe, “and me having theintentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more, I will nowconclude—leastways begin—to mention what have led to my having hadthe present honour. For was it not,” said Joe, with his old air of lucidexposition, “that my only wish were to be useful to you, I should nothave had the honour of breaking wittles in the company and abode ofgentlemen.”I was so unwilling to see the look again, that I made no remonstrance againstthis tone.“Well, sir,” pursued Joe, “this is how it were. I were at theBargemen t’other night, Pip;”—whenever he subsided intoaffection, he called me Pip, and whenever he relapsed into politeness he calledme sir; “when there come up in his shay-cart, Pumblechook. Which thatsame identical,” said Joe, going down a new track, “do comb my’air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out up and down town as itwere him which ever had your infant companionation and were looked upon as aplayfellow by yourself.”“Nonsense. It was you, Joe.”“Which I fully believed it were, Pip,” said Joe, slightly tossinghis head, “though it signify little now, sir. Well, Pip; this sameidentical, which his manners is given to blusterous, come to me at the Bargemen(wot a pipe and a pint of beer do give refreshment to the workingman, sir, anddo not over stimilate), and his word were, ‘Joseph, Miss Havisham shewish to speak to you.’”“Miss Havisham, Joe?”“‘She wish,’ were Pumblechook’s word, ‘to speakto you.’” Joe sat and rolled his eyes at the ceiling.“Yes, Joe? Go on, please.”“Next day, sir,” said Joe, looking at me as if I were a long wayoff, “having cleaned myself, I go and I see Miss A.”“Miss A., Joe? Miss Havisham?”“Which I say, sir,” replied Joe, with an air of legal formality, asif he were making his will, “Miss A., or otherways Havisham. Herexpression air then as follering: ‘Mr. Gargery. You air in correspondencewith Mr. Pip?’ Having had a letter from you, I were able to say ‘Iam.’ (When I married your sister, sir, I said ‘I will;’ andwhen I answered your friend, Pip, I said ‘I am.’) ‘Would youtell him, then,’ said she, ‘that which Estella has come home andwould be glad to see him.’”I felt my face fire up as I looked at Joe. I hope one remote cause of itsfiring may have been my consciousness that if I had known his errand, I shouldhave given him more encouragement.“Biddy,” pursued Joe, “when I got home and asked her fur towrite the message to you, a little hung back. Biddy says, ‘I know he willbe very glad to have it by word of mouth, it is holiday time, you want to seehim, go!’ I have now concluded, sir,” said Joe, rising from hischair, “and, Pip, I wish you ever well and ever prospering to a greaterand a greater height.”“But you are not going now, Joe?”“Yes I am,” said Joe.“But you are coming back to dinner, Joe?”“No I am not,” said Joe.Our eyes met, and all the “Sir” melted out of that manly heart ashe gave me his hand.“Pip, dear old chap, life is made of ever so many partings weldedtogether, as I may say, and one man’s a blacksmith, and one’s awhitesmith, and one’s a goldsmith, and one’s a coppersmith.Diwisions among such must come, and must be met as they come. If there’sbeen any fault at all to-day, it’s mine. You and me is not two figures tobe together in London; nor yet anywheres else but what is private, and beknown,and understood among friends. It ain’t that I am proud, but that I wantto be right, as you shall never see me no more in these clothes. I’mwrong in these clothes. I’m wrong out of the forge, the kitchen, or offth’ meshes. You won’t find half so much fault in me if you think ofme in my forge dress, with my hammer in my hand, or even my pipe. Youwon’t find half so much fault in me if, supposing as you should ever wishto see me, you come and put your head in at the forge window and see Joe theblacksmith, there, at the old anvil, in the old burnt apron, sticking to theold work. I’m awful dull, but I hope I’ve beat out something nighthe rights of this at last. And so GOD bless you, dear old Pip,old chap, GOD bless you!”I had not been mistaken in my fancy that there was a simple dignity in him. Thefashion of his dress could no more come in its way when he spoke these wordsthan it could come in its way in Heaven. He touched me gently on the forehead,and went out. As soon as I could recover myself sufficiently, I hurried outafter him and looked for him in the neighbouring streets; but he was gone.Chapter XXVIII.It wasclear that I must repair to our town next day, and in the first flow of myrepentance, it was equally clear that I must stay at Joe’s. But, when Ihad secured my box-place by to-morrow’s coach, and had been down to Mr.Pocket’s and back, I was not by any means convinced on the last point,and began to invent reasons and make excuses for putting up at the Blue Boar. Ishould be an inconvenience at Joe’s; I was not expected, and my bed wouldnot be ready; I should be too far from Miss Havisham’s, and she wasexacting and mightn’t like it. All other swindlers upon earth are nothingto the self-swindlers, and with such pretences did I cheat myself. Surely acurious thing. That I should innocently take a bad half-crown of somebodyelse’s manufacture is reasonable enough; but that I should knowinglyreckon the spurious coin of my own make as good money! An obliging stranger,under pretence of compactly folding up my bank-notes for security’s sake,abstracts the notes and gives me nutshells; but what is his sleight of hand tomine, when I fold up my own nutshells and pass them on myself as notes!Having settled that I must go to the Blue Boar, my mind was much disturbed byindecision whether or not to take the Avenger. It was tempting to think of thatexpensive Mercenary publicly airing his boots in the archway of the BlueBoar’s posting-yard; it was almost solemn to imagine him casuallyproduced in the tailor’s shop, and confounding the disrespectful sensesof Trabb’s boy. On the other hand, Trabb’s boy might worm himselfinto his intimacy and tell him things; or, reckless and desperate wretch as Iknew he could be, might hoot him in the High Street. My patroness, too, mighthear of him, and not approve. On the whole, I resolved to leave the Avengerbehind.It was the afternoon coach by which I had taken my place, and, as winter hadnow come round, I should not arrive at my destination until two or three hoursafter dark. Our time of starting from the Cross Keys was two o’clock. Iarrived on the ground with a quarter of an hour to spare, attended by theAvenger,—if I may connect that expression with one who never attended onme if he could possibly help it.At that time it was customary to carry Convicts down to the dock-yards bystage-coach. As I had often heard of them in the capacity of outsidepassengers, and had more than once seen them on the high road dangling theirironed legs over the coach roof, I had no cause to be surprised when Herbert,meeting me in the yard, came up and told me there were two convicts going downwith me. But I had a reason that was an old reason now for constitutionallyfaltering whenever I heard the word “convict.”“You don’t mind them, Handel?” said Herbert.“O no!”“I thought you seemed as if you didn’t like them?”“I can’t pretend that I do like them, and I suppose you don’tparticularly. But I don’t mind them.”“See! There they are,” said Herbert, “coming out of the Tap.What a degraded and vile sight it is!”They had been treating their guard, I suppose, for they had a gaoler with them,and all three came out wiping their mouths on their hands. The two convictswere handcuffed together, and had irons on their legs,—irons of a patternthat I knew well. They wore the dress that I likewise knew well. Their keeperhad a brace of pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under his arm; buthe was on terms of good understanding with them, and stood with them besidehim, looking on at the putting-to of the horses, rather with an air as if theconvicts were an interesting Exhibition not formally open at the moment, and hethe Curator. One was a taller and stouter man than the other, and appeared as amatter of course, according to the mysterious ways of the world, both convictand free, to have had allotted to him the smaller suit of clothes. His arms andlegs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and his attire disguised himabsurdly; but I knew his half-closed eye at one glance. There stood the manwhom I had seen on the settle at the Three Jolly Bargemen on a Saturday night,and who had brought me down with his invisible gun!It was easy to make sure that as yet he knew me no more than if he had neverseen me in his life. He looked across at me, and his eye appraised mywatch-chain, and then he incidentally spat and said something to the otherconvict, and they laughed and slued themselves round with a clink of theircoupling manacle, and looked at something else. The great numbers on theirbacks, as if they were street doors; their coarse mangy ungainly outer surface,as if they were lower animals; their ironed legs, apologetically garlanded withpocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which all present looked at them and keptfrom them; made them (as Herbert had said) a most disagreeable and degradedspectacle.But this was not the worst of it. It came out that the whole of the back of thecoach had been taken by a family removing from London, and that there were noplaces for the two prisoners but on the seat in front behind the coachman.Hereupon, a choleric gentleman, who had taken the fourth place on that seat,flew into a most violent passion, and said that it was a breach of contract tomix him up with such villainous company, and that it was poisonous, andpernicious, and infamous, and shameful, and I don’t know what else. Atthis time the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and we were allpreparing to get up, and the prisoners had come over with theirkeeper,—bringing with them that curious flavour of bread-poultice, baize,rope-yarn, and hearthstone, which attends the convict presence.“Don’t take it so much amiss, sir,” pleaded the keeper to theangry passenger; “I’ll sit next you myself. I’ll put’em on the outside of the row. They won’t interfere with you, sir.You needn’t know they’re there.”“And don’t blame me,” growled the convict I hadrecognised. “I don’t want to go. I am quite ready tostay behind. As fur as I am concerned any one’s welcome to myplace.”“Or mine,” said the other, gruffly. “I wouldn’thave incommoded none of you, if I’d had my way.” Then theyboth laughed, and began cracking nuts, and spitting the shells about.—AsI really think I should have liked to do myself, if I had been in their placeand so despised.At length, it was voted that there was no help for the angry gentleman, andthat he must either go in his chance company or remain behind. So he got intohis place, still making complaints, and the keeper got into the place next him,and the convicts hauled themselves up as well as they could, and the convict Ihad recognised sat behind me with his breath on the hair of my head.“Good-bye, Handel!” Herbert called out as we started. I thoughtwhat a blessed fortune it was, that he had found another name for me than Pip.It is impossible to express with what acuteness I felt the convict’sbreathing, not only on the back of my head, but all along my spine. Thesensation was like being touched in the marrow with some pungent and searchingacid, it set my very teeth on edge. He seemed to have more breathing businessto do than another man, and to make more noise in doing it; and I was consciousof growing high-shouldered on one side, in my shrinking endeavours to fend himoff.The weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold. It made us alllethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left the Half-way Housebehind, we habitually dozed and shivered and were silent. I dozed off, myself,in considering the question whether I ought to restore a couple of poundssterling to this creature before losing sight of him, and how it could best bedone. In the act of dipping forward as if I were going to bathe among thehorses, I woke in a fright and took the question up again.But I must have lost it longer than I had thought, since, although I couldrecognise nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights and shadows of ourlamps, I traced marsh country in the cold damp wind that blew at us. Coweringforward for warmth and to make me a screen against the wind, the convicts werecloser to me than before. The very first words I heard them interchange as Ibecame conscious, were the words of my own thought, “Two One Poundnotes.”“How did he get ’em?” said the convict I had never seen.“How should I know?” returned the other. “He had ’emstowed away somehows. Giv him by friends, I expect.”“I wish,” said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold,“that I had ’em here.”“Two one pound notes, or friends?”“Two one pound notes. I’d sell all the friends I ever had for one,and think it a blessed good bargain. Well? So he says—?”“So he says,” resumed the convict I had recognised,—“itwas all said and done in half a minute, behind a pile of timber in theDock-yard,—‘You’re a-going to be discharged?’ Yes, Iwas. Would I find out that boy that had fed him and kep his secret, and givehim them two one pound notes? Yes, I would. And I did.”“More fool you,” growled the other. “I’d have spent’em on a Man, in wittles and drink. He must have been a green one. Meanto say he knowed nothing of you?”“Not a ha’porth. Different gangs and different ships. He was triedagain for prison breaking, and got made a Lifer.”“And was that—Honour!—the only time you worked out, in thispart of the country?”“The only time.”“What might have been your opinion of the place?”“A most beastly place. Mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp, mist,and mudbank.”They both execrated the place in very strong language, and gradually growledthemselves out, and had nothing left to say.After overhearing this dialogue, I should assuredly have got down and been leftin the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for feeling certain that theman had no suspicion of my identity. Indeed, I was not only so changed in thecourse of nature, but so differently dressed and so differently circumstanced,that it was not at all likely he could have known me without accidental help.Still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, was sufficientlystrange to fill me with a dread that some other coincidence might at any momentconnect me, in his hearing, with my name. For this reason, I resolved to alightas soon as we touched the town, and put myself out of his hearing. This deviceI executed successfully. My little portmanteau was in the boot under my feet; Ihad but to turn a hinge to get it out; I threw it down before me, got downafter it, and was left at the first lamp on the first stones of the townpavement. As to the convicts, they went their way with the coach, and I knew atwhat point they would be spirited off to the river. In my fancy, I saw the boatwith its convict crew waiting for them at the slime-washed stairs,—againheard the gruff “Give way, you!” like and order todogs,—again saw the wicked Noah’s Ark lying out on the black water.I could not have said what I was afraid of, for my fear was altogetherundefined and vague, but there was great fear upon me. As I walked on to thehotel, I felt that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painfulor disagreeable recognition, made me tremble. I am confident that it took nodistinctness of shape, and that it was the revival for a few minutes of theterror of childhood.The coffee-room at the Blue Boar was empty, and I had not only ordered mydinner there, but had sat down to it, before the waiter knew me. As soon as hehad apologised for the remissness of his memory, he asked me if he should sendBoots for Mr. Pumblechook?“No,” said I, “certainly not.”The waiter (it was he who had brought up the Great Remonstrance from theCommercials, on the day when I was bound) appeared surprised, and took theearliest opportunity of putting a dirty old copy of a local newspaper sodirectly in my way, that I took it up and read this paragraph:—Our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, in reference to therecent romantic rise in fortune of a young artificer in iron of thisneighbourhood (what a theme, by the way, for the magic pen of our as yet notuniversally acknowledged townsman TOOBY, the poet of ourcolumns!) that the youth’s earliest patron, companion, and friend, was ahighly respected individual not entirely unconnected with the corn and seedtrade, and whose eminently convenient and commodious business premises aresituate within a hundred miles of the High Street. It is not whollyirrespective of our personal feelings that we record HIM as theMentor of our young Telemachus, for it is good to know that our town producedthe founder of the latter’s fortunes. Does the thought-contracted brow ofthe local Sage or the lustrous eye of local Beauty inquire whose fortunes? Webelieve that Quintin Matsys was the BLACKSMITH of Antwerp.VERB. SAP.I entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in the days ofmy prosperity I had gone to the North Pole, I should have met somebody there,wandering Esquimaux or civilized man, who would have told me that Pumblechookwas my earliest patron and the founder of my fortunes.Chapter XXIX.Betimes in the morning I was up and out. It was too early yet togo to Miss Havisham’s, so I loitered into the country on MissHavisham’s side of town,—which was not Joe’s side; I could gothere to-morrow,—thinking about my patroness, and painting brilliantpictures of her plans for me.She had adopted Estella, she had as good as adopted me, and it could not failto be her intention to bring us together. She reserved it for me to restore thedesolate house, admit the sunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-goingand the cold hearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy thevermin,—in short, do all the shining deeds of the young Knight ofromance, and marry the Princess. I had stopped to look at the house as Ipassed; and its seared red brick walls, blocked windows, and strong green ivyclasping even the stacks of chimneys with its twigs and tendons, as if withsinewy old arms, had made up a rich attractive mystery, of which I was thehero. Estella was the inspiration of it, and the heart of it, of course. But,though she had taken such strong possession of me, though my fancy and my hopewere so set upon her, though her influence on my boyish life and character hadbeen all-powerful, I did not, even that romantic morning, invest her with anyattributes save those she possessed. I mention this in this place, of a fixedpurpose, because it is the clue by which I am to be followed into my poorlabyrinth. According to my experience, the conventional notion of a lovercannot be always true. The unqualified truth is, that when I loved Estella withthe love of a man, I loved her simply because I found her irresistible. Oncefor all; I knew to my sorrow, often and often, if not always, that I loved heragainst reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, againsthappiness, against all discouragement that could be. Once for all; I loved hernone the less because I knew it, and it had no more influence in restraining methan if I had devoutly believed her to be human perfection.I so shaped out my walk as to arrive at the gate at my old time. When I hadrung at the bell with an unsteady hand, I turned my back upon the gate, while Itried to get my breath and keep the beating of my heart moderately quiet. Iheard the side-door open, and steps come across the courtyard; but I pretendednot to hear, even when the gate swung on its rusty hinges.Being at last touched on the shoulder, I started and turned. I started muchmore naturally then, to find myself confronted by a man in a sober grey dress.The last man I should have expected to see in that place of porter at MissHavisham’s door.“Orlick!”“Ah, young master, there’s more changes than yours. But come in,come in. It’s opposed to my orders to hold the gate open.”I entered and he swung it, and locked it, and took the key out.“Yes!” said he, facing round, after doggedly preceding me a fewsteps towards the house. “Here I am!”“How did you come here?”“I come here,” he retorted, “on my legs. I had my box broughtalongside me in a barrow.”“Are you here for good?”“I ain’t here for harm, young master, I suppose?”I was not so sure of that. I had leisure to entertain the retort in my mind,while he slowly lifted his heavy glance from the pavement, up my legs and arms,to my face.“Then you have left the forge?” I said.“Do this look like a forge?” replied Orlick, sending his glance allround him with an air of injury. “Now, do it look like it?”I asked him how long he had left Gargery’s forge?“One day is so like another here,” he replied, “that Idon’t know without casting it up. However, I come here some time sinceyou left.”“I could have told you that, Orlick.”“Ah!” said he, dryly. “But then you’ve got to be ascholar.”By this time we had come to the house, where I found his room to be one justwithin the side-door, with a little window in it looking on the courtyard. Inits small proportions, it was not unlike the kind of place usually assigned toa gate-porter in Paris. Certain keys were hanging on the wall, to which he nowadded the gate key; and his patchwork-covered bed was in a little innerdivision or recess. The whole had a slovenly, confined, and sleepy look, like acage for a human dormouse; while he, looming dark and heavy in the shadow of acorner by the window, looked like the human dormouse for whom it was fittedup,—as indeed he was.“I never saw this room before,” I remarked; “but there usedto be no Porter here.”“No,” said he; “not till it got about that there was noprotection on the premises, and it come to be considered dangerous, withconvicts and Tag and Rag and Bobtail going up and down. And then I wasrecommended to the place as a man who could give another man as good as hebrought, and I took it. It’s easier than bellowsing andhammering.—That’s loaded, that is.”My eye had been caught by a gun with a brass-bound stock over thechimney-piece, and his eye had followed mine.“Well,” said I, not desirous of more conversation, “shall Igo up to Miss Havisham?”“Burn me, if I know!” he retorted, first stretching himself andthen shaking himself; “my orders ends here, young master. I give thishere bell a rap with this here hammer, and you go on along the passage till youmeet somebody.”“I am expected, I believe?”“Burn me twice over, if I can say!” said he.Upon that, I turned down the long passage which I had first trodden in my thickboots, and he made his bell sound. At the end of the passage, while the bellwas still reverberating, I found Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now becomeconstitutionally green and yellow by reason of me.“Oh!” said she. “You, is it, Mr. Pip?”“It is, Miss Pocket. I am glad to tell you that Mr. Pocket and family areall well.”“Are they any wiser?” said Sarah, with a dismal shake of the head;“they had better be wiser, than well. Ah, Matthew, Matthew! You know yourway, sir?”Tolerably, for I had gone up the staircase in the dark, many a time. I ascendedit now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tapped in my old way at the door ofMiss Havisham’s room. “Pip’s rap,” I heard her say,immediately; “come in, Pip.”She was in her chair near the old table, in the old dress, with her two handscrossed on her stick, her chin resting on them, and her eyes on the fire.Sitting near her, with the white shoe, that had never been worn, in her hand,and her head bent as she looked at it, was an elegant lady whom I had neverseen.“Come in, Pip,” Miss Havisham continued to mutter, without lookinground or up; “come in, Pip, how do you do, Pip? so you kiss my hand as ifI were a queen, eh?—Well?”She looked up at me suddenly, only moving her eyes, and repeated in a grimlyplayful manner,—“Well?”“I heard, Miss Havisham,” said I, rather at a loss, “that youwere so kind as to wish me to come and see you, and I came directly.”“Well?”The lady whom I had never seen before, lifted up her eyes and looked archly atme, and then I saw that the eyes were Estella’s eyes. But she was so muchchanged, was so much more beautiful, so much more womanly, in all thingswinning admiration, had made such wonderful advance, that I seemed to have madenone. I fancied, as I looked at her, that I slipped hopelessly back into thecoarse and common boy again. O the sense of distance and disparity that cameupon me, and the inaccessibility that came about her!She gave me her hand. I stammered something about the pleasure I felt in seeingher again, and about my having looked forward to it, for a long, long time.“Do you find her much changed, Pip?” asked Miss Havisham, with hergreedy look, and striking her stick upon a chair that stood between them, as asign to me to sit down there.“When I came in, Miss Havisham, I thought there was nothing of Estella inthe face or figure; but now it all settles down so curiously into theold—”“What? You are not going to say into the old Estella?” MissHavisham interrupted. “She was proud and insulting, and you wanted to goaway from her. Don’t you remember?”I said confusedly that that was long ago, and that I knew no better then, andthe like. Estella smiled with perfect composure, and said she had no doubt ofmy having been quite right, and of her having been very disagreeable.“Is he changed?” Miss Havisham asked her.“Very much,” said Estella, looking at me.“Less coarse and common?” said Miss Havisham, playing withEstella’s hair.Estella laughed, and looked at the shoe in her hand, and laughed again, andlooked at me, and put the shoe down. She treated me as a boy still, but shelured me on.We sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which had so wroughtupon me, and I learnt that she had but just come home from France, and that shewas going to London. Proud and wilful as of old, she had brought thosequalities into such subjection to her beauty that it was impossible and out ofnature—or I thought so—to separate them from her beauty. Truly itwas impossible to dissociate her presence from all those wretched hankeringsafter money and gentility that had disturbed my boyhood,—from all thoseill-regulated aspirations that had first made me ashamed of home andJoe,—from all those visions that had raised her face in the glowing fire,struck it out of the iron on the anvil, extracted it from the darkness of nightto look in at the wooden window of the forge, and flit away. In a word, it wasimpossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present, from theinnermost life of my life.It was settled that I should stay there all the rest of the day, and return tothe hotel at night, and to London to-morrow. When we had conversed for a while,Miss Havisham sent us two out to walk in the neglected garden: on our coming inby and by, she said, I should wheel her about a little, as in times of yore.So, Estella and I went out into the garden by the gate through which I hadstrayed to my encounter with the pale young gentleman, now Herbert; I,trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of her dress; she, quitecomposed and most decidedly not worshipping the hem of mine. As we drew near tothe place of encounter, she stopped and said,—“I must have been a singular little creature to hide and see that fightthat day; but I did, and I enjoyed it very much.”“You rewarded me very much.”“Did I?” she replied, in an incidental and forgetful way. “Iremember I entertained a great objection to your adversary, because I took itill that he should be brought here to pester me with his company.”“He and I are great friends now.”“Are you? I think I recollect though, that you read with hisfather?”“Yes.”I made the admission with reluctance, for it seemed to have a boyish look, andshe already treated me more than enough like a boy.“Since your change of fortune and prospects, you have changed yourcompanions,” said Estella.“Naturally,” said I.“And necessarily,” she added, in a haughty tone; “what wasfit company for you once, would be quite unfit company for you now.”In my conscience, I doubt very much whether I had any lingering intention leftof going to see Joe; but if I had, this observation put it to flight.“You had no idea of your impending good fortune, in those times?”said Estella, with a slight wave of her hand, signifying in the fighting times.“Not the least.”The air of completeness and superiority with which she walked at my side, andthe air of youthfulness and submission with which I walked at hers, made acontrast that I strongly felt. It would have rankled in me more than it did, ifI had not regarded myself as eliciting it by being so set apart for her andassigned to her.The garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, and after wehad made the round of it twice or thrice, we came out again into the breweryyard. I showed her to a nicety where I had seen her walking on the casks, thatfirst old day, and she said, with a cold and careless look in that direction,“Did I?” I reminded her where she had come out of the house andgiven me my meat and drink, and she said, “I don’t remember.”“Not remember that you made me cry?” said I. “No,” saidshe, and shook her head and looked about her. I verily believe that her notremembering and not minding in the least, made me cry again,inwardly,—and that is the sharpest crying of all.“You must know,” said Estella, condescending to me as a brilliantand beautiful woman might, “that I have no heart,—if that hasanything to do with my memory.”I got through some jargon to the effect that I took the liberty of doubtingthat. That I knew better. That there could be no such beauty without it.“Oh! I have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, I have no doubt,”said Estella, “and of course if it ceased to beat I should cease to be.But you know what I mean. I have no softness there,no—sympathy—sentiment—nonsense.”What was it that was borne in upon my mind when she stood still andlooked attentively at me? Anything that I had seen in Miss Havisham? No. Insome of her looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblance to MissHavisham which may often be noticed to have been acquired by children, fromgrown person with whom they have been much associated and secluded, and which,when childhood is passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness ofexpression between faces that are otherwise quite different. And yet I couldnot trace this to Miss Havisham. I looked again, and though she was stilllooking at me, the suggestion was gone.What was it?“I am serious,” said Estella, not so much with a frown (for herbrow was smooth) as with a darkening of her face; “if we are to be thrownmuch together, you had better believe it at once. No!” imperiouslystopping me as I opened my lips. “I have not bestowed my tendernessanywhere. I have never had any such thing.”In another moment we were in the brewery, so long disused, and she pointed tothe high gallery where I had seen her going out on that same first day, andtold me she remembered to have been up there, and to have seen me standingscared below. As my eyes followed her white hand, again the same dim suggestionthat I could not possibly grasp crossed me. My involuntary start occasioned herto lay her hand upon my arm. Instantly the ghost passed once more and was gone.What was it?“What is the matter?” asked Estella. “Are you scaredagain?”“I should be, if I believed what you said just now,” I replied, toturn it off.“Then you don’t? Very well. It is said, at any rate. Miss Havishamwill soon be expecting you at your old post, though I think that might be laidaside now, with other old belongings. Let us make one more round of the garden,and then go in. Come! You shall not shed tears for my cruelty to-day; you shallbe my Page, and give me your shoulder.”Her handsome dress had trailed upon the ground. She held it in one hand now,and with the other lightly touched my shoulder as we walked. We walked roundthe ruined garden twice or thrice more, and it was all in bloom for me. If thegreen and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall had been the mostprecious flowers that ever blew, it could not have been more cherished in myremembrance.There was no discrepancy of years between us to remove her far from me; we wereof nearly the same age, though of course the age told for more in her case thanin mine; but the air of inaccessibility which her beauty and her manner gaveher, tormented me in the midst of my delight, and at the height of theassurance I felt that our patroness had chosen us for one another. Wretchedboy!At last we went back into the house, and there I heard, with surprise, that myguardian had come down to see Miss Havisham on business, and would come back todinner. The old wintry branches of chandeliers in the room where the moulderingtable was spread had been lighted while we were out, and Miss Havisham was inher chair and waiting for me.It was like pushing the chair itself back into the past, when we began the oldslow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast. But, in the funerealroom, with that figure of the grave fallen back in the chair fixing its eyesupon her, Estella looked more bright and beautiful than before, and I was understronger enchantment.The time so melted away, that our early dinner-hour drew close at hand, andEstella left us to prepare herself. We had stopped near the centre of the longtable, and Miss Havisham, with one of her withered arms stretched out of thechair, rested that clenched hand upon the yellow cloth. As Estella looked backover her shoulder before going out at the door, Miss Havisham kissed that handto her, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful.Then, Estella being gone and we two left alone, she turned to me, and said in awhisper,—“Is she beautiful, graceful, well-grown? Do you admire her?”“Everybody must who sees her, Miss Havisham.”She drew an arm round my neck, and drew my head close down to hers as she satin the chair. “Love her, love her, love her! How does she use you?”Before I could answer (if I could have answered so difficult a question at all)she repeated, “Love her, love her, love her! If she favours you, love her.If she wounds you, love her. If she tears your heart to pieces,—and as itgets older and stronger it will tear deeper,—love her, love her, loveher!”Never had I seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her utterance ofthese words. I could feel the muscles of the thin arm round my neck swell withthe vehemence that possessed her.“Hear me, Pip! I adopted her, to be loved. I bred her and educated her,to be loved. I developed her into what she is, that she might be loved. Loveher!”She said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt that she meant tosay it; but if the often repeated word had been hate instead oflove—despair—revenge—dire death—it could not havesounded from her lips more like a curse.“I’ll tell you,” said she, in the same hurried passionatewhisper, “what real love is. It is blind devotion, unquestioningself-humiliation, utter submission, trust and belief against yourself andagainst the whole world, giving up your whole heart and soul to thesmiter—as I did!”When she came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, I caught her roundthe waist. For she rose up in the chair, in her shroud of a dress, and struckat the air as if she would as soon have struck herself against the wall andfallen dead.All this passed in a few seconds. As I drew her down into her chair, I wasconscious of a scent that I knew, and turning, saw my guardian in the room.He always carried (I have not yet mentioned it, I think) a pocket-handkerchiefof rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to him inhis profession. I have seen him so terrify a client or a witness byceremoniously unfolding this pocket-handkerchief as if he were immediatelygoing to blow his nose, and then pausing, as if he knew he should not have timeto do it before such client or witness committed himself, that theself-committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course. When I sawhim in the room he had this expressive pocket-handkerchief in both hands, andwas looking at us. On meeting my eye, he said plainly, by a momentary andsilent pause in that attitude, “Indeed? Singular!” and then put thehandkerchief to its right use with wonderful effect.Miss Havisham had seen him as soon as I, and was (like everybody else) afraidof him. She made a strong attempt to compose herself, and stammered that he wasas punctual as ever.“As punctual as ever,” he repeated, coming up to us. “(How doyou do, Pip? Shall I give you a ride, Miss Havisham? Once round?) And so youare here, Pip?”I told him when I had arrived, and how Miss Havisham had wished me to come andsee Estella. To which he replied, “Ah! Very fine young lady!” Thenhe pushed Miss Havisham in her chair before him, with one of his large hands,and put the other in his trousers-pocket as if the pocket were full of secrets.“Well, Pip! How often have you seen Miss Estella before?” said he,when he came to a stop.“How often?”“Ah! How many times? Ten thousand times?”“Oh! Certainly not so many.”“Twice?”“Jaggers,” interposed Miss Havisham, much to my relief,“leave my Pip alone, and go with him to your dinner.”He complied, and we groped our way down the dark stairs together. While we werestill on our way to those detached apartments across the paved yard at theback, he asked me how often I had seen Miss Havisham eat and drink; offering mea breadth of choice, as usual, between a hundred times and once.I considered, and said, “Never.”“And never will, Pip,” he retorted, with a frowning smile.“She has never allowed herself to be seen doing either, since she livedthis present life of hers. She wanders about in the night, and then lays handson such food as she takes.”“Pray, sir,” said I, “may I ask you a question?”“You may,” said he, “and I may decline to answer it. Put yourquestion.”“Estella’s name. Is it Havisham or—?” I had nothing toadd.“Or what?” said he.“Is it Havisham?”“It is Havisham.”This brought us to the dinner-table, where she and Sarah Pocket awaited us. Mr.Jaggers presided, Estella sat opposite to him, I faced my green and yellowfriend. We dined very well, and were waited on by a maid-servant whom I hadnever seen in all my comings and goings, but who, for anything I know, had beenin that mysterious house the whole time. After dinner a bottle of choice oldport was placed before my guardian (he was evidently well acquainted with thevintage), and the two ladies left us.Anything to equal the determined reticence of Mr. Jaggers under that roof Inever saw elsewhere, even in him. He kept his very looks to himself, andscarcely directed his eyes to Estella’s face once during dinner. When shespoke to him, he listened, and in due course answered, but never looked at her,that I could see. On the other hand, she often looked at him, with interest andcuriosity, if not distrust, but his face never showed the least consciousness.Throughout dinner he took a dry delight in making Sarah Pocket greener andyellower, by often referring in conversation with me to my expectations; buthere, again, he showed no consciousness, and even made it appear that heextorted—and even did extort, though I don’t know how—thosereferences out of my innocent self.And when he and I were left alone together, he sat with an air upon him ofgeneral lying by in consequence of information he possessed, that really wastoo much for me. He cross-examined his very wine when he had nothing else inhand. He held it between himself and the candle, tasted the port, rolled it inhis mouth, swallowed it, looked at his glass again, smelt the port, tried it,drank it, filled again, and cross-examined the glass again, until I was asnervous as if I had known the wine to be telling him something to mydisadvantage. Three or four times I feebly thought I would start conversation;but whenever he saw me going to ask him anything, he looked at me with hisglass in his hand, and rolling his wine about in his mouth, as if requesting meto take notice that it was of no use, for he couldn’t answer.I think Miss Pocket was conscious that the sight of me involved her in thedanger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing off her cap,—whichwas a very hideous one, in the nature of a muslin mop,—and strewing theground with her hair,—which assuredly had never grown on her head.She did not appear when we afterwards went up to Miss Havisham’s room,and we four played at whist. In the interval, Miss Havisham, in a fantasticway, had put some of the most beautiful jewels from her dressing-table intoEstella’s hair, and about her bosom and arms; and I saw even my guardianlook at her from under his thick eyebrows, and raise them a little, when herloveliness was before him, with those rich flushes of glitter and colour in it. Of the manner and extent to which he took our trumps into custody, and came outwith mean little cards at the ends of hands, before which the glory of ourKings and Queens was utterly abased, I say nothing; nor, of the feeling that Ihad, respecting his looking upon us personally in the light of three veryobvious and poor riddles that he had found out long ago. What I suffered from,was the incompatibility between his cold presence and my feelings towardsEstella. It was not that I knew I could never bear to speak to him about her,that I knew I could never bear to hear him creak his boots at her, that I knewI could never bear to see him wash his hands of her; it was, that my admirationshould be within a foot or two of him,—it was, that my feelings should bein the same place with him,—that, was the agonizing circumstance.We played until nine o’clock, and then it was arranged that when Estellacame to London I should be forewarned of her coming and should meet her at thecoach; and then I took leave of her, and touched her and left her.My guardian lay at the Boar in the next room to mine. Far into the night, MissHavisham’s words, “Love her, love her, love her!” sounded inmy ears. I adapted them for my own repetition, and said to my pillow, “Ilove her, I love her, I love her!” hundreds of times. Then, a burst ofgratitude came upon me, that she should be destined for me, once theblacksmith’s boy. Then I thought if she were, as I feared, by no meansrapturously grateful for that destiny yet, when would she begin to beinterested in me? When should I awaken the heart within her that was mute andsleeping now?Ah me! I thought those were high and great emotions. But I never thought therewas anything low and small in my keeping away from Joe, because I knew shewould be contemptuous of him. It was but a day gone, and Joe had brought thetears into my eyes; they had soon dried, God forgive me! soon dried.Chapter XXX.Afterwell considering the matter while I was dressing at the Blue Boar in themorning, I resolved to tell my guardian that I doubted Orlick’s being theright sort of man to fill a post of trust at Miss Havisham’s. “Whyof course he is not the right sort of man, Pip,” said my guardian,comfortably satisfied beforehand on the general head, “because the manwho fills the post of trust never is the right sort of man.” It seemedquite to put him into spirits to find that this particular post was notexceptionally held by the right sort of man, and he listened in a satisfiedmanner while I told him what knowledge I had of Orlick. “Very good,Pip,” he observed, when I had concluded, “I’ll go roundpresently, and pay our friend off.” Rather alarmed by this summaryaction, I was for a little delay, and even hinted that our friend himself mightbe difficult to deal with. “Oh no he won’t,” said myguardian, making his pocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence;“I should like to see him argue the question with me.”As we were going back together to London by the midday coach, and as Ibreakfasted under such terrors of Pumblechook that I could scarcely hold mycup, this gave me an opportunity of saying that I wanted a walk, and that Iwould go on along the London road while Mr. Jaggers was occupied, if he wouldlet the coachman know that I would get into my place when overtaken. I was thusenabled to fly from the Blue Boar immediately after breakfast. By then making aloop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the back ofPumblechook’s premises, I got round into the High Street again, a littlebeyond that pitfall, and felt myself in comparative security.It was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it was notdisagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognised and stared after. One ortwo of the tradespeople even darted out of their shops and went a little waydown the street before me, that they might turn, as if they had forgottensomething, and pass me face to face,—on which occasions I don’tknow whether they or I made the worse pretence; they of not doing it, or I ofnot seeing it. Still my position was a distinguished one, and I was not at alldissatisfied with it, until Fate threw me in the way of that unlimitedmiscreant, Trabb’s boy.Casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my progress, I beheldTrabb’s boy approaching, lashing himself with an empty blue bag. Deemingthat a serene and unconscious contemplation of him would best beseem me, andwould be most likely to quell his evil mind, I advanced with that expression ofcountenance, and was rather congratulating myself on my success, when suddenlythe knees of Trabb’s boy smote together, his hair uprose, his cap felloff, he trembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road, andcrying to the populace, “Hold me! I’m so frightened!” feignedto be in a paroxysm of terror and contrition, occasioned by the dignity of myappearance. As I passed him, his teeth loudly chattered in his head, and withevery mark of extreme humiliation, he prostrated himself in the dust.This was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing. I had not advanced anothertwo hundred yards when, to my inexpressible terror, amazement, and indignation,I again beheld Trabb’s boy approaching. He was coming round a narrowcorner. His blue bag was slung over his shoulder, honest industry beamed in hiseyes, a determination to proceed to Trabb’s with cheerful briskness wasindicated in his gait. With a shock he became aware of me, and was severelyvisited as before; but this time his motion was rotatory, and he staggeredround and round me with knees more afflicted, and with uplifted hands as ifbeseeching for mercy. His sufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by aknot of spectators, and I felt utterly confounded.I had not got as much further down the street as the post-office, when I againbeheld Trabb’s boy shooting round by a back way. This time, he wasentirely changed. He wore the blue bag in the manner of my great-coat, and wasstrutting along the pavement towards me on the opposite side of the street,attended by a company of delighted young friends to whom he from time to timeexclaimed, with a wave of his hand, “Don’t know yah!” Wordscannot state the amount of aggravation and injury wreaked upon me byTrabb’s boy, when passing abreast of me, he pulled up his shirt-collar,twined his side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo, and smirked extravagantly by,wriggling his elbows and body, and drawling to his attendants,“Don’t know yah, don’t know yah, ’pon my souldon’t know yah!” The disgrace attendant on his immediatelyafterwards taking to crowing and pursuing me across the bridge with crows, asfrom an exceedingly dejected fowl who had known me when I was a blacksmith,culminated the disgrace with which I left the town, and was, so to speak,ejected by it into the open country. But unless I had taken the life of Trabb’s boy on that occasion, I reallydo not even now see what I could have done save endure. To have struggled withhim in the street, or to have exacted any lower recompense from him than hisheart’s best blood, would have been futile and degrading. Moreover, hewas a boy whom no man could hurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, whenchased into a corner, flew out again between his captor’s legs,scornfully yelping. I wrote, however, to Mr. Trabb by next day’s post, tosay that Mr. Pip must decline to deal further with one who could so far forgetwhat he owed to the best interests of society, as to employ a boy who excitedLoathing in every respectable mind.The coach, with Mr. Jaggers inside, came up in due time, and I took my box-seatagain, and arrived in London safe,—but not sound, for my heart was gone.As soon as I arrived, I sent a penitential codfish and barrel of oysters to Joe(as reparation for not having gone myself), and then went on to Barnard’sInn.I found Herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome me back. Havingdespatched The Avenger to the coffee-house for an addition to the dinner, Ifelt that I must open my breast that very evening to my friend and chum. Asconfidence was out of the question with The Avenger in the hall, which couldmerely be regarded in the light of an antechamber to the keyhole, I sent him tothe Play. A better proof of the severity of my bondage to that taskmaster couldscarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts to which I was constantlydriven to find him employment. So mean is extremity, that I sometimes sent himto Hyde Park corner to see what o’clock it was.Dinner done and we sitting with our feet upon the fender, I said to Herbert,“My dear Herbert, I have something very particular to tell you.”“My dear Handel,” he returned, “I shall esteem and respectyour confidence.”“It concerns myself, Herbert,” said I, “and one otherperson.”Herbert crossed his feet, looked at the fire with his head on one side, andhaving looked at it in vain for some time, looked at me because I didn’tgo on.“Herbert,” said I, laying my hand upon his knee, “Ilove—I adore—Estella.”Instead of being transfixed, Herbert replied in an easy matter-of-course way,“Exactly. Well?”“Well, Herbert? Is that all you say? Well?”“What next, I mean?” said Herbert. “Of course I knowthat.”“How do you know it?” said I.“How do I know it, Handel? Why, from you.”“I never told you.”“Told me! You have never told me when you have got your hair cut, but Ihave had senses to perceive it. You have always adored her, ever since I haveknown you. You brought your adoration and your portmanteau here together. Toldme! Why, you have always told me all day long. When you told me your own story,you told me plainly that you began adoring her the first time you saw her, whenyou were very young indeed.”“Very well, then,” said I, to whom this was a new and not unwelcomelight, “I have never left off adoring her. And she has come back, a mostbeautiful and most elegant creature. And I saw her yesterday. And if I adoredher before, I now doubly adore her.”“Lucky for you then, Handel,” said Herbert, “that you arepicked out for her and allotted to her. Without encroaching on forbiddenground, we may venture to say that there can be no doubt between ourselves ofthat fact. Have you any idea yet, of Estella’s views on the adorationquestion?”I shook my head gloomily. “Oh! She is thousands of miles away, fromme,” said I.“Patience, my dear Handel: time enough, time enough. But you havesomething more to say?”“I am ashamed to say it,” I returned, “and yet it’s noworse to say it than to think it. You call me a lucky fellow. Of course, I am.I was a blacksmith’s boy but yesterday; I am—what shall I say Iam—to-day?”“Say a good fellow, if you want a phrase,” returned Herbert,smiling, and clapping his hand on the back of mine—“a good fellow,with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and diffidence, action and dreaming,curiously mixed in him.”I stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this mixture in mycharacter. On the whole, I by no means recognised the analysis, but thought itnot worth disputing.“When I ask what I am to call myself to-day, Herbert,” I went on,“I suggest what I have in my thoughts. You say I am lucky. I know I havedone nothing to raise myself in life, and that Fortune alone has raised me;that is being very lucky. And yet, when I think of Estella—”(“And when don’t you, you know?” Herbert threw in, with hiseyes on the fire; which I thought kind and sympathetic of him.)“—Then, my dear Herbert, I cannot tell you how dependent anduncertain I feel, and how exposed to hundreds of chances. Avoiding forbiddenground, as you did just now, I may still say that on the constancy of oneperson (naming no person) all my expectations depend. And at the best, howindefinite and unsatisfactory, only to know so vaguely what they are!” Insaying this, I relieved my mind of what had always been there, more or less,though no doubt most since yesterday.“Now, Handel,” Herbert replied, in his gay, hopeful way, “itseems to me that in the despondency of the tender passion, we are looking intoour gift-horse’s mouth with a magnifying-glass. Likewise, it seems to methat, concentrating our attention on the examination, we altogether overlookone of the best points of the animal. Didn’t you tell me that yourguardian, Mr. Jaggers, told you in the beginning, that you were not endowedwith expectations only? And even if he had not told you so,—though thatis a very large If, I grant,—could you believe that of all men in London,Mr. Jaggers is the man to hold his present relations towards you unless he weresure of his ground?”I said I could not deny that this was a strong point. I said it (people oftendo so, in such cases) like a rather reluctant concession to truth andjustice;—as if I wanted to deny it!“I should think it was a strong point,” said Herbert,“and I should think you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to therest, you must bide your guardian’s time, and he must bide hisclient’s time. You’ll be one-and-twenty before you know where youare, and then perhaps you’ll get some further enlightenment. At allevents, you’ll be nearer getting it, for it must come at last.”“What a hopeful disposition you have!” said I, gratefully admiringhis cheery ways.“I ought to have,” said Herbert, “for I have not much else. Imust acknowledge, by the by, that the good sense of what I have just said isnot my own, but my father’s. The only remark I ever heard him make onyour story, was the final one, “The thing is settled and done, or Mr.Jaggers would not be in it.” And now before I say anything more about myfather, or my father’s son, and repay confidence with confidence, I wantto make myself seriously disagreeable to you for a moment,—positivelyrepulsive.”“You won’t succeed,” said I.“O yes I shall!” said he. “One, two, three, and now I am infor it. Handel, my good fellow;”—though he spoke in this lighttone, he was very much in earnest,—“I have been thinking since wehave been talking with our feet on this fender, that Estella surely cannot be acondition of your inheritance, if she was never referred to by your guardian.Am I right in so understanding what you have told me, as that he never referredto her, directly or indirectly, in any way? Never even hinted, for instance,that your patron might have views as to your marriage ultimately?”“Never.”“Now, Handel, I am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes, upon mysoul and honour! Not being bound to her, can you not detach yourself fromher?—I told you I should be disagreeable.”I turned my head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the old marsh windscoming up from the sea, a feeling like that which had subdued me on the morningwhen I left the forge, when the mists were solemnly rising, and when I laid myhand upon the village finger-post, smote upon my heart again. There was silencebetween us for a little while.“Yes; but my dear Handel,” Herbert went on, as if we had beentalking, instead of silent, “its having been so strongly rooted in thebreast of a boy whom nature and circumstances made so romantic, renders it veryserious. Think of her bringing-up, and think of Miss Havisham. Think of whatshe is herself (now I am repulsive and you abominate me). This may lead tomiserable things.”“I know it, Herbert,” said I, with my head still turned away,“but I can’t help it.”“You can’t detach yourself?”“No. Impossible!”“You can’t try, Handel?”“No. Impossible!”“Well!” said Herbert, getting up with a lively shake as if he hadbeen asleep, and stirring the fire, “now I’ll endeavour to makemyself agreeable again!”So he went round the room and shook the curtains out, put the chairs in theirplaces, tidied the books and so forth that were lying about, looked into thehall, peeped into the letter-box, shut the door, and came back to his chair bythe fire: where he sat down, nursing his left leg in both arms.“I was going to say a word or two, Handel, concerning my father and myfather’s son. I am afraid it is scarcely necessary for my father’sson to remark that my father’s establishment is not particularlybrilliant in its housekeeping.”“There is always plenty, Herbert,” said I, to say somethingencouraging.“O yes! and so the dustman says, I believe, with the strongest approval,and so does the marine-store shop in the back street. Gravely, Handel, for thesubject is grave enough, you know how it is as well as I do. I suppose therewas a time once when my father had not given matters up; but if ever there was,the time is gone. May I ask you if you have ever had an opportunity ofremarking, down in your part of the country, that the children of not exactlysuitable marriages are always most particularly anxious to be married?”This was such a singular question, that I asked him in return, “Is itso?”“I don’t know,” said Herbert, “that’s what I wantto know. Because it is decidedly the case with us. My poor sister Charlotte,who was next me and died before she was fourteen, was a striking example.Little Jane is the same. In her desire to be matrimonially established, youmight suppose her to have passed her short existence in the perpetualcontemplation of domestic bliss. Little Alick in a frock has already madearrangements for his union with a suitable young person at Kew. And indeed, Ithink we are all engaged, except the baby.”“Then you are?” said I.“I am,” said Herbert; “but it’s a secret.”I assured him of my keeping the secret, and begged to be favoured with furtherparticulars. He had spoken so sensibly and feelingly of my weakness that Iwanted to know something about his strength.“May I ask the name?” I said.“Name of Clara,” said Herbert.“Live in London?”“Yes, perhaps I ought to mention,” said Herbert, who had becomecuriously crestfallen and meek, since we entered on the interesting theme,“that she is rather below my mother’s nonsensical family notions.Her father had to do with the victualling of passenger-ships. I think he was aspecies of purser.”“What is he now?” said I.“He’s an invalid now,” replied Herbert.“Living on—?”“On the first floor,” said Herbert. Which was not at all what Imeant, for I had intended my question to apply to his means. “I havenever seen him, for he has always kept his room overhead, since I have knownClara. But I have heard him constantly. He makes tremendous rows,—roars,and pegs at the floor with some frightful instrument.” In looking at meand then laughing heartily, Herbert for the time recovered his usual livelymanner.“Don’t you expect to see him?” said I.“O yes, I constantly expect to see him,” returned Herbert,“because I never hear him, without expecting him to come tumbling throughthe ceiling. But I don’t know how long the rafters may hold.”When he had once more laughed heartily, he became meek again, and told me thatthe moment he began to realise Capital, it was his intention to marry thisyoung lady. He added as a self-evident proposition, engendering low spirits,“But you can’t marry, you know, while you’re lookingabout you.”As we contemplated the fire, and as I thought what a difficult vision torealise this same Capital sometimes was, I put my hands in my pockets. A foldedpiece of paper in one of them attracting my attention, I opened it and found itto be the play-bill I had received from Joe, relative to the celebratedprovincial amateur of Roscian renown. “And bless my heart,” Iinvoluntarily added aloud, “it’s to-night!”This changed the subject in an instant, and made us hurriedly resolve to go tothe play. So, when I had pledged myself to comfort and abet Herbert in theaffair of his heart by all practicable and impracticable means, and whenHerbert had told me that his affianced already knew me by reputation and that Ishould be presented to her, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon our mutualconfidence, we blew out our candles, made up our fire, locked our door, andissued forth in quest of Mr. Wopsle and Denmark.Chapter XXXI.On ourarrival in Denmark, we found the king and queen of that country elevated in twoarm-chairs on a kitchen-table, holding a Court. The whole of the Danishnobility were in attendance; consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leatherboots of a gigantic ancestor, a venerable Peer with a dirty face who seemed tohave risen from the people late in life, and the Danish chivalry with a comb inits hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting on the whole a feminineappearance. My gifted townsman stood gloomily apart, with folded arms, and Icould have wished that his curls and forehead had been more probable.Several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded. Thelate king of the country not only appeared to have been troubled with a coughat the time of his decease, but to have taken it with him to the tomb, and tohave brought it back. The royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript roundits truncheon, to which it had the appearance of occasionally referring, andthat too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of referencewhich were suggestive of a state of mortality. It was this, I conceive, whichled to the Shade’s being advised by the gallery to “turnover!”—a recommendation which it took extremely ill. It waslikewise to be noted of this majestic spirit, that whereas it always appearedwith an air of having been out a long time and walked an immense distance, itperceptibly came from a closely contiguous wall. This occasioned its terrors tobe received derisively. The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though nodoubt historically brazen, was considered by the public to have too much brassabout her; her chin being attached to her diadem by a broad band of that metal(as if she had a gorgeous toothache), her waist being encircled by another, andeach of her arms by another, so that she was openly mentioned as “thekettle-drum.” The noble boy in the ancestral boots was inconsistent,representing himself, as it were in one breath, as an able seaman, a strollingactor, a grave-digger, a clergyman, and a person of the utmost importance at aCourt fencing-match, on the authority of whose practised eye and nicediscrimination the finest strokes were judged. This gradually led to a want oftoleration for him, and even—on his being detected in holy orders, anddeclining to perform the funeral service—to the general indignationtaking the form of nuts. Lastly, Ophelia was a prey to such slow musicalmadness, that when, in course of time, she had taken off her white muslinscarf, folded it up, and buried it, a sulky man who had been long cooling hisimpatient nose against an iron bar in the front row of the gallery, growled,“Now the baby’s put to bed let’s have supper!” Which,to say the least of it, was out of keeping.Upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated with playfuleffect. Whenever that undecided Prince had to ask a question or state a doubt,the public helped him out with it. As for example; on the question whether’twas nobler in the mind to suffer, some roared yes, and some no, andsome inclining to both opinions said “Toss up for it;” and quite aDebating Society arose. When he asked what should such fellows as he docrawling between earth and heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of“Hear, hear!” When he appeared with his stocking disordered (itsdisorder expressed, according to usage, by one very neat fold in the top, whichI suppose to be always got up with a flat iron), a conversation took place inthe gallery respecting the paleness of his leg, and whether it was occasionedby the turn the ghost had given him. On his taking the recorders,—verylike a little black flute that had just been played in the orchestra and handedout at the door,—he was called upon unanimously for Rule Britannia. Whenhe recommended the player not to saw the air thus, the sulky man said,“And don’t you do it, neither; you’re a deal worsethan him!” And I grieve to add that peals of laughter greeted Mr.Wopsle on every one of these occasions.But his greatest trials were in the churchyard, which had the appearance of aprimeval forest, with a kind of small ecclesiastical wash-house on one side,and a turnpike gate on the other. Mr. Wopsle in a comprehensive black cloak,being descried entering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in afriendly way, “Look out! Here’s the undertaker a coming, to see howyou’re a getting on with your work!” I believe it is well known ina constitutional country that Mr. Wopsle could not possibly have returned theskull, after moralizing over it, without dusting his fingers on a white napkintaken from his breast; but even that innocent and indispensable action did notpass without the comment, “Wai-ter!” The arrival of the body forinterment (in an empty black box with the lid tumbling open), was the signalfor a general joy, which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers,of an individual obnoxious to identification. The joy attended Mr. Wopslethrough his struggle with Laertes on the brink of the orchestra and the grave,and slackened no more until he had tumbled the king off the kitchen-table, andhad died by inches from the ankles upward.We had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud Mr. Wopsle; but theywere too hopeless to be persisted in. Therefore we had sat, feeling keenly forhim, but laughing, nevertheless, from ear to ear. I laughed in spite of myselfall the time, the whole thing was so droll; and yet I had a latent impressionthat there was something decidedly fine in Mr. Wopsle’selocution,—not for old associations’ sake, I am afraid, but becauseit was very slow, very dreary, very uphill and downhill, and very unlike anyway in which any man in any natural circumstances of life or death everexpressed himself about anything. When the tragedy was over, and he had beencalled for and hooted, I said to Herbert, “Let us go at once, or perhapswe shall meet him.”We made all the haste we could downstairs, but we were not quick enough either.Standing at the door was a Jewish man with an unnatural heavy smear of eyebrow,who caught my eyes as we advanced, and said, when we came up with him,—“Mr. Pip and friend?”Identity of Mr. Pip and friend confessed.“Mr. Waldengarver,” said the man, “would be glad to have thehonour.”“Waldengarver?” I repeated—when Herbert murmured in my ear,“Probably Wopsle.”“Oh!” said I. “Yes. Shall we follow you?”“A few steps, please.” When we were in a side alley, he turned andasked, “How did you think he looked?—I dressed him.”I don’t know what he had looked like, except a funeral; with the additionof a large Danish sun or star hanging round his neck by a blue ribbon, that hadgiven him the appearance of being insured in some extraordinary Fire Office.But I said he had looked very nice.“When he come to the grave,” said our conductor, “he showedhis cloak beautiful. But, judging from the wing, it looked to me that when hesee the ghost in the queen’s apartment, he might have made more of hisstockings.”I modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swing door, into asort of hot packing-case immediately behind it. Here Mr. Wopsle was divestinghimself of his Danish garments, and here there was just room for us to look athim over one another’s shoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, orlid, wide open.“Gentlemen,” said Mr. Wopsle, “I am proud to see you. I hope,Mr. Pip, you will excuse my sending round. I had the happiness to know you informer times, and the Drama has ever had a claim which has ever beenacknowledged, on the noble and the affluent.”Meanwhile, Mr. Waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying to gethimself out of his princely sables.“Skin the stockings off Mr. Waldengarver,” said the owner of thatproperty, “or you’ll bust ’em. Bust ’em, andyou’ll bust five-and-thirty shillings. Shakspeare never was complimentedwith a finer pair. Keep quiet in your chair now, and leave ’em tome.”With that, he went upon his knees, and began to flay his victim; who, on thefirst stocking coming off, would certainly have fallen over backward with hischair, but for there being no room to fall anyhow.I had been afraid until then to say a word about the play. But then, Mr.Waldengarver looked up at us complacently, and said,—“Gentlemen, how did it seem to you, to go, in front?”Herbert said from behind (at the same time poking me), “Capitally.”So I said “Capitally.”“How did you like my reading of the character, gentlemen?” said Mr.Waldengarver, almost, if not quite, with patronage.Herbert said from behind (again poking me), “Massive and concrete.”So I said boldly, as if I had originated it, and must beg to insist upon it,“Massive and concrete.”“I am glad to have your approbation, gentlemen,” said Mr.Waldengarver, with an air of dignity, in spite of his being ground against thewall at the time, and holding on by the seat of the chair.“But I’ll tell you one thing, Mr. Waldengarver,” said the manwho was on his knees, “in which you’re out in your reading. Nowmind! I don’t care who says contrairy; I tell you so. You’re out inyour reading of Hamlet when you get your legs in profile. The last Hamlet as Idressed, made the same mistakes in his reading at rehearsal, till I got him toput a large red wafer on each of his shins, and then at that rehearsal (whichwas the last) I went in front, sir, to the back of the pit, and whenever hisreading brought him into profile, I called out “I don’t see nowafers!” And at night his reading was lovely.”Mr. Waldengarver smiled at me, as much as to say “a faithfulDependent—I overlook his folly;” and then said aloud, “Myview is a little classic and thoughtful for them here; but they will improve,they will improve.”Herbert and I said together, O, no doubt they would improve.“Did you observe, gentlemen,” said Mr. Waldengarver, “thatthere was a man in the gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on theservice,—I mean, the representation?”We basely replied that we rather thought we had noticed such a man. I added,“He was drunk, no doubt.”“O dear no, sir,” said Mr. Wopsle, “not drunk. His employerwould see to that, sir. His employer would not allow him to be drunk.”“You know his employer?” said I.Mr. Wopsle shut his eyes, and opened them again; performing both ceremoniesvery slowly. “You must have observed, gentlemen,” said he,“an ignorant and a blatant ass, with a rasping throat and a countenanceexpressive of low malignity, who went through—I will not saysustained—the rôle (if I may use a French expression) of Claudius, Kingof Denmark. That is his employer, gentlemen. Such is the profession!”Without distinctly knowing whether I should have been more sorry for Mr. Wopsleif he had been in despair, I was so sorry for him as it was, that I took theopportunity of his turning round to have his braces put on,—which jostledus out at the doorway,—to ask Herbert what he thought of having him hometo supper? Herbert said he thought it would be kind to do so; therefore Iinvited him, and he went to Barnard’s with us, wrapped up to the eyes,and we did our best for him, and he sat until two o’clock in the morning,reviewing his success and developing his plans. I forget in detail what theywere, but I have a general recollection that he was to begin with reviving theDrama, and to end with crushing it; inasmuch as his decease would leave itutterly bereft and without a chance or hope.Miserably I went to bed after all, and miserably thought of Estella, andmiserably dreamed that my expectations were all cancelled, and that I had togive my hand in marriage to Herbert’s Clara, or play Hamlet to MissHavisham’s Ghost, before twenty thousand people, without knowing twentywords of it.Chapter XXXII.Oneday when I was busy with my books and Mr. Pocket, I received a note by thepost, the mere outside of which threw me into a great flutter; for, though Ihad never seen the handwriting in which it was addressed, I divined whose handit was. It had no set beginning, as Dear Mr. Pip, or Dear Pip, or Dear Sir, orDear Anything, but ran thus:—“I am to come to London the day after to-morrow by the midday coach. Ibelieve it was settled you should meet me? At all events Miss Havisham has thatimpression, and I write in obedience to it. She sends you her regard.“Yours, ESTELLA.”If there had been time, I should probably have ordered several suits of clothesfor this occasion; but as there was not, I was fain to be content with those Ihad. My appetite vanished instantly, and I knew no peace or rest until the dayarrived. Not that its arrival brought me either; for, then I was worse thanever, and began haunting the coach-office in Wood Street, Cheapside, before thecoach had left the Blue Boar in our town. For all that I knew this perfectlywell, I still felt as if it were not safe to let the coach-office be out of mysight longer than five minutes at a time; and in this condition of unreason Ihad performed the first half-hour of a watch of four or five hours, whenWemmick ran against me.“Halloa, Mr. Pip,” said he; “how do you do? I should hardlyhave thought this was your beat.”I explained that I was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up by coach, andI inquired after the Castle and the Aged.“Both flourishing thankye,” said Wemmick, “and particularlythe Aged. He’s in wonderful feather. He’ll be eighty-two nextbirthday. I have a notion of firing eighty-two times, if the neighbourhoodshouldn’t complain, and that cannon of mine should prove equal to thepressure. However, this is not London talk. Where do you think I am goingto?”“To the office?” said I, for he was tending in that direction.“Next thing to it,” returned Wemmick, “I am going to Newgate.We are in a banker’s-parcel case just at present, and I have been downthe road taking a squint at the scene of action, and thereupon must have a wordor two with our client.”“Did your client commit the robbery?” I asked.“Bless your soul and body, no,” answered Wemmick, very drily.“But he is accused of it. So might you or I be. Either of us might beaccused of it, you know.”“Only neither of us is,” I remarked.“Yah!” said Wemmick, touching me on the breast with his forefinger;“you’re a deep one, Mr. Pip! Would you like to have a look atNewgate? Have you time to spare?”I had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief,notwithstanding its irreconcilability with my latent desire to keep my eye onthe coach-office. Muttering that I would make the inquiry whether I had time towalk with him, I went into the office, and ascertained from the clerk with thenicest precision and much to the trying of his temper, the earliest moment atwhich the coach could be expected,—which I knew beforehand, quite as wellas he. I then rejoined Mr. Wemmick, and affecting to consult my watch, and tobe surprised by the information I had received, accepted his offer.We were at Newgate in a few minutes, and we passed through the lodge where somefetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prison rules, into theinterior of the jail. At that time jails were much neglected, and the period ofexaggerated reaction consequent on all public wrongdoing—and which isalways its heaviest and longest punishment—was still far off. So, felonswere not lodged and fed better than soldiers (to say nothing of paupers), andseldom set fire to their prisons with the excusable object of improving theflavour of their soup. It was visiting time when Wemmick took me in, and apotman was going his rounds with beer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards,were buying beer, and talking to friends; and a frowzy, ugly, disorderly,depressing scene it was.It struck me that Wemmick walked among the prisoners much as a gardener mightwalk among his plants. This was first put into my head by his seeing a shootthat had come up in the night, and saying, “What, Captain Tom? Areyou there? Ah, indeed!” and also, “Is that Black Bill behindthe cistern? Why I didn’t look for you these two months; how do you findyourself?” Equally in his stopping at the bars and attending to anxiouswhisperers,—always singly,—Wemmick with his post-office in animmovable state, looked at them while in conference, as if he were takingparticular notice of the advance they had made, since last observed, towardscoming out in full blow at their trial.He was highly popular, and I found that he took the familiar department of Mr.Jaggers’s business; though something of the state of Mr. Jaggers hungabout him too, forbidding approach beyond certain limits. His personalrecognition of each successive client was comprised in a nod, and in hissettling his hat a little easier on his head with both hands, and thentightening the post-office, and putting his hands in his pockets. In one or twoinstances there was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then Mr.Wemmick, backing as far as possible from the insufficient money produced, said,“it’s no use, my boy. I’m only a subordinate. I can’ttake it. Don’t go on in that way with a subordinate. If you are unable tomake up your quantum, my boy, you had better address yourself to a principal;there are plenty of principals in the profession, you know, and what is notworth the while of one, may be worth the while of another; that’s myrecommendation to you, speaking as a subordinate. Don’t try on uselessmeasures. Why should you? Now, who’s next?”Thus, we walked through Wemmick’s greenhouse, until he turned to me andsaid, “Notice the man I shall shake hands with.” I should have doneso, without the preparation, as he had shaken hands with no one yet.Almost as soon as he had spoken, a portly upright man (whom I can see now, as Iwrite) in a well-worn olive-coloured frock-coat, with a peculiar palloroverspreading the red in his complexion, and eyes that went wandering aboutwhen he tried to fix them, came up to a corner of the bars, and put his hand tohis hat—which had a greasy and fatty surface like cold broth—with ahalf-serious and half-jocose military salute.“Colonel, to you!” said Wemmick; “how are you,Colonel?”“All right, Mr. Wemmick.”“Everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was too strongfor us, Colonel.”“Yes, it was too strong, sir,—but I don’t care.”“No, no,” said Wemmick, coolly, “you don’tcare.” Then, turning to me, “Served His Majesty this man. Was asoldier in the line and bought his discharge.”I said, “Indeed?” and the man’s eyes looked at me, and thenlooked over my head, and then looked all round me, and then he drew his handacross his lips and laughed.“I think I shall be out of this on Monday, sir,” he said toWemmick.“Perhaps,” returned my friend, “but there’s noknowing.”“I am glad to have the chance of bidding you good-bye, Mr.Wemmick,” said the man, stretching out his hand between two bars.“Thankye,” said Wemmick, shaking hands with him. “Same toyou, Colonel.”“If what I had upon me when taken had been real, Mr. Wemmick,” saidthe man, unwilling to let his hand go, “I should have asked the favour ofyour wearing another ring—in acknowledgment of your attentions.”“I’ll accept the will for the deed,” said Wemmick. “Bythe by; you were quite a pigeon-fancier.” The man looked up at the sky.“I am told you had a remarkable breed of tumblers. Could youcommission any friend of yours to bring me a pair, if you’ve no furtheruse for ’em?”“It shall be done, sir.”“All right,” said Wemmick, “they shall be taken care of.Good-afternoon, Colonel. Good-bye!” They shook hands again, and as wewalked away Wemmick said to me, “A Coiner, a very good workman. TheRecorder’s report is made to-day, and he is sure to be executed onMonday. Still you see, as far as it goes, a pair of pigeons are portableproperty all the same.” With that, he looked back, and nodded at thisdead plant, and then cast his eyes about him in walking out of the yard, as ifhe were considering what other pot would go best in its place.As we came out of the prison through the lodge, I found that the greatimportance of my guardian was appreciated by the turnkeys, no less than bythose whom they held in charge. “Well, Mr. Wemmick,” said theturnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and whocarefully locked one before he unlocked the other, “what’s Mr.Jaggers going to do with that water-side murder? Is he going to make itmanslaughter, or what’s he going to make of it?”“Why don’t you ask him?” returned Wemmick.“O yes, I dare say!” said the turnkey.“Now, that’s the way with them here, Mr. Pip,” remarkedWemmick, turning to me with his post-office elongated. “They don’tmind what they ask of me, the subordinate; but you’ll never catch’em asking any questions of my principal.”“Is this young gentleman one of the ’prentices or articled ones ofyour office?” asked the turnkey, with a grin at Mr. Wemmick’shumour.“There he goes again, you see!” cried Wemmick, “I told youso! Asks another question of the subordinate before his first is dry! Well,supposing Mr. Pip is one of them?”“Why then,” said the turnkey, grinning again, “he knows whatMr. Jaggers is.”“Yah!” cried Wemmick, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in afacetious way, “you’re dumb as one of your own keys when you haveto do with my principal, you know you are. Let us out, you old fox, orI’ll get him to bring an action against you for falseimprisonment.”The turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at us over thespikes of the wicket when we descended the steps into the street.“Mind you, Mr. Pip,” said Wemmick, gravely in my ear, as he took myarm to be more confidential; “I don’t know that Mr. Jaggers does abetter thing than the way in which he keeps himself so high. He’s alwaysso high. His constant height is of a piece with his immense abilities. ThatColonel durst no more take leave of him, than that turnkey durst ask himhis intentions respecting a case. Then, between his height and them, he slipsin his subordinate,—don’t you see?—and so he has ’em,soul and body.”I was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by my guardian’ssubtlety. To confess the truth, I very heartily wished, and not for the firsttime, that I had had some other guardian of minor abilities.Mr. Wemmick and I parted at the office in Little Britain, where suppliants forMr. Jaggers’s notice were lingering about as usual, and I returned to mywatch in the street of the coach-office, with some three hours on hand. Iconsumed the whole time in thinking how strange it was that I should beencompassed by all this taint of prison and crime; that, in my childhood out onour lonely marshes on a winter evening, I should have first encountered it;that, it should have reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stainthat was faded but not gone; that, it should in this new way pervade my fortuneand advancement. While my mind was thus engaged, I thought of the beautifulyoung Estella, proud and refined, coming towards me, and I thought withabsolute abhorrence of the contrast between the jail and her. I wished thatWemmick had not met me, or that I had not yielded to him and gone with him, sothat, of all days in the year on this day, I might not have had Newgate in mybreath and on my clothes. I beat the prison dust off my feet as I sauntered toand fro, and I shook it out of my dress, and I exhaled its air from my lungs.So contaminated did I feel, remembering who was coming, that the coach camequickly after all, and I was not yet free from the soiling consciousness of Mr.Wemmick’s conservatory, when I saw her face at the coach window and herhand waving to me.What was the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had passed?Chapter XXXIII.In herfurred travelling-dress, Estella seemed more delicately beautiful than she hadever seemed yet, even in my eyes. Her manner was more winning than she hadcared to let it be to me before, and I thought I saw Miss Havisham’sinfluence in the change.We stood in the Inn Yard while she pointed out her luggage to me, and when itwas all collected I remembered—having forgotten everything but herself inthe meanwhile—that I knew nothing of her destination.“I am going to Richmond,” she told me. “Our lesson is, thatthere are two Richmonds, one in Surrey and one in Yorkshire, and that mine isthe Surrey Richmond. The distance is ten miles. I am to have a carriage, andyou are to take me. This is my purse, and you are to pay my charges out of it.O, you must take the purse! We have no choice, you and I, but to obey ourinstructions. We are not free to follow our own devices, you and I.”As she looked at me in giving me the purse, I hoped there was an inner meaningin her words. She said them slightingly, but not with displeasure.“A carriage will have to be sent for, Estella. Will you rest here alittle?”“Yes, I am to rest here a little, and I am to drink some tea, and you areto take care of me the while.”She drew her arm through mine, as if it must be done, and I requested a waiterwho had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing inhis life, to show us a private sitting-room. Upon that, he pulled out a napkin,as if it were a magic clue without which he couldn’t find the wayupstairs, and led us to the black hole of the establishment, fitted up with adiminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article, considering the hole’sproportions), an anchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody’s pattens. On myobjecting to this retreat, he took us into another room with a dinner-table forthirty, and in the grate a scorched leaf of a copy-book under a bushel ofcoal-dust. Having looked at this extinct conflagration and shaken his head, hetook my order; which, proving to be merely, “Some tea for thelady,” sent him out of the room in a very low state of mind.I was, and I am, sensible that the air of this chamber, in its strongcombination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one to infer that thecoaching department was not doing well, and that the enterprising proprietorwas boiling down the horses for the refreshment department. Yet the room wasall in all to me, Estella being in it. I thought that with her I could havebeen happy there for life. (I was not at all happy there at the time, observe,and I knew it well.)“Where are you going to, at Richmond?” I asked Estella.“I am going to live,” said she, “at a great expense, with alady there, who has the power—or says she has—of taking me about,and introducing me, and showing people to me and showing me to people.”“I suppose you will be glad of variety and admiration?”“Yes, I suppose so.”She answered so carelessly, that I said, “You speak of yourself as if youwere some one else.”“Where did you learn how I speak of others? Come, come,” saidEstella, smiling delightfully, “you must not expect me to go to school toyou; I must talk in my own way. How do you thrive with Mr.Pocket?”“I live quite pleasantly there; at least—” It appeared to methat I was losing a chance.“At least?” repeated Estella.“As pleasantly as I could anywhere, away from you.”“You silly boy,” said Estella, quite composedly, “how can youtalk such nonsense? Your friend Mr. Matthew, I believe, is superior to the restof his family?”“Very superior indeed. He is nobody’s enemy—”“Don’t add but his own,” interposed Estella, “for Ihate that class of man. But he really is disinterested, and above smalljealousy and spite, I have heard?”“I am sure I have every reason to say so.”“You have not every reason to say so of the rest of his people,”said Estella, nodding at me with an expression of face that was at once graveand rallying, “for they beset Miss Havisham with reports and insinuationsto your disadvantage. They watch you, misrepresent you, write letters about you(anonymous sometimes), and you are the torment and the occupation of theirlives. You can scarcely realise to yourself the hatred those people feel foryou.”“They do me no harm, I hope?”Instead of answering, Estella burst out laughing. This was very singular to me,and I looked at her in considerable perplexity. When she left off—and shehad not laughed languidly, but with real enjoyment—I said, in mydiffident way with her,—“I hope I may suppose that you would not be amused if they did me anyharm.”“No, no you may be sure of that,” said Estella. “You may becertain that I laugh because they fail. O, those people with Miss Havisham, andthe tortures they undergo!” She laughed again, and even now when she hadtold me why, her laughter was very singular to me, for I could not doubt itsbeing genuine, and yet it seemed too much for the occasion. I thought theremust really be something more here than I knew; she saw the thought in my mind,and answered it.“It is not easy for even you.” said Estella, “to know whatsatisfaction it gives me to see those people thwarted, or what an enjoyablesense of the ridiculous I have when they are made ridiculous. For you were notbrought up in that strange house from a mere baby. I was. You had not yourlittle wits sharpened by their intriguing against you, suppressed anddefenceless, under the mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft andsoothing. I had. You did not gradually open your round childish eyes wider andwider to the discovery of that impostor of a woman who calculates her stores ofpeace of mind for when she wakes up in the night. I did.”It was no laughing matter with Estella now, nor was she summoning theseremembrances from any shallow place. I would not have been the cause of thatlook of hers for all my expectations in a heap.“Two things I can tell you,” said Estella. “First,notwithstanding the proverb that constant dropping will wear away a stone, youmay set your mind at rest that these people never will—never would in ahundred years—impair your ground with Miss Havisham, in any particular,great or small. Second, I am beholden to you as the cause of their being sobusy and so mean in vain, and there is my hand upon it.”As she gave it to me playfully,—for her darker mood had been butmomentary—I held it and put it to my lips. “You ridiculousboy,” said Estella, “will you never take warning? Or do you kiss myhand in the same spirit in which I once let you kiss my cheek?”“What spirit was that?” said I.“I must think a moment. A spirit of contempt for the fawners andplotters.”“If I say yes, may I kiss the cheek again?”“You should have asked before you touched the hand. But, yes, if youlike.”I leaned down, and her calm face was like a statue’s. “Now,”said Estella, gliding away the instant I touched her cheek, “you are totake care that I have some tea, and you are to take me to Richmond.”Her reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon us, and wewere mere puppets, gave me pain; but everything in our intercourse did give mepain. Whatever her tone with me happened to be, I could put no trust in it, andbuild no hope on it; and yet I went on against trust and against hope. Whyrepeat it a thousand times? So it always was.I rang for the tea, and the waiter, reappearing with his magic clue, brought inby degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment, but of tea not a glimpse. Ateaboard, cups and saucers, plates, knives and forks (including carvers),spoons (various), salt-cellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmostprecaution under a strong iron cover, Moses in the bulrushes typified by a softbit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a pale loaf with a powdered head, twoproof impressions of the bars of the kitchen fireplace on triangular bits ofbread, and ultimately a fat family urn; which the waiter staggered in with,expressing in his countenance burden and suffering. After a prolonged absenceat this stage of the entertainment, he at length came back with a casket ofprecious appearance containing twigs. These I steeped in hot water, and so fromthe whole of these appliances extracted one cup of I don’t know what forEstella.The bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler not forgotten, and thechambermaid taken into consideration,—in a word, the whole house bribedinto a state of contempt and animosity, and Estella’s purse muchlightened,—we got into our post-coach and drove away. Turning intoCheapside and rattling up Newgate Street, we were soon under the walls of whichI was so ashamed.“What place is that?” Estella asked me.I made a foolish pretence of not at first recognising it, and then told her. Asshe looked at it, and drew in her head again, murmuring,“Wretches!” I would not have confessed to my visit for anyconsideration.“Mr. Jaggers,” said I, by way of putting it neatly on somebodyelse, “has the reputation of being more in the secrets of that dismalplace than any man in London.”“He is more in the secrets of every place, I think,” said Estella,in a low voice.“You have been accustomed to see him often, I suppose?”“I have been accustomed to see him at uncertain intervals, ever since Ican remember. But I know him no better now, than I did before I could speakplainly. What is your own experience of him? Do you advance with him?”“Once habituated to his distrustful manner,” said I, “I havedone very well.”“Are you intimate?”“I have dined with him at his private house.”“I fancy,” said Estella, shrinking “that must be a curiousplace.”“It is a curious place.”I should have been chary of discussing my guardian too freely even with her;but I should have gone on with the subject so far as to describe the dinner inGerrard Street, if we had not then come into a sudden glare of gas. It seemed,while it lasted, to be all alight and alive with that inexplicable feeling Ihad had before; and when we were out of it, I was as much dazed for a fewmoments as if I had been in lightning.So we fell into other talk, and it was principally about the way by which wewere travelling, and about what parts of London lay on this side of it, andwhat on that. The great city was almost new to her, she told me, for she hadnever left Miss Havisham’s neighbourhood until she had gone to France,and she had merely passed through London then in going and returning. I askedher if my guardian had any charge of her while she remained here? To that sheemphatically said “God forbid!” and no more.It was impossible for me to avoid seeing that she cared to attract me; that shemade herself winning, and would have won me even if the task had needed pains.Yet this made me none the happier, for even if she had not taken that tone ofour being disposed of by others, I should have felt that she held my heart inher hand because she wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would havewrung any tenderness in her to crush it and throw it away.When we passed through Hammersmith, I showed her where Mr. Matthew Pocketlived, and said it was no great way from Richmond, and that I hoped I shouldsee her sometimes.“O yes, you are to see me; you are to come when you think proper; you areto be mentioned to the family; indeed you are already mentioned.”I inquired was it a large household she was going to be a member of?“No; there are only two; mother and daughter. The mother is a lady ofsome station, though not averse to increasing her income.”“I wonder Miss Havisham could part with you again so soon.”“It is a part of Miss Havisham’s plans for me, Pip,” saidEstella, with a sigh, as if she were tired; “I am to write to herconstantly and see her regularly and report how I go on,—I and thejewels,—for they are nearly all mine now.”It was the first time she had ever called me by my name. Of course she did sopurposely, and knew that I should treasure it up.We came to Richmond all too soon, and our destination there was a house by thegreen,—a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroideredcoats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, had had their court days many atime. Some ancient trees before the house were still cut into fashions asformal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their ownallotted places in the great procession of the dead were not far off, and theywould soon drop into them and go the silent way of the rest.A bell with an old voice—which I dare say in its time had often said tothe house, Here is the green farthingale, Here is the diamond-hilted sword,Here are the shoes with red heels and the blue solitaire—sounded gravelyin the moonlight, and two cherry-coloured maids came fluttering out to receiveEstella. The doorway soon absorbed her boxes, and she gave me her hand and asmile, and said good-night, and was absorbed likewise. And still I stoodlooking at the house, thinking how happy I should be if I lived there with her,and knowing that I never was happy with her, but always miserable.I got into the carriage to be taken back to Hammersmith, and I got in with abad heart-ache, and I got out with a worse heart-ache. At our own door, I foundlittle Jane Pocket coming home from a little party escorted by her littlelover; and I envied her little lover, in spite of his being subject to Flopson.Mr. Pocket was out lecturing; for, he was a most delightful lecturer ondomestic economy, and his treatises on the management of children and servantswere considered the very best text-books on those themes. But Mrs. Pocket wasat home, and was in a little difficulty, on account of the baby’s havingbeen accommodated with a needle-case to keep him quiet during the unaccountableabsence (with a relative in the Foot Guards) of Millers. And more needles weremissing than it could be regarded as quite wholesome for a patient of suchtender years either to apply externally or to take as a tonic.Mr. Pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellent practical advice,and for having a clear and sound perception of things and a highly judiciousmind, I had some notion in my heart-ache of begging him to accept myconfidence. But happening to look up at Mrs. Pocket as she sat reading her bookof dignities after prescribing Bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, Ithought—Well—No, I wouldn’t.Chapter XXXIV.As Ihad grown accustomed to my expectations, I had insensibly begun to notice theireffect upon myself and those around me. Their influence on my own character Idisguised from my recognition as much as possible, but I knew very well that itwas not all good. I lived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting mybehaviour to Joe. My conscience was not by any means comfortable about Biddy.When I woke up in the night,—like Camilla,—I used to think, with aweariness on my spirits, that I should have been happier and better if I hadnever seen Miss Havisham’s face, and had risen to manhood content to bepartners with Joe in the honest old forge. Many a time of an evening, when Isat alone looking at the fire, I thought, after all there was no fire like theforge fire and the kitchen fire at home.Yet Estella was so inseparable from all my restlessness and disquiet of mind,that I really fell into confusion as to the limits of my own part in itsproduction. That is to say, supposing I had had no expectations, and yet hadhad Estella to think of, I could not make out to my satisfaction that I shouldhave done much better. Now, concerning the influence of my position on others,I was in no such difficulty, and so I perceived—though dimly enoughperhaps—that it was not beneficial to anybody, and, above all, that itwas not beneficial to Herbert. My lavish habits led his easy nature intoexpenses that he could not afford, corrupted the simplicity of his life, anddisturbed his peace with anxieties and regrets. I was not at all remorseful forhaving unwittingly set those other branches of the Pocket family to the poorarts they practised; because such littlenesses were their natural bent, andwould have been evoked by anybody else, if I had left them slumbering. ButHerbert’s was a very different case, and it often caused me a twinge tothink that I had done him evil service in crowding his sparely furnishedchambers with incongruous upholstery work, and placing the Canary-breastedAvenger at his disposal.So now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, I began tocontract a quantity of debt. I could hardly begin but Herbert must begin too,so he soon followed. At Startop’s suggestion, we put ourselves down forelection into a club called The Finches of the Grove: the object of whichinstitution I have never divined, if it were not that the members should dineexpensively once a fortnight, to quarrel among themselves as much as possibleafter dinner, and to cause six waiters to get drunk on the stairs. I know thatthese gratifying social ends were so invariably accomplished, that Herbert andI understood nothing else to be referred to in the first standing toast of thesociety: which ran “Gentlemen, may the present promotion of good feelingever reign predominant among the Finches of the Grove.”The Finches spent their money foolishly (the Hotel we dined at was in CoventGarden), and the first Finch I saw when I had the honour of joining the Grovewas Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own,and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners.Occasionally, he shot himself out of his equipage headforemost over the apron;and I saw him on one occasion deliver himself at the door of the Grove in thisunintentional way—like coals. But here I anticipate a little, for I wasnot a Finch, and could not be, according to the sacred laws of the society,until I came of age.In my confidence in my own resources, I would willingly have takenHerbert’s expenses on myself; but Herbert was proud, and I could make nosuch proposal to him. So he got into difficulties in every direction, andcontinued to look about him. When we gradually fell into keeping late hours andlate company, I noticed that he looked about him with a desponding eye atbreakfast-time; that he began to look about him more hopefully about midday;that he drooped when he came into dinner; that he seemed to descry Capital inthe distance, rather clearly, after dinner; that he all but realised Capitaltowards midnight; and that at about two o’clock in the morning, he becameso deeply despondent again as to talk of buying a rifle and going to America,with a general purpose of compelling buffaloes to make his fortune.I was usually at Hammersmith about half the week, and when I was at HammersmithI haunted Richmond, whereof separately by and by. Herbert would often come toHammersmith when I was there, and I think at those seasons his father wouldoccasionally have some passing perception that the opening he was looking for,had not appeared yet. But in the general tumbling up of the family, histumbling out in life somewhere, was a thing to transact itself somehow. In themeantime Mr. Pocket grew greyer, and tried oftener to lift himself out of hisperplexities by the hair. While Mrs. Pocket tripped up the family with herfootstool, read her book of dignities, lost her pocket-handkerchief, told usabout her grandpapa, and taught the young idea how to shoot, by shooting itinto bed whenever it attracted her notice.As I am now generalising a period of my life with the object of clearing my waybefore me, I can scarcely do so better than by at once completing thedescription of our usual manners and customs at Barnard’s Inn.We spent as much money as we could, and got as little for it as people couldmake up their minds to give us. We were always more or less miserable, and mostof our acquaintance were in the same condition. There was a gay fiction amongus that we were constantly enjoying ourselves, and a skeleton truth that wenever did. To the best of my belief, our case was in the last aspect a rathercommon one.Every morning, with an air ever new, Herbert went into the City to look abouthim. I often paid him a visit in the dark back-room in which he consorted withan ink-jar, a hat-peg, a coal-box, a string-box, an almanac, a desk and stool,and a ruler; and I do not remember that I ever saw him do anything else butlook about him. If we all did what we undertake to do, as faithfully as Herbertdid, we might live in a Republic of the Virtues. He had nothing else to do,poor fellow, except at a certain hour of every afternoon to “go toLloyd’s”—in observance of a ceremony of seeing his principal,I think. He never did anything else in connection with Lloyd’s that Icould find out, except come back again. When he felt his case unusuallyserious, and that he positively must find an opening, he would go on’Change at a busy time, and walk in and out, in a kind of gloomy countrydance figure, among the assembled magnates. “For,” says Herbert tome, coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions, “I find thetruth to be, Handel, that an opening won’t come to one, but one must goto it,—so I have been.”If we had been less attached to one another, I think we must have hated oneanother regularly every morning. I detested the chambers beyond expression atthat period of repentance, and could not endure the sight of theAvenger’s livery; which had a more expensive and a less remunerativeappearance then than at any other time in the four-and-twenty hours. As we gotmore and more into debt, breakfast became a hollower and hollower form, and,being on one occasion at breakfast-time threatened (by letter) with legalproceedings, “not unwholly unconnected,” as my local paper mightput it, “with jewelery,” I went so far as to seize the Avenger byhis blue collar and shake him off his feet,—so that he was actually inthe air, like a booted Cupid,—for presuming to suppose that we wanted aroll.At certain times—meaning at uncertain times, for they depended on ourhumour—I would say to Herbert, as if it were a remarkablediscovery,—“My dear Herbert, we are getting on badly.”“My dear Handel,” Herbert would say to me, in all sincerity,“if you will believe me, those very words were on my lips, by a strangecoincidence.”“Then, Herbert,” I would respond, “let us look into ouraffairs.”We always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointment for thispurpose. I always thought this was business, this was the way to confront thething, this was the way to take the foe by the throat. And I know Herbertthought so too.We ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle of somethingsimilarly out of the common way, in order that our minds might be fortified forthe occasion, and we might come well up to the mark. Dinner over, we produced abundle of pens, a copious supply of ink, and a goodly show of writing andblotting paper. For there was something very comfortable in having plenty ofstationery.I would then take a sheet of paper, and write across the top of it, in a neathand, the heading, “Memorandum of Pip’s debts”; withBarnard’s Inn and the date very carefully added. Herbert would also takea sheet of paper, and write across it with similar formalities,“Memorandum of Herbert’s debts.”Each of us would then refer to a confused heap of papers at his side, which hadbeen thrown into drawers, worn into holes in pockets, half burnt in lightingcandles, stuck for weeks into the looking-glass, and otherwise damaged. Thesound of our pens going refreshed us exceedingly, insomuch that I sometimesfound it difficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceeding andactually paying the money. In point of meritorious character, the two thingsseemed about equal.When we had written a little while, I would ask Herbert how he got on? Herbertprobably would have been scratching his head in a most rueful manner at thesight of his accumulating figures.“They are mounting up, Handel,” Herbert would say; “upon mylife, they are mounting up.”“Be firm, Herbert,” I would retort, plying my own pen with greatassiduity. “Look the thing in the face. Look into your affairs. Starethem out of countenance.”“So I would, Handel, only they are staring me out ofcountenance.”However, my determined manner would have its effect, and Herbert would fall towork again. After a time he would give up once more, on the plea that he hadnot got Cobbs’s bill, or Lobbs’s, or Nobbs’s, as the casemight be.“Then, Herbert, estimate; estimate it in round numbers, and put itdown.”“What a fellow of resource you are!” my friend would reply, withadmiration. “Really your business powers are very remarkable.”I thought so too. I established with myself, on these occasions, the reputationof a first-rate man of business,—prompt, decisive, energetic, clear,cool-headed. When I had got all my responsibilities down upon my list, Icompared each with the bill, and ticked it off. My self-approval when I tickedan entry was quite a luxurious sensation. When I had no more ticks to make, Ifolded all my bills up uniformly, docketed each on the back, and tied the wholeinto a symmetrical bundle. Then I did the same for Herbert (who modestly saidhe had not my administrative genius), and felt that I had brought his affairsinto a focus for him.My business habits had one other bright feature, which I called “leavinga Margin.” For example; supposing Herbert’s debts to be one hundredand sixty-four pounds four-and-twopence, I would say, “Leave a margin,and put them down at two hundred.” Or, supposing my own to be four timesas much, I would leave a margin, and put them down at seven hundred. I had thehighest opinion of the wisdom of this same Margin, but I am bound toacknowledge that on looking back, I deem it to have been an expensive device.For, we always ran into new debt immediately, to the full extent of the margin,and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency it imparted, got pretty faron into another margin.But there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on these examinationsof our affairs that gave me, for the time, an admirable opinion of myself.Soothed by my exertions, my method, and Herbert’s compliments, I wouldsit with his symmetrical bundle and my own on the table before me among thestationery, and feel like a Bank of some sort, rather than a privateindividual.We shut our outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that we might not beinterrupted. I had fallen into my serene state one evening, when we heard aletter dropped through the slit in the said door, and fall on the ground.“It’s for you, Handel,” said Herbert, going out and comingback with it, “and I hope there is nothing the matter.” This was inallusion to its heavy black seal and border.The letter was signed Trabb & Co., and its contents were simply, that I wasan honoured sir, and that they begged to inform me that Mrs. J. Gargery haddeparted this life on Monday last at twenty minutes past six in the evening,and that my attendance was requested at the interment on Monday next at threeo’clock in the afternoon.Chapter XXXV.It wasthe first time that a grave had opened in my road of life, and the gap it madein the smooth ground was wonderful. The figure of my sister in her chair by thekitchen fire, haunted me night and day. That the place could possibly be,without her, was something my mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas shehad seldom or never been in my thoughts of late, I had now the strangest ideasthat she was coming towards me in the street, or that she would presently knockat the door. In my rooms too, with which she had never been at all associated,there was at once the blankness of death and a perpetual suggestion of thesound of her voice or the turn of her face or figure, as if she were stillalive and had been often there.Whatever my fortunes might have been, I could scarcely have recalled my sisterwith much tenderness. But I suppose there is a shock of regret which may existwithout much tenderness. Under its influence (and perhaps to make up for thewant of the softer feeling) I was seized with a violent indignation against theassailant from whom she had suffered so much; and I felt that on sufficientproof I could have revengefully pursued Orlick, or any one else, to the lastextremity.Having written to Joe, to offer him consolation, and to assure him that I wouldcome to the funeral, I passed the intermediate days in the curious state ofmind I have glanced at. I went down early in the morning, and alighted at theBlue Boar in good time to walk over to the forge.It was fine summer weather again, and, as I walked along, the times when I wasa little helpless creature, and my sister did not spare me, vividly returned.But they returned with a gentle tone upon them that softened even the edge ofTickler. For now, the very breath of the beans and clover whispered to my heartthat the day must come when it would be well for my memory that others walkingin the sunshine should be softened as they thought of me.At last I came within sight of the house, and saw that Trabb and Co. had put ina funereal execution and taken possession. Two dismally absurd persons, eachostentatiously exhibiting a crutch done up in a black bandage,—as if thatinstrument could possibly communicate any comfort to anybody,—were postedat the front door; and in one of them I recognised a postboy discharged fromthe Boar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning, inconsequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for him to ride his horseclasped round the neck with both arms. All the children of the village, andmost of the women, were admiring these sable warders and the closed windows ofthe house and forge; and as I came up, one of the two warders (the postboy)knocked at the door,—implying that I was far too much exhausted by griefto have strength remaining to knock for myself.Another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese for a wager)opened the door, and showed me into the best parlour. Here, Mr. Trabb had takenunto himself the best table, and had got all the leaves up, and was holding akind of black Bazaar, with the aid of a quantity of black pins. At the momentof my arrival, he had just finished putting somebody’s hat into blacklong-clothes, like an African baby; so he held out his hand for mine. But I,misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook hands with him withevery testimony of warm affection.Poor dear Joe, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large bow under hischin, was seated apart at the upper end of the room; where, as chief mourner,he had evidently been stationed by Trabb. When I bent down and said to him,“Dear Joe, how are you?” he said, “Pip, old chap, you knowedher when she were a fine figure of a—” and clasped my hand and saidno more.Biddy, looking very neat and modest in her black dress, went quietly here andthere, and was very helpful. When I had spoken to Biddy, as I thought it not atime for talking I went and sat down near Joe, and there began to wonder inwhat part of the house it—she—my sister—was. The air of theparlour being faint with the smell of sweet-cake, I looked about for the tableof refreshments; it was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to thegloom, but there was a cut-up plum cake upon it, and there were cut-up oranges,and sandwiches, and biscuits, and two decanters that I knew very well asornaments, but had never seen used in all my life; one full of port, and one ofsherry. Standing at this table, I became conscious of the servile Pumblechookin a black cloak and several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffinghimself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention. The moment hesucceeded, he came over to me (breathing sherry and crumbs), and said in asubdued voice, “May I, dear sir?” and did. I then descried Mr. andMrs. Hubble; the last-named in a decent speechless paroxysm in a corner. Wewere all going to “follow,” and were all in course of being tied upseparately (by Trabb) into ridiculous bundles.“Which I meantersay, Pip,” Joe whispered me, as we were being whatMr. Trabb called “formed” in the parlour, two and two,—and itwas dreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance; “which Imeantersay, sir, as I would in preference have carried her to the churchmyself, along with three or four friendly ones wot come to it with willingharts and arms, but it were considered wot the neighbours would look down onsuch and would be of opinions as it were wanting in respect.”“Pocket-handkerchiefs out, all!” cried Mr. Trabb at this point, ina depressed business-like voice. “Pocket-handkerchiefs out! We areready!”So we all put our pocket-handkerchiefs to our faces, as if our noses werebleeding, and filed out two and two; Joe and I; Biddy and Pumblechook; Mr. andMrs. Hubble. The remains of my poor sister had been brought round by thekitchen door, and, it being a point of Undertaking ceremony that the sixbearers must be stifled and blinded under a horrible black velvet housing witha white border, the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs,shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers,—thepostboy and his comrade.The neighbourhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements, and we weremuch admired as we went through the village; the more youthful and vigorouspart of the community making dashes now and then to cut us off, and lying inwait to intercept us at points of vantage. At such times the more exuberantamong them called out in an excited manner on our emergence round some cornerof expectancy, “Here they come!” “Here theyare!” and we were all but cheered. In this progress I was much annoyed bythe abject Pumblechook, who, being behind me, persisted all the way as adelicate attention in arranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak.My thoughts were further distracted by the excessive pride of Mr. and Mrs.Hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious in being members of sodistinguished a procession.And now the range of marshes lay clear before us, with the sails of the shipson the river growing out of it; and we went into the churchyard, close to thegraves of my unknown parents, Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and AlsoGeorgiana, Wife of the Above. And there, my sister was laid quietly in theearth, while the larks sang high above it, and the light wind strewed it withbeautiful shadows of clouds and trees.Of the conduct of the worldly minded Pumblechook while this was doing, I desireto say no more than it was all addressed to me; and that even when those noblepassages were read which remind humanity how it brought nothing into the worldand can take nothing out, and how it fleeth like a shadow and never continuethlong in one stay, I heard him cough a reservation of the case of a younggentleman who came unexpectedly into large property. When we got back, he hadthe hardihood to tell me that he wished my sister could have known I had doneher so much honour, and to hint that she would have considered it reasonablypurchased at the price of her death. After that, he drank all the rest of thesherry, and Mr. Hubble drank the port, and the two talked (which I have sinceobserved to be customary in such cases) as if they were of quite another racefrom the deceased, and were notoriously immortal. Finally, he went away withMr. and Mrs. Hubble,—to make an evening of it, I felt sure, and to tellthe Jolly Bargemen that he was the founder of my fortunes and my earliestbenefactor.When they were all gone, and when Trabb and his men—but not his Boy; Ilooked for him—had crammed their mummery into bags, and were gone too,the house felt wholesomer. Soon afterwards, Biddy, Joe, and I, had a colddinner together; but we dined in the best parlour, not in the old kitchen, andJoe was so exceedingly particular what he did with his knife and fork and thesaltcellar and what not, that there was great restraint upon us. But afterdinner, when I made him take his pipe, and when I had loitered with him aboutthe forge, and when we sat down together on the great block of stone outsideit, we got on better. I noticed that after the funeral Joe changed his clothesso far, as to make a compromise between his Sunday dress and working dress; inwhich the dear fellow looked natural, and like the Man he was.He was very much pleased by my asking if I might sleep in my own little room,and I was pleased too; for I felt that I had done rather a great thing inmaking the request. When the shadows of evening were closing in, I took anopportunity of getting into the garden with Biddy for a little talk.“Biddy,” said I, “I think you might have written to me aboutthese sad matters.”“Do you, Mr. Pip?” said Biddy. “I should have written if Ihad thought that.”“Don’t suppose that I mean to be unkind, Biddy, when I say Iconsider that you ought to have thought that.”“Do you, Mr. Pip?”She was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty way with her, thatI did not like the thought of making her cry again. After looking a little ather downcast eyes as she walked beside me, I gave up that point.“I suppose it will be difficult for you to remain here now, Biddydear?”“Oh! I can’t do so, Mr. Pip,” said Biddy, in a tone of regretbut still of quiet conviction. “I have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble, andI am going to her to-morrow. I hope we shall be able to take some care of Mr.Gargery, together, until he settles down.”“How are you going to live, Biddy? If you want any mo—”“How am I going to live?” repeated Biddy, striking in, with amomentary flush upon her face. “I’ll tell you, Mr. Pip. I am goingto try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearly finished here. Ican be well recommended by all the neighbours, and I hope I can be industriousand patient, and teach myself while I teach others. You know, Mr. Pip,”pursued Biddy, with a smile, as she raised her eyes to my face, “the newschools are not like the old, but I learnt a good deal from you after thattime, and have had time since then to improve.”“I think you would always improve, Biddy, under any circumstances.”“Ah! Except in my bad side of human nature,” murmured Biddy.It was not so much a reproach as an irresistible thinking aloud. Well! Ithought I would give up that point too. So, I walked a little further withBiddy, looking silently at her downcast eyes.“I have not heard the particulars of my sister’s death,Biddy.”“They are very slight, poor thing. She had been in one of her badstates—though they had got better of late, rather than worse—forfour days, when she came out of it in the evening, just at tea-time, and saidquite plainly, ‘Joe.’ As she had never said any word for a longwhile, I ran and fetched in Mr. Gargery from the forge. She made signs to methat she wanted him to sit down close to her, and wanted me to put her armsround his neck. So I put them round his neck, and she laid her head down on hisshoulder quite content and satisfied. And so she presently said‘Joe’ again, and once ‘Pardon,’ and once‘Pip.’ And so she never lifted her head up any more, and it wasjust an hour later when we laid it down on her own bed, because we found shewas gone.”Biddy cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars that were comingout, were blurred in my own sight.“Nothing was ever discovered, Biddy?”“Nothing.”“Do you know what is become of Orlick?”“I should think from the colour of his clothes that he is working in thequarries.”“Of course you have seen him then?—Why are you looking at that darktree in the lane?”“I saw him there, on the night she died.”“That was not the last time either, Biddy?”“No; I have seen him there, since we have been walking here.—It isof no use,” said Biddy, laying her hand upon my arm, as I was for runningout, “you know I would not deceive you; he was not there a minute, and heis gone.”It revived my utmost indignation to find that she was still pursued by thisfellow, and I felt inveterate against him. I told her so, and told her that Iwould spend any money or take any pains to drive him out of that country. Bydegrees she led me into more temperate talk, and she told me how Joe loved me,and how Joe never complained of anything,—she didn’t say, of me;she had no need; I knew what she meant,—but ever did his duty in his wayof life, with a strong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart.“Indeed, it would be hard to say too much for him,” said I;“and Biddy, we must often speak of these things, for of course I shall beoften down here now. I am not going to leave poor Joe alone.”Biddy said never a single word.“Biddy, don’t you hear me?”“Yes, Mr. Pip.”“Not to mention your calling me Mr. Pip,—which appears to me to bein bad taste, Biddy,—what do you mean?”“What do I mean?” asked Biddy, timidly.“Biddy,” said I, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, “Imust request to know what you mean by this?”“By this?” said Biddy.“Now, don’t echo,” I retorted. “You used not to echo,Biddy.”“Used not!” said Biddy. “O Mr. Pip! Used!”Well! I rather thought I would give up that point too. After another silentturn in the garden, I fell back on the main position.“Biddy,” said I, “I made a remark respecting my coming downhere often, to see Joe, which you received with a marked silence. Have thegoodness, Biddy, to tell me why.”“Are you quite sure, then, that you WILL come to see himoften?” asked Biddy, stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking atme under the stars with a clear and honest eye.“O dear me!” said I, as if I found myself compelled to give upBiddy in despair. “This really is a very bad side of human nature!Don’t say any more, if you please, Biddy. This shocks me verymuch.”For which cogent reason I kept Biddy at a distance during supper, and when Iwent up to my own old little room, took as stately a leave of her as I could,in my murmuring soul, deem reconcilable with the churchyard and the event ofthe day. As often as I was restless in the night, and that was every quarter ofan hour, I reflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice,Biddy had done me.Early in the morning I was to go. Early in the morning I was out, and lookingin, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge. There I stood, forminutes, looking at Joe, already at work with a glow of health and strengthupon his face that made it show as if the bright sun of the life in store forhim were shining on it.“Good-bye, dear Joe!—No, don’t wipe it off—forGod’s sake, give me your blackened hand!—I shall be down soon andoften.” “Never too soon, sir,” said Joe, “and never too often,Pip!”Biddy was waiting for me at the kitchen door, with a mug of new milk and acrust of bread. “Biddy,” said I, when I gave her my hand atparting, “I am not angry, but I am hurt.”“No, don’t be hurt,” she pleaded quite pathetically;“let only me be hurt, if I have been ungenerous.”Once more, the mists were rising as I walked away. If they disclosed to me, asI suspect they did, that I should not come back, and that Biddy wasquite right, all I can say is,—they were quite right too.Chapter XXXVI.Herbert and I went on from bad to worse, in the way ofincreasing our debts, looking into our affairs, leaving Margins, and the likeexemplary transactions; and Time went on, whether or no, as he has a way ofdoing; and I came of age,—in fulfilment of Herbert’s prediction,that I should do so before I knew where I was.Herbert himself had come of age eight months before me. As he had nothing elsethan his majority to come into, the event did not make a profound sensation inBarnard’s Inn. But we had looked forward to my one-and-twentiethbirthday, with a crowd of speculations and anticipations, for we had bothconsidered that my guardian could hardly help saying something definite on thatoccasion.I had taken care to have it well understood in Little Britain when my birthdaywas. On the day before it, I received an official note from Wemmick, informingme that Mr. Jaggers would be glad if I would call upon him at five in theafternoon of the auspicious day. This convinced us that something great was tohappen, and threw me into an unusual flutter when I repaired to myguardian’s office, a model of punctuality.In the outer office Wemmick offered me his congratulations, and incidentallyrubbed the side of his nose with a folded piece of tissue-paper that I likedthe look of. But he said nothing respecting it, and motioned me with a nod intomy guardian’s room. It was November, and my guardian was standing beforehis fire leaning his back against the chimney-piece, with his hands under hiscoattails.“Well, Pip,” said he, “I must call you Mr. Pip to-day.Congratulations, Mr. Pip.”We shook hands,—he was always a remarkably short shaker,—and Ithanked him.“Take a chair, Mr. Pip,” said my guardian.As I sat down, and he preserved his attitude and bent his brows at his boots, Ifelt at a disadvantage, which reminded me of that old time when I had been putupon a tombstone. The two ghastly casts on the shelf were not far from him, andtheir expression was as if they were making a stupid apoplectic attempt toattend to the conversation.“Now my young friend,” my guardian began, as if I were a witness inthe box, “I am going to have a word or two with you.”“If you please, sir.”“What do you suppose,” said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look atthe ground, and then throwing his head back to look at theceiling,—“what do you suppose you are living at the rate of?”“At the rate of, sir?”“At,” repeated Mr. Jaggers, still looking at the ceiling,“the—rate—of?” And then looked all round the room, andpaused with his pocket-handkerchief in his hand, half-way to his nose.I had looked into my affairs so often, that I had thoroughly destroyed anyslight notion I might ever have had of their bearings. Reluctantly, I confessedmyself quite unable to answer the question. This reply seemed agreeable to Mr.Jaggers, who said, “I thought so!” and blew his nose with an air ofsatisfaction.“Now, I have asked you a question, my friend,” said Mr.Jaggers. “Have you anything to ask me?”“Of course it would be a great relief to me to ask you several questions,sir; but I remember your prohibition.”“Ask one,” said Mr. Jaggers.“Is my benefactor to be made known to me to-day?”“No. Ask another.”“Is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?”“Waive that, a moment,” said Mr. Jaggers, “and askanother.”I looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escape from theinquiry, “Have-I—anything to receive, sir?” On that, Mr.Jaggers said, triumphantly, “I thought we should come to it!” andcalled to Wemmick to give him that piece of paper. Wemmick appeared, handed itin, and disappeared.“Now, Mr. Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, “attend, if you please. Youhave been drawing pretty freely here; your name occurs pretty often inWemmick’s cash-book; but you are in debt, of course?”“I am afraid I must say yes, sir.”“You know you must say yes; don’t you?” said Mr. Jaggers.“Yes, sir.”“I don’t ask you what you owe, because you don’t know; and ifyou did know, you wouldn’t tell me; you would say less. Yes, yes, myfriend,” cried Mr. Jaggers, waving his forefinger to stop me as I made ashow of protesting: “it’s likely enough that you think youwouldn’t, but you would. You’ll excuse me, but I know better thanyou. Now, take this piece of paper in your hand. You have got it? Very good.Now, unfold it and tell me what it is.”“This is a bank-note,” said I, “for five hundredpounds.”“That is a bank-note,” repeated Mr. Jaggers, “for fivehundred pounds. And a very handsome sum of money too, I think. You consider itso?”“How could I do otherwise!”“Ah! But answer the question,” said Mr. Jaggers.“Undoubtedly.”“You consider it, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money. Now, thathandsome sum of money, Pip, is your own. It is a present to you on this day, inearnest of your expectations. And at the rate of that handsome sum of money perannum, and at no higher rate, you are to live until the donor of the wholeappears. That is to say, you will now take your money affairs entirely intoyour own hands, and you will draw from Wemmick one hundred and twenty-fivepounds per quarter, until you are in communication with the fountain-head, andno longer with the mere agent. As I have told you before, I am the mere agent.I execute my instructions, and I am paid for doing so. I think theminjudicious, but I am not paid for giving any opinion on their merits.”I was beginning to express my gratitude to my benefactor for the greatliberality with which I was treated, when Mr. Jaggers stopped me. “I amnot paid, Pip,” said he, coolly, “to carry your words to anyone;” and then gathered up his coat-tails, as he had gathered up thesubject, and stood frowning at his boots as if he suspected them of designsagainst him.After a pause, I hinted,—“There was a question just now, Mr. Jaggers, which you desired me towaive for a moment. I hope I am doing nothing wrong in asking it again?”“What is it?” said he.I might have known that he would never help me out; but it took me aback tohave to shape the question afresh, as if it were quite new. “Is itlikely,” I said, after hesitating, “that my patron, thefountain-head you have spoken of, Mr. Jaggers, will soon—” there Idelicately stopped.“Will soon what?” asked Mr. Jaggers. “That’s noquestion as it stands, you know.”“Will soon come to London,” said I, after casting about for aprecise form of words, “or summon me anywhere else?”“Now, here,” replied Mr. Jaggers, fixing me for the first time withhis dark deep-set eyes, “we must revert to the evening when we firstencountered one another in your village. What did I tell you then, Pip?”“You told me, Mr. Jaggers, that it might be years hence when that personappeared.”“Just so,” said Mr. Jaggers, “that’s my answer.”As we looked full at one another, I felt my breath come quicker in my strongdesire to get something out of him. And as I felt that it came quicker, and asI felt that he saw that it came quicker, I felt that I had less chance thanever of getting anything out of him.“Do you suppose it will still be years hence, Mr. Jaggers?”Mr. Jaggers shook his head,—not in negativing the question, but inaltogether negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to answerit,—and the two horrible casts of the twitched faces looked, when my eyesstrayed up to them, as if they had come to a crisis in their suspendedattention, and were going to sneeze.“Come!” said Mr. Jaggers, warming the backs of his legs with thebacks of his warmed hands, “I’ll be plain with you, my friend Pip.That’s a question I must not be asked. You’ll understand thatbetter, when I tell you it’s a question that might compromise me.Come! I’ll go a little further with you; I’ll say somethingmore.”He bent down so low to frown at his boots, that he was able to rub the calvesof his legs in the pause he made.“When that person discloses,” said Mr. Jaggers, straighteninghimself, “you and that person will settle your own affairs. When thatperson discloses, my part in this business will cease and determine. When thatperson discloses, it will not be necessary for me to know anything about it.And that’s all I have got to say.”We looked at one another until I withdrew my eyes, and looked thoughtfully atthe floor. From this last speech I derived the notion that Miss Havisham, forsome reason or no reason, had not taken him into her confidence as to herdesigning me for Estella; that he resented this, and felt a jealousy about it;or that he really did object to that scheme, and would have nothing to do withit. When I raised my eyes again, I found that he had been shrewdly looking atme all the time, and was doing so still.“If that is all you have to say, sir,” I remarked, “there canbe nothing left for me to say.”He nodded assent, and pulled out his thief-dreaded watch, and asked me where Iwas going to dine? I replied at my own chambers, with Herbert. As a necessarysequence, I asked him if he would favour us with his company, and he promptlyaccepted the invitation. But he insisted on walking home with me, in order thatI might make no extra preparation for him, and first he had a letter or two towrite, and (of course) had his hands to wash. So I said I would go into theouter office and talk to Wemmick.The fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into my pocket, athought had come into my head which had been often there before; and itappeared to me that Wemmick was a good person to advise with concerning suchthought.He had already locked up his safe, and made preparations for going home. He hadleft his desk, brought out his two greasy office candlesticks and stood them inline with the snuffers on a slab near the door, ready to be extinguished; hehad raked his fire low, put his hat and great-coat ready, and was beatinghimself all over the chest with his safe-key, as an athletic exercise afterbusiness.“Mr. Wemmick,” said I, “I want to ask your opinion. I am verydesirous to serve a friend.”Wemmick tightened his post-office and shook his head, as if his opinion weredead against any fatal weakness of that sort.“This friend,” I pursued, “is trying to get on in commerciallife, but has no money, and finds it difficult and disheartening to make abeginning. Now I want somehow to help him to a beginning.”“With money down?” said Wemmick, in a tone drier than any sawdust.“With some money down,” I replied, for an uneasy remembranceshot across me of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home—“withsome money down, and perhaps some anticipation of myexpectations.”“Mr. Pip,” said Wemmick, “I should like just to run over withyou on my fingers, if you please, the names of the various bridges up as highas Chelsea Reach. Let’s see; there’s London, one; Southwark, two;Blackfriars, three; Waterloo, four; Westminster, five; Vauxhall, six.” Hehad checked off each bridge in its turn, with the handle of his safe-key on thepalm of his hand. “There’s as many as six, you see, to choosefrom.”“I don’t understand you,” said I.“Choose your bridge, Mr. Pip,” returned Wemmick, “and take awalk upon your bridge, and pitch your money into the Thames over the centrearch of your bridge, and you know the end of it. Serve a friend with it, andyou may know the end of it too,—but it’s a less pleasant andprofitable end.”I could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, he made it so wide after sayingthis.“This is very discouraging,” said I.“Meant to be so,” said Wemmick.“Then is it your opinion,” I inquired, with some littleindignation, “that a man should never—”“—Invest portable property in a friend?” said Wemmick.“Certainly he should not. Unless he wants to get rid of thefriend,—and then it becomes a question how much portable property it maybe worth to get rid of him.”“And that,” said I, “is your deliberate opinion, Mr.Wemmick?”“That,” he returned, “is my deliberate opinion in thisoffice.”“Ah!” said I, pressing him, for I thought I saw him near a loopholehere; “but would that be your opinion at Walworth?”“Mr. Pip,” he replied, with gravity, “Walworth is one place,and this office is another. Much as the Aged is one person, and Mr. Jaggers isanother. They must not be confounded together. My Walworth sentiments must betaken at Walworth; none but my official sentiments can be taken in thisoffice.”“Very well,” said I, much relieved, “then I shall look you upat Walworth, you may depend upon it.”“Mr. Pip,” he returned, “you will be welcome there, in aprivate and personal capacity.”We had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing my guardian’sears to be the sharpest of the sharp. As he now appeared in his doorway,towelling his hands, Wemmick got on his great-coat and stood by to snuff outthe candles. We all three went into the street together, and from the door-stepWemmick turned his way, and Mr. Jaggers and I turned ours.I could not help wishing more than once that evening, that Mr. Jaggers had hadan Aged in Gerrard Street, or a Stinger, or a Something, or a Somebody, tounbend his brows a little. It was an uncomfortable consideration on atwenty-first birthday, that coming of age at all seemed hardly worth while insuch a guarded and suspicious world as he made of it. He was a thousand timesbetter informed and cleverer than Wemmick, and yet I would a thousand timesrather have had Wemmick to dinner. And Mr. Jaggers made not me alone intenselymelancholy, because, after he was gone, Herbert said of himself, with his eyesfixed on the fire, that he thought he must have committed a felony andforgotten the details of it, he felt so dejected and guilty.Chapter XXXVII.Deeming Sunday the best day for taking Mr. Wemmick’sWalworth sentiments, I devoted the next ensuing Sunday afternoon to apilgrimage to the Castle. On arriving before the battlements, I found the UnionJack flying and the drawbridge up; but undeterred by this show of defiance andresistance, I rang at the gate, and was admitted in a most pacific manner bythe Aged.“My son, sir,” said the old man, after securing the drawbridge,“rather had it in his mind that you might happen to drop in, and he leftword that he would soon be home from his afternoon’s walk. He is veryregular in his walks, is my son. Very regular in everything, is my son.”I nodded at the old gentleman as Wemmick himself might have nodded, and we wentin and sat down by the fireside.“You made acquaintance with my son, sir,” said the old man, in hischirping way, while he warmed his hands at the blaze, “at his office, Iexpect?” I nodded. “Hah! I have heerd that my son is a wonderfulhand at his business, sir?” I nodded hard. “Yes; so they tell me.His business is the Law?” I nodded harder. “Which makes it moresurprising in my son,” said the old man, “for he was not brought upto the Law, but to the Wine-Coopering.”Curious to know how the old gentleman stood informed concerning the reputationof Mr. Jaggers, I roared that name at him. He threw me into the greatestconfusion by laughing heartily and replying in a very sprightly manner,“No, to be sure; you’re right.” And to this hour I have notthe faintest notion what he meant, or what joke he thought I had made.As I could not sit there nodding at him perpetually, without making some otherattempt to interest him, I shouted at inquiry whether his own calling in lifehad been “the Wine-Coopering.” By dint of straining that term outof myself several times and tapping the old gentleman on the chest to associateit with him, I at last succeeded in making my meaning understood.“No,” said the old gentleman; “the warehousing, thewarehousing. First, over yonder;” he appeared to mean up the chimney, butI believe he intended to refer me to Liverpool; “and then in the City ofLondon here. However, having an infirmity—for I am hard of hearing,sir—”I expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment.“—Yes, hard of hearing; having that infirmity coming upon me, myson he went into the Law, and he took charge of me, and he by little and littlemade out this elegant and beautiful property. But returning to what you said,you know,” pursued the old man, again laughing heartily, “what Isay is, No to be sure; you’re right.”I was modestly wondering whether my utmost ingenuity would have enabled me tosay anything that would have amused him half as much as this imaginarypleasantry, when I was startled by a sudden click in the wall on one side ofthe chimney, and the ghostly tumbling open of a little wooden flap with“JOHN” upon it. The old man, following my eyes,cried with great triumph, “My son’s come home!” and we bothwent out to the drawbridge.It was worth any money to see Wemmick waving a salute to me from the other sideof the moat, when we might have shaken hands across it with the greatest ease.The Aged was so delighted to work the drawbridge, that I made no offer toassist him, but stood quiet until Wemmick had come across, and had presented meto Miss Skiffins; a lady by whom he was accompanied.Miss Skiffins was of a wooden appearance, and was, like her escort, in thepost-office branch of the service. She might have been some two or three yearsyounger than Wemmick, and I judged her to stand possessed of portable property.The cut of her dress from the waist upward, both before and behind, made herfigure very like a boy’s kite; and I might have pronounced her gown alittle too decidedly orange, and her gloves a little too intensely green. Butshe seemed to be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the Aged.I was not long in discovering that she was a frequent visitor at the Castle;for, on our going in, and my complimenting Wemmick on his ingenious contrivancefor announcing himself to the Aged, he begged me to give my attention for amoment to the other side of the chimney, and disappeared. Presently anotherclick came, and another little door tumbled open with “MissSkiffins” on it; then Miss Skiffins shut up and John tumbled open; thenMiss Skiffins and John both tumbled open together, and finally shut uptogether. On Wemmick’s return from working these mechanical appliances, Iexpressed the great admiration with which I regarded them, and he said,“Well, you know, they’re both pleasant and useful to the Aged. Andby George, sir, it’s a thing worth mentioning, that of all the people whocome to this gate, the secret of those pulls is only known to the Aged, MissSkiffins, and me!”“And Mr. Wemmick made them,” added Miss Skiffins, “with hisown hands out of his own head.”While Miss Skiffins was taking off her bonnet (she retained her green glovesduring the evening as an outward and visible sign that there was company),Wemmick invited me to take a walk with him round the property, and see how theisland looked in wintertime. Thinking that he did this to give me anopportunity of taking his Walworth sentiments, I seized the opportunity as soonas we were out of the Castle.Having thought of the matter with care, I approached my subject as if I hadnever hinted at it before. I informed Wemmick that I was anxious in behalf ofHerbert Pocket, and I told him how we had first met, and how we had fought. Iglanced at Herbert’s home, and at his character, and at his having nomeans but such as he was dependent on his father for; those, uncertain andunpunctual. I alluded to the advantages I had derived in my first rawness andignorance from his society, and I confessed that I feared I had but ill repaidthem, and that he might have done better without me and my expectations.Keeping Miss Havisham in the background at a great distance, I still hinted atthe possibility of my having competed with him in his prospects, and at thecertainty of his possessing a generous soul, and being far above any meandistrusts, retaliations, or designs. For all these reasons (I told Wemmick),and because he was my young companion and friend, and I had a great affectionfor him, I wished my own good fortune to reflect some rays upon him, andtherefore I sought advice from Wemmick’s experience and knowledge of menand affairs, how I could best try with my resources to help Herbert to somepresent income,—say of a hundred a year, to keep him in good hope andheart,—and gradually to buy him on to some small partnership. I beggedWemmick, in conclusion, to understand that my help must always be renderedwithout Herbert’s knowledge or suspicion, and that there was no one elsein the world with whom I could advise. I wound up by laying my hand upon hisshoulder, and saying, “I can’t help confiding in you, though I knowit must be troublesome to you; but that is your fault, in having ever broughtme here.”Wemmick was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind of start,“Well you know, Mr. Pip, I must tell you one thing. This is devilish goodof you.”“Say you’ll help me to be good then,” said I.“Ecod,” replied Wemmick, shaking his head, “that’s notmy trade.”“Nor is this your trading-place,” said I.“You are right,” he returned. “You hit the nail on the head.Mr. Pip, I’ll put on my considering-cap, and I think all you want to domay be done by degrees. Skiffins (that’s her brother) is an accountantand agent. I’ll look him up and go to work for you.”“I thank you ten thousand times.”“On the contrary,” said he, “I thank you, for though we arestrictly in our private and personal capacity, still it may be mentioned thatthere are Newgate cobwebs about, and it brushes them away.”After a little further conversation to the same effect, we returned into theCastle where we found Miss Skiffins preparing tea. The responsible duty ofmaking the toast was delegated to the Aged, and that excellent old gentlemanwas so intent upon it that he seemed to me in some danger of melting his eyes.It was no nominal meal that we were going to make, but a vigorous reality. TheAged prepared such a hay-stack of buttered toast, that I could scarcely see himover it as it simmered on an iron stand hooked on to the top-bar; while MissSkiffins brewed such a jorum of tea, that the pig in the back premises becamestrongly excited, and repeatedly expressed his desire to participate in theentertainment.The flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the right moment oftime, and I felt as snugly cut off from the rest of Walworth as if the moatwere thirty feet wide by as many deep. Nothing disturbed the tranquillity ofthe Castle, but the occasional tumbling open of John and Miss Skiffins: whichlittle doors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made mesympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to it. I inferred from themethodical nature of Miss Skiffins’s arrangements that she made tea thereevery Sunday night; and I rather suspected that a classic brooch she wore,representing the profile of an undesirable female with a very straight nose anda very new moon, was a piece of portable property that had been given her byWemmick.We ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it wasdelightful to see how warm and greasy we all got after it. The Aged especially,might have passed for some clean old chief of a savage tribe, just oiled. Aftera short pause of repose, Miss Skiffins—in the absence of the littleservant who, it seemed, retired to the bosom of her family on Sundayafternoons—washed up the tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateurmanner that compromised none of us. Then, she put on her gloves again, and wedrew round the fire, and Wemmick said, “Now, Aged Parent, tip us thepaper.”Wemmick explained to me while the Aged got his spectacles out, that this wasaccording to custom, and that it gave the old gentleman infinite satisfactionto read the news aloud. “I won’t offer an apology,” saidWemmick, “for he isn’t capable of many pleasures—are you,Aged P.?”“All right, John, all right,” returned the old man, seeing himselfspoken to.“Only tip him a nod every now and then when he looks off hispaper,” said Wemmick, “and he’ll be as happy as a king. Weare all attention, Aged One.”“All right, John, all right!” returned the cheerful old man, sobusy and so pleased, that it really was quite charming.The Aged’s reading reminded me of the classes at Mr. Wopsle’sgreat-aunt’s, with the pleasanter peculiarity that it seemed to comethrough a keyhole. As he wanted the candles close to him, and as he was alwayson the verge of putting either his head or the newspaper into them, he requiredas much watching as a powder-mill. But Wemmick was equally untiring and gentlein his vigilance, and the Aged read on, quite unconscious of his many rescues.Whenever he looked at us, we all expressed the greatest interest and amazement,and nodded until he resumed again.As Wemmick and Miss Skiffins sat side by side, and as I sat in a shadowycorner, I observed a slow and gradual elongation of Mr. Wemmick’s mouth,powerfully suggestive of his slowly and gradually stealing his arm round MissSkiffins’s waist. In course of time I saw his hand appear on the otherside of Miss Skiffins; but at that moment Miss Skiffins neatly stopped him withthe green glove, unwound his arm again as if it were an article of dress, andwith the greatest deliberation laid it on the table before her. MissSkiffins’s composure while she did this was one of the most remarkablesights I have ever seen, and if I could have thought the act consistent withabstraction of mind, I should have deemed that Miss Skiffins performed itmechanically.By and by, I noticed Wemmick’s arm beginning to disappear again, andgradually fading out of view. Shortly afterwards, his mouth began to widenagain. After an interval of suspense on my part that was quite enthralling andalmost painful, I saw his hand appear on the other side of Miss Skiffins.Instantly, Miss Skiffins stopped it with the neatness of a placid boxer, tookoff that girdle or cestus as before, and laid it on the table. Taking the tableto represent the path of virtue, I am justified in stating that during thewhole time of the Aged’s reading, Wemmick’s arm was straying fromthe path of virtue and being recalled to it by Miss Skiffins.At last, the Aged read himself into a light slumber. This was the time forWemmick to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, and a black bottle witha porcelain-topped cork, representing some clerical dignitary of a rubicund andsocial aspect. With the aid of these appliances we all had something warm todrink, including the Aged, who was soon awake again. Miss Skiffins mixed, and Iobserved that she and Wemmick drank out of one glass. Of course I knew betterthan to offer to see Miss Skiffins home, and under the circumstances I thoughtI had best go first; which I did, taking a cordial leave of the Aged, andhaving passed a pleasant evening.Before a week was out, I received a note from Wemmick, dated Walworth, statingthat he hoped he had made some advance in that matter appertaining to ourprivate and personal capacities, and that he would be glad if I could come andsee him again upon it. So, I went out to Walworth again, and yet again, and yetagain, and I saw him by appointment in the City several times, but never heldany communication with him on the subject in or near Little Britain. The upshotwas, that we found a worthy young merchant or shipping-broker, not longestablished in business, who wanted intelligent help, and who wanted capital,and who in due course of time and receipt would want a partner. Between him andme, secret articles were signed of which Herbert was the subject, and I paidhim half of my five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundry other payments:some, to fall due at certain dates out of my income: some, contingent on mycoming into my property. Miss Skiffins’s brother conducted thenegotiation. Wemmick pervaded it throughout, but never appeared in it.The whole business was so cleverly managed, that Herbert had not the leastsuspicion of my hand being in it. I never shall forget the radiant face withwhich he came home one afternoon, and told me, as a mighty piece of news, ofhis having fallen in with one Clarriker (the young merchant’s name), andof Clarriker’s having shown an extraordinary inclination towards him, andof his belief that the opening had come at last. Day by day as his hopes grewstronger and his face brighter, he must have thought me a more and moreaffectionate friend, for I had the greatest difficulty in restraining my tearsof triumph when I saw him so happy. At length, the thing being done, and hehaving that day entered Clarriker’s House, and he having talked to me fora whole evening in a flush of pleasure and success, I did really cry in goodearnest when I went to bed, to think that my expectations had done some good tosomebody.A great event in my life, the turning point of my life, now opens on my view.But, before I proceed to narrate it, and before I pass on to all the changes itinvolved, I must give one chapter to Estella. It is not much to give to thetheme that so long filled my heart.Chapter XXXVIII.Ifthat staid old house near the Green at Richmond should ever come to be hauntedwhen I am dead, it will be haunted, surely, by my ghost. O the many, manynights and days through which the unquiet spirit within me haunted that housewhen Estella lived there! Let my body be where it would, my spirit was alwayswandering, wandering, wandering, about that house.The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name, was a widow, withone daughter several years older than Estella. The mother looked young, and thedaughter looked old; the mother’s complexion was pink, and thedaughter’s was yellow; the mother set up for frivolity, and the daughterfor theology. They were in what is called a good position, and visited, andwere visited by, numbers of people. Little, if any, community of feelingsubsisted between them and Estella, but the understanding was established thatthey were necessary to her, and that she was necessary to them. Mrs. Brandleyhad been a friend of Miss Havisham’s before the time of her seclusion.In Mrs. Brandley’s house and out of Mrs. Brandley’s house, Isuffered every kind and degree of torture that Estella could cause me. Thenature of my relations with her, which placed me on terms of familiaritywithout placing me on terms of favour, conduced to my distraction. She made useof me to tease other admirers, and she turned the very familiarity betweenherself and me to the account of putting a constant slight on my devotion toher. If I had been her secretary, steward, half-brother, poorrelation,—if I had been a younger brother of her appointedhusband,—I could not have seemed to myself further from my hopes when Iwas nearest to her. The privilege of calling her by her name and hearing hercall me by mine became, under the circumstances an aggravation of my trials;and while I think it likely that it almost maddened her other lovers, I knowtoo certainly that it almost maddened me.She had admirers without end. No doubt my jealousy made an admirer of every onewho went near her; but there were more than enough of them without that.I saw her often at Richmond, I heard of her often in town, and I used often totake her and the Brandleys on the water; there were picnics, fête days, plays,operas, concerts, parties, all sorts of pleasures, through which I pursuedher,—and they were all miseries to me. I never had one hour’shappiness in her society, and yet my mind all round the four-and-twenty hourswas harping on the happiness of having her with me unto death.Throughout this part of our intercourse,—and it lasted, as will presentlybe seen, for what I then thought a long time,—she habitually reverted tothat tone which expressed that our association was forced upon us. There wereother times when she would come to a sudden check in this tone and in all hermany tones, and would seem to pity me.“Pip, Pip,” she said one evening, coming to such a check, when wesat apart at a darkening window of the house in Richmond; “will you nevertake warning?”“Of what?”“Of me.”“Warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, Estella?”“Do I mean! If you don’t know what I mean, you are blind.”I should have replied that Love was commonly reputed blind, but for the reasonthat I always was restrained—and this was not the least of mymiseries—by a feeling that it was ungenerous to press myself upon her,when she knew that she could not choose but obey Miss Havisham. My dread alwayswas, that this knowledge on her part laid me under a heavy disadvantage withher pride, and made me the subject of a rebellious struggle in her bosom.“At any rate,” said I, “I have no warning given me just now,for you wrote to me to come to you, this time.”“That’s true,” said Estella, with a cold careless smile thatalways chilled me.After looking at the twilight without, for a little while, she went on tosay:—“The time has come round when Miss Havisham wishes to have me for a dayat Satis. You are to take me there, and bring me back, if you will. She wouldrather I did not travel alone, and objects to receiving my maid, for she has asensitive horror of being talked of by such people. Can you take me?”“Can I take you, Estella!”“You can then? The day after to-morrow, if you please. You are to pay allcharges out of my purse. You hear the condition of your going?”“And must obey,” said I.This was all the preparation I received for that visit, or for others like it;Miss Havisham never wrote to me, nor had I ever so much as seen herhandwriting. We went down on the next day but one, and we found her in the roomwhere I had first beheld her, and it is needless to add that there was nochange in Satis House.She was even more dreadfully fond of Estella than she had been when I last sawthem together; I repeat the word advisedly, for there was something positivelydreadful in the energy of her looks and embraces. She hung upon Estella’sbeauty, hung upon her words, hung upon her gestures, and sat mumbling her owntrembling fingers while she looked at her, as though she were devouring thebeautiful creature she had reared.From Estella she looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed to pry intomy heart and probe its wounds. “How does she use you, Pip; how does sheuse you?” she asked me again, with her witch-like eagerness, even inEstella’s hearing. But, when we sat by her flickering fire at night, shewas most weird; for then, keeping Estella’s hand drawn through her armand clutched in her own hand, she extorted from her, by dint of referring backto what Estella had told her in her regular letters, the names and conditionsof the men whom she had fascinated; and as Miss Havisham dwelt upon this roll,with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased, she sat with her otherhand on her crutch stick, and her chin on that, and her wan bright eyes glaringat me, a very spectre.I saw in this, wretched though it made me, and bitter the sense of dependenceand even of degradation that it awakened,—I saw in this that Estella wasset to wreak Miss Havisham’s revenge on men, and that she was not to begiven to me until she had gratified it for a term. I saw in this, a reason forher being beforehand assigned to me. Sending her out to attract and torment anddo mischief, Miss Havisham sent her with the malicious assurance that she wasbeyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who staked upon that cast weresecured to lose. I saw in this that I, too, was tormented by a perversion ofingenuity, even while the prize was reserved for me. I saw in this the reasonfor my being staved off so long and the reason for my late guardian’sdeclining to commit himself to the formal knowledge of such a scheme. In aword, I saw in this Miss Havisham as I had her then and there before my eyes,and always had had her before my eyes; and I saw in this, the distinct shadowof the darkened and unhealthy house in which her life was hidden from the sun.The candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces on the wall.They were high from the ground, and they burnt with the steady dulness ofartificial light in air that is seldom renewed. As I looked round at them, andat the pale gloom they made, and at the stopped clock, and at the witheredarticles of bridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at her own awfulfigure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceilingand the wall, I saw in everything the construction that my mind had come to,repeated and thrown back to me. My thoughts passed into the great room acrossthe landing where the table was spread, and I saw it written, as it were, inthe falls of the cobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiderson the cloth, in the tracks of the mice as they betook their little quickenedhearts behind the panels, and in the gropings and pausings of the beetles onthe floor.It happened on the occasion of this visit that some sharp words arose betweenEstella and Miss Havisham. It was the first time I had ever seen them opposed.We were seated by the fire, as just now described, and Miss Havisham still hadEstella’s arm drawn through her own, and still clutched Estella’shand in hers, when Estella gradually began to detach herself. She had shown aproud impatience more than once before, and had rather endured that fierceaffection than accepted or returned it.“What!” said Miss Havisham, flashing her eyes upon her, “areyou tired of me?”“Only a little tired of myself,” replied Estella, disengaging herarm, and moving to the great chimney-piece, where she stood looking down at thefire.“Speak the truth, you ingrate!” cried Miss Havisham, passionatelystriking her stick upon the floor; “you are tired of me.”Estella looked at her with perfect composure, and again looked down at thefire. Her graceful figure and her beautiful face expressed a self-possessedindifference to the wild heat of the other, that was almost cruel.“You stock and stone!” exclaimed Miss Havisham. “You cold,cold heart!”“What?” said Estella, preserving her attitude of indifference asshe leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving her eyes; “doyou reproach me for being cold? You?”“Are you not?” was the fierce retort.“You should know,” said Estella. “I am what you have made me.Take all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all thefailure; in short, take me.”“O, look at her, look at her!” cried Miss Havisham, bitterly;“Look at her so hard and thankless, on the hearth where she was reared!Where I took her into this wretched breast when it was first bleeding from itsstabs, and where I have lavished years of tenderness upon her!” “At least I was no party to the compact,” said Estella, “forif I could walk and speak, when it was made, it was as much as I could do. Butwhat would you have? You have been very good to me, and I owe everything toyou. What would you have?”“Love,” replied the other.“You have it.”“I have not,” said Miss Havisham.“Mother by adoption,” retorted Estella, never departing from theeasy grace of her attitude, never raising her voice as the other did, neveryielding either to anger or tenderness,—“mother by adoption, I havesaid that I owe everything to you. All I possess is freely yours. All that youhave given me, is at your command to have again. Beyond that, I have nothing.And if you ask me to give you, what you never gave me, my gratitude and dutycannot do impossibilities.”“Did I never give her love!” cried Miss Havisham, turning wildly tome. “Did I never give her a burning love, inseparable from jealousy atall times, and from sharp pain, while she speaks thus to me! Let her call memad, let her call me mad!”“Why should I call you mad,” returned Estella, “I, of allpeople? Does any one live, who knows what set purposes you have, half as wellas I do? Does any one live, who knows what a steady memory you have, half aswell as I do? I who have sat on this same hearth on the little stool that iseven now beside you there, learning your lessons and looking up into your face,when your face was strange and frightened me!”“Soon forgotten!” moaned Miss Havisham. “Times soonforgotten!”“No, not forgotten,” retorted Estella,—“not forgotten,but treasured up in my memory. When have you found me false to your teaching?When have you found me unmindful of your lessons? When have you found me givingadmission here,” she touched her bosom with her hand, “to anythingthat you excluded? Be just to me.”“So proud, so proud!” moaned Miss Havisham, pushing away her greyhair with both her hands.“Who taught me to be proud?” returned Estella. “Who praisedme when I learnt my lesson?”“So hard, so hard!” moaned Miss Havisham, with her former action.“Who taught me to be hard?” returned Estella. “Who praised mewhen I learnt my lesson?”“But to be proud and hard to me!” Miss Havisham quiteshrieked, as she stretched out her arms. “Estella, Estella, Estella, tobe proud and hard to me!”Estella looked at her for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, but was nototherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, she looked down at the fireagain.“I cannot think,” said Estella, raising her eyes after a silence“why you should be so unreasonable when I come to see you after aseparation. I have never forgotten your wrongs and their causes. I have neverbeen unfaithful to you or your schooling. I have never shown any weakness thatI can charge myself with.”“Would it be weakness to return my love?” exclaimed Miss Havisham.“But yes, yes, she would call it so!”“I begin to think,” said Estella, in a musing way, after anothermoment of calm wonder, “that I almost understand how this comes about. Ifyou had brought up your adopted daughter wholly in the dark confinement ofthese rooms, and had never let her know that there was such a thing as thedaylight by which she had never once seen your face,—if you had donethat, and then, for a purpose had wanted her to understand the daylight andknow all about it, you would have been disappointed and angry?”Miss Havisham, with her head in her hands, sat making a low moaning, andswaying herself on her chair, but gave no answer.“Or,” said Estella,—“which is a nearer case,—ifyou had taught her, from the dawn of her intelligence, with your utmost energyand might, that there was such a thing as daylight, but that it was made to beher enemy and destroyer, and she must always turn against it, for it hadblighted you and would else blight her;—if you had done this, and then,for a purpose, had wanted her to take naturally to the daylight and she couldnot do it, you would have been disappointed and angry?”Miss Havisham sat listening (or it seemed so, for I could not see her face),but still made no answer.“So,” said Estella, “I must be taken as I have been made. Thesuccess is not mine, the failure is not mine, but the two together makeme.”Miss Havisham had settled down, I hardly knew how, upon the floor, among thefaded bridal relics with which it was strewn. I took advantage of themoment—I had sought one from the first—to leave the room, afterbeseeching Estella’s attention to her, with a movement of my hand. When Ileft, Estella was yet standing by the great chimney-piece, just as she hadstood throughout. Miss Havisham’s grey hair was all adrift upon theground, among the other bridal wrecks, and was a miserable sight to see.It was with a depressed heart that I walked in the starlight for an hour andmore, about the courtyard, and about the brewery, and about the ruined garden.When I at last took courage to return to the room, I found Estella sitting atMiss Havisham’s knee, taking up some stitches in one of those oldarticles of dress that were dropping to pieces, and of which I have often beenreminded since by the faded tatters of old banners that I have seen hanging upin cathedrals. Afterwards, Estella and I played at cards, as ofyore,—only we were skilful now, and played French games,—and so theevening wore away, and I went to bed.I lay in that separate building across the courtyard. It was the first time Ihad ever lain down to rest in Satis House, and sleep refused to come near me. Athousand Miss Havishams haunted me. She was on this side of my pillow, on that,at the head of the bed, at the foot, behind the half-opened door of thedressing-room, in the dressing-room, in the room overhead, in the roombeneath,—everywhere. At last, when the night was slow to creep on towardstwo o’clock, I felt that I absolutely could no longer bear the place as aplace to lie down in, and that I must get up. I therefore got up and put on myclothes, and went out across the yard into the long stone passage, designing togain the outer courtyard and walk there for the relief of my mind. But I was nosooner in the passage than I extinguished my candle; for I saw Miss Havishamgoing along it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry. I followed her at adistance, and saw her go up the staircase. She carried a bare candle in herhand, which she had probably taken from one of the sconces in her own room, andwas a most unearthly object by its light. Standing at the bottom of thestaircase, I felt the mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing heropen the door, and I heard her walking there, and so across into her own room,and so across again into that, never ceasing the low cry. After a time, I triedin the dark both to get out, and to go back, but I could do neither until somestreaks of day strayed in and showed me where to lay my hands. During the wholeinterval, whenever I went to the bottom of the staircase, I heard her footstep,saw her light pass above, and heard her ceaseless low cry.Before we left next day, there was no revival of the difference between her andEstella, nor was it ever revived on any similar occasion; and there were foursimilar occasions, to the best of my remembrance. Nor, did MissHavisham’s manner towards Estella in anywise change, except that Ibelieved it to have something like fear infused among its formercharacteristics.It is impossible to turn this leaf of my life, without putting BentleyDrummle’s name upon it; or I would, very gladly.On a certain occasion when the Finches were assembled in force, and when goodfeeling was being promoted in the usual manner by nobody’s agreeing withanybody else, the presiding Finch called the Grove to order, forasmuch as Mr.Drummle had not yet toasted a lady; which, according to the solemn constitutionof the society, it was the brute’s turn to do that day. I thought I sawhim leer in an ugly way at me while the decanters were going round, but asthere was no love lost between us, that might easily be. What was my indignantsurprise when he called upon the company to pledge him to“Estella!”“Estella who?” said I.“Never you mind,” retorted Drummle.“Estella of where?” said I. “You are bound to say ofwhere.” Which he was, as a Finch.“Of Richmond, gentlemen,” said Drummle, putting me out of thequestion, “and a peerless beauty.”Much he knew about peerless beauties, a mean, miserable idiot! I whisperedHerbert.“I know that lady,” said Herbert, across the table, when the toasthad been honoured.“Do you?” said Drummle.“And so do I,” I added, with a scarlet face.“Do you?” said Drummle. “O, Lord!”This was the only retort—except glass or crockery—that the heavycreature was capable of making; but, I became as highly incensed by it as if ithad been barbed with wit, and I immediately rose in my place and said that Icould not but regard it as being like the honourable Finch’s impudence tocome down to that Grove,—we always talked about coming down to thatGrove, as a neat Parliamentary turn of expression,—down to that Grove,proposing a lady of whom he knew nothing. Mr. Drummle, upon this, starting up,demanded what I meant by that? Whereupon I made him the extreme reply that Ibelieved he knew where I was to be found.Whether it was possible in a Christian country to get on without blood, afterthis, was a question on which the Finches were divided. The debate upon it grewso lively, indeed, that at least six more honourable members told six more,during the discussion, that they believed they knew where theywere to be found. However, it was decided at last (the Grove being a Court ofHonour) that if Mr. Drummle would bring never so slight a certificate from thelady, importing that he had the honour of her acquaintance, Mr. Pip mustexpress his regret, as a gentleman and a Finch, for “having been betrayedinto a warmth which.” Next day was appointed for the production (lest ourhonour should take cold from delay), and next day Drummle appeared with apolite little avowal in Estella’s hand, that she had had the honour ofdancing with him several times. This left me no course but to regret that I hadbeen “betrayed into a warmth which,” and on the whole to repudiate,as untenable, the idea that I was to be found anywhere. Drummle and I then satsnorting at one another for an hour, while the Grove engaged in indiscriminatecontradiction, and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared to havegone ahead at an amazing rate.I tell this lightly, but it was no light thing to me. For, I cannot adequatelyexpress what pain it gave me to think that Estella should show any favour to acontemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so very far below the average. To thepresent moment, I believe it to have been referable to some pure fire ofgenerosity and disinterestedness in my love for her, that I could not endurethe thought of her stooping to that hound. No doubt I should have beenmiserable whomsoever she had favoured; but a worthier object would have causedme a different kind and degree of distress.It was easy for me to find out, and I did soon find out, that Drummle had begunto follow her closely, and that she allowed him to do it. A little while, andhe was always in pursuit of her, and he and I crossed one another every day. Heheld on, in a dull persistent way, and Estella held him on; now withencouragement, now with discouragement, now almost flattering him, now openlydespising him, now knowing him very well, now scarcely remembering who he was.The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him, was used to lying in wait, however,and had the patience of his tribe. Added to that, he had a blockhead confidencein his money and in his family greatness, which sometimes did him goodservice,—almost taking the place of concentration and determined purpose.So, the Spider, doggedly watching Estella, outwatched many brighter insects,and would often uncoil himself and drop at the right nick of time.At a certain Assembly Ball at Richmond (there used to be Assembly Balls at mostplaces then), where Estella had outshone all other beauties, this blunderingDrummle so hung about her, and with so much toleration on her part, that Iresolved to speak to her concerning him. I took the next opportunity; which waswhen she was waiting for Mrs. Blandley to take her home, and was sitting apartamong some flowers, ready to go. I was with her, for I almost alwaysaccompanied them to and from such places.“Are you tired, Estella?”“Rather, Pip.”“You should be.”“Say rather, I should not be; for I have my letter to Satis House towrite, before I go to sleep.”“Recounting to-night’s triumph?” said I. “Surely a verypoor one, Estella.”“What do you mean? I didn’t know there had been any.”“Estella,” said I, “do look at that fellow in the corneryonder, who is looking over here at us.”“Why should I look at him?” returned Estella, with her eyes on meinstead. “What is there in that fellow in the corner yonder,—to useyour words,—that I need look at?”“Indeed, that is the very question I want to ask you,” said I.“For he has been hovering about you all night.”“Moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures,” replied Estella, with aglance towards him, “hover about a lighted candle. Can the candle helpit?”“No,” I returned; “but cannot the Estella help it?”“Well!” said she, laughing, after a moment, “perhaps. Yes.Anything you like.”“But, Estella, do hear me speak. It makes me wretched that you shouldencourage a man so generally despised as Drummle. You know he isdespised.”“Well?” said she.“You know he is as ungainly within as without. A deficient, ill-tempered,lowering, stupid fellow.”“Well?” said she.“You know he has nothing to recommend him but money and a ridiculous rollof addle-headed predecessors; now, don’t you?”“Well?” said she again; and each time she said it, she opened herlovely eyes the wider.To overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, I took it fromher, and said, repeating it with emphasis, “Well! Then, that is why itmakes me wretched.”Now, if I could have believed that she favoured Drummle with any idea of makingme—me—wretched, I should have been in better heart about it; but inthat habitual way of hers, she put me so entirely out of the question, that Icould believe nothing of the kind.“Pip,” said Estella, casting her glance over the room,“don’t be foolish about its effect on you. It may have its effecton others, and may be meant to have. It’s not worth discussing.”“Yes it is,” said I, “because I cannot bear that peopleshould say, ‘she throws away her graces and attractions on a mere boor,the lowest in the crowd.’”“I can bear it,” said Estella.“Oh! don’t be so proud, Estella, and so inflexible.”“Calls me proud and inflexible in this breath!” said Estella,opening her hands. “And in his last breath reproached me for stooping toa boor!”“There is no doubt you do,” said I, something hurriedly, “forI have seen you give him looks and smiles this very night, such as you nevergive to—me.”“Do you want me then,” said Estella, turning suddenly with a fixedand serious, if not angry, look, “to deceive and entrap you?”“Do you deceive and entrap him, Estella?”“Yes, and many others,—all of them but you. Here is Mrs. Brandley.I’ll say no more.”And now that I have given the one chapter to the theme that so filled my heart,and so often made it ache and ache again, I pass on unhindered, to the eventthat had impended over me longer yet; the event that had begun to be preparedfor, before I knew that the world held Estella, and in the days when her babyintelligence was receiving its first distortions from Miss Havisham’swasting hands.In the Eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state inthe flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry, the tunnel for therope to hold it in its place was slowly carried through the leagues of rock,the slab was slowly raised and fitted in the roof, the rope was rove to it andslowly taken through the miles of hollow to the great iron ring. All being madeready with much labour, and the hour come, the sultan was aroused in the deadof the night, and the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the greatiron ring was put into his hand, and he struck with it, and the rope parted andrushed away, and the ceiling fell. So, in my case; all the work, near and afar,that tended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant the blow wasstruck, and the roof of my stronghold dropped upon me.Chapter XXXIX.I wasthree-and-twenty years of age. Not another word had I heard to enlighten me onthe subject of my expectations, and my twenty-third birthday was a week gone.We had left Barnard’s Inn more than a year, and lived in the Temple. Ourchambers were in Garden-court, down by the river.Mr. Pocket and I had for some time parted company as to our original relations,though we continued on the best terms. Notwithstanding my inability to settleto anything,—which I hope arose out of the restless and incomplete tenureon which I held my means,—I had a taste for reading, and read regularlyso many hours a day. That matter of Herbert’s was still progressing, andeverything with me was as I have brought it down to the close of the lastpreceding chapter.Business had taken Herbert on a journey to Marseilles. I was alone, and had adull sense of being alone. Dispirited and anxious, long hoping that to-morrowor next week would clear my way, and long disappointed, I sadly missed thecheerful face and ready response of my friend.It was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud, mud, mud,deep in all the streets. Day after day, a vast heavy veil had been driving overLondon from the East, and it drove still, as if in the East there were aneternity of cloud and wind. So furious had been the gusts, that high buildingsin town had had the lead stripped off their roofs; and in the country, treeshad been torn up, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts hadcome in from the coast, of shipwreck and death. Violent blasts of rain hadaccompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed as I sat down to readhad been the worst of all.Alterations have been made in that part of the Temple since that time, and ithas not now so lonely a character as it had then, nor is it so exposed to theriver. We lived at the top of the last house, and the wind rushing up the rivershook the house that night, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea.When the rain came with it and dashed against the windows, I thought, raisingmy eyes to them as they rocked, that I might have fancied myself in astorm-beaten lighthouse. Occasionally, the smoke came rolling down the chimneyas though it could not bear to go out into such a night; and when I set thedoors open and looked down the staircase, the staircase lamps were blown out;and when I shaded my face with my hands and looked through the black windows(opening them ever so little was out of the question in the teeth of such windand rain), I saw that the lamps in the court were blown out, and that the lampson the bridges and the shore were shuddering, and that the coal-fires in bargeson the river were being carried away before the wind like red-hot splashes inthe rain.I read with my watch upon the table, purposing to close my book at eleveno’clock. As I shut it, Saint Paul’s, and all the many church-clocksin the City—some leading, some accompanying, some following—struckthat hour. The sound was curiously flawed by the wind; and I was listening, andthinking how the wind assailed and tore it, when I heard a footstep on thestair.What nervous folly made me start, and awfully connect it with the footstep ofmy dead sister, matters not. It was past in a moment, and I listened again, andheard the footstep stumble in coming on. Remembering then, that thestaircase-lights were blown out, I took up my reading-lamp and went out to thestair-head. Whoever was below had stopped on seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.“There is some one down there, is there not?” I called out, lookingdown.“Yes,” said a voice from the darkness beneath.“What floor do you want?”“The top. Mr. Pip.”“That is my name.—There is nothing the matter?”“Nothing the matter,” returned the voice. And the man came on.I stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and he came slowly withinits light. It was a shaded lamp, to shine upon a book, and its circle of lightwas very contracted; so that he was in it for a mere instant, and then out ofit. In the instant, I had seen a face that was strange to me, looking up withan incomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight of me.Moving the lamp as the man moved, I made out that he was substantially dressed,but roughly, like a voyager by sea. That he had long iron-grey hair. That hisage was about sixty. That he was a muscular man, strong on his legs, and thathe was browned and hardened by exposure to weather. As he ascended the laststair or two, and the light of my lamp included us both, I saw, with a stupidkind of amazement, that he was holding out both his hands to me.“Pray what is your business?” I asked him.“My business?” he repeated, pausing. “Ah! Yes. I will explainmy business, by your leave.”“Do you wish to come in?”“Yes,” he replied; “I wish to come in, master.”I had asked him the question inhospitably enough, for I resented the sort ofbright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face. I resented it,because it seemed to imply that he expected me to respond to it. But I took himinto the room I had just left, and, having set the lamp on the table, asked himas civilly as I could to explain himself.He looked about him with the strangest air,—an air of wondering pleasure,as if he had some part in the things he admired,—and he pulled off arough outer coat, and his hat. Then, I saw that his head was furrowed and bald,and that the long iron-grey hair grew only on its sides. But, I saw nothingthat in the least explained him. On the contrary, I saw him next moment, oncemore holding out both his hands to me.“What do you mean?” said I, half suspecting him to be mad.He stopped in his looking at me, and slowly rubbed his right hand over hishead. “It’s disapinting to a man,” he said, in a coarsebroken voice, “arter having looked for’ard so distant, and come sofur; but you’re not to blame for that,—neither on us is to blamefor that. I’ll speak in half a minute. Give me half a minute,please.”He sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered his foreheadwith his large brown veinous hands. I looked at him attentively then, andrecoiled a little from him; but I did not know him.“There’s no one nigh,” said he, looking over his shoulder;“is there?”“Why do you, a stranger coming into my rooms at this time of the night,ask that question?” said I.“You’re a game one,” he returned, shaking his head at me witha deliberate affection, at once most unintelligible and most exasperating;“I’m glad you’ve grow’d up, a game one! But don’tcatch hold of me. You’d be sorry arterwards to have done it.”I relinquished the intention he had detected, for I knew him! Even yet I couldnot recall a single feature, but I knew him! If the wind and the rain haddriven away the intervening years, had scattered all the intervening objects,had swept us to the churchyard where we first stood face to face on suchdifferent levels, I could not have known my convict more distinctly than I knewhim now as he sat in the chair before the fire. No need to take a file from hispocket and show it to me; no need to take the handkerchief from his neck andtwist it round his head; no need to hug himself with both his arms, and take ashivering turn across the room, looking back at me for recognition. I knew himbefore he gave me one of those aids, though, a moment before, I had not beenconscious of remotely suspecting his identity.He came back to where I stood, and again held out both his hands. Not knowingwhat to do,—for, in my astonishment I had lost myself-possession,—I reluctantly gave him my hands. He grasped themheartily, raised them to his lips, kissed them, and still held them.“You acted noble, my boy,” said he. “Noble, Pip! And I havenever forgot it!”At a change in his manner as if he were even going to embrace me, I laid a handupon his breast and put him away.“Stay!” said I. “Keep off! If you are grateful to me for whatI did when I was a little child, I hope you have shown your gratitude bymending your way of life. If you have come here to thank me, it was notnecessary. Still, however you have found me out, there must be something goodin the feeling that has brought you here, and I will not repulse you; butsurely you must understand that—I—”My attention was so attracted by the singularity of his fixed look at me, thatthe words died away on my tongue.“You was a-saying,” he observed, when we had confronted one anotherin silence, “that surely I must understand. What, surely must Iunderstand?”“That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with you of longago, under these different circumstances. I am glad to believe you haverepented and recovered yourself. I am glad to tell you so. I am glad that,thinking I deserve to be thanked, you have come to thank me. But our ways aredifferent ways, none the less. You are wet, and you look weary. Will you drinksomething before you go?”He had replaced his neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenly observant of me,biting a long end of it. “I think,” he answered, still with the endat his mouth and still observant of me, “that I will drink (Ithank you) afore I go.”There was a tray ready on a side-table. I brought it to the table near thefire, and asked him what he would have? He touched one of the bottles withoutlooking at it or speaking, and I made him some hot rum and water. I tried tokeep my hand steady while I did so, but his look at me as he leaned back in hischair with the long draggled end of his neckerchief between histeeth—evidently forgotten—made my hand very difficult to master.When at last I put the glass to him, I saw with amazement that his eyes werefull of tears.Up to this time I had remained standing, not to disguise that I wished himgone. But I was softened by the softened aspect of the man, and felt a touch ofreproach. “I hope,” said I, hurriedly putting something into aglass for myself, and drawing a chair to the table, “that you will notthink I spoke harshly to you just now. I had no intention of doing it, and I amsorry for it if I did. I wish you well and happy!”As I put my glass to my lips, he glanced with surprise at the end of hisneckerchief, dropping from his mouth when he opened it, and stretched out hishand. I gave him mine, and then he drank, and drew his sleeve across his eyesand forehead.“How are you living?” I asked him.“I’ve been a sheep-farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides,away in the new world,” said he; “many a thousand mile of stormywater off from this.”“I hope you have done well?”“I’ve done wonderfully well. There’s others went out alongerme as has done well too, but no man has done nigh as well as me. I’mfamous for it.”“I am glad to hear it.”“I hope to hear you say so, my dear boy.”Without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone in which theywere spoken, I turned off to a point that had just come into my mind.“Have you ever seen a messenger you once sent to me,” I inquired,“since he undertook that trust?”“Never set eyes upon him. I warn’t likely to it.”“He came faithfully, and he brought me the two one-pound notes. I was apoor boy then, as you know, and to a poor boy they were a little fortune. But,like you, I have done well since, and you must let me pay them back. You canput them to some other poor boy’s use.” I took out my purse.He watched me as I laid my purse upon the table and opened it, and he watchedme as I separated two one-pound notes from its contents. They were clean andnew, and I spread them out and handed them over to him. Still watching me, helaid them one upon the other, folded them long-wise, gave them a twist, setfire to them at the lamp, and dropped the ashes into the tray.“May I make so bold,” he said then, with a smile that was like afrown, and with a frown that was like a smile, “as ask you how youhave done well, since you and me was out on them lone shivering marshes?”“How?”“Ah!”He emptied his glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire, with his heavybrown hand on the mantel-shelf. He put a foot up to the bars, to dry and warmit, and the wet boot began to steam; but, he neither looked at it, nor at thefire, but steadily looked at me. It was only now that I began to tremble.When my lips had parted, and had shaped some words that were without sound, Iforced myself to tell him (though I could not do it distinctly), that I hadbeen chosen to succeed to some property.“Might a mere warmint ask what property?” said he.I faltered, “I don’t know.”“Might a mere warmint ask whose property?” said he.I faltered again, “I don’t know.”“Could I make a guess, I wonder,” said the Convict, “at yourincome since you come of age! As to the first figure now. Five?”With my heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, I rose out ofmy chair, and stood with my hand upon the back of it, looking wildly at him.“Concerning a guardian,” he went on. “There ought to havebeen some guardian, or such-like, whiles you was a minor. Some lawyer, maybe.As to the first letter of that lawyer’s name now. Would it be J?”All the truth of my position came flashing on me; and its disappointments,dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds, rushed in in such a multitudethat I was borne down by them and had to struggle for every breath I drew.“Put it,” he resumed, “as the employer of that lawyer whosename begun with a J, and might be Jaggers,—put it as he had come over seato Portsmouth, and had landed there, and had wanted to come on to you.‘However, you have found me out,’ you says just now. Well! However,did I find you out? Why, I wrote from Portsmouth to a person in London, forparticulars of your address. That person’s name? Why, Wemmick.”I could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save my life. I stood,with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on my breast, where I seemed to besuffocating,—I stood so, looking wildly at him, until I grasped at thechair, when the room began to surge and turn. He caught me, drew me to thesofa, put me up against the cushions, and bent on one knee before me, bringingthe face that I now well remembered, and that I shuddered at, very near tomine.“Yes, Pip, dear boy, I’ve made a gentleman on you! It’s mewot has done it! I swore that time, sure as ever I earned a guinea, that guineashould go to you. I swore arterwards, sure as ever I spec’lated and gotrich, you should get rich. I lived rough, that you should live smooth; I workedhard, that you should be above work. What odds, dear boy? Do I tell it, fur youto feel a obligation? Not a bit. I tell it, fur you to know as that therehunted dunghill dog wot you kep life in, got his head so high that he couldmake a gentleman,—and, Pip, you’re him!”The abhorrence in which I held the man, the dread I had of him, the repugnancewith which I shrank from him, could not have been exceeded if he had been someterrible beast.“Look’ee here, Pip. I’m your second father. You’re myson,—more to me nor any son. I’ve put away money, only for you tospend. When I was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no facesbut faces of sheep till I half forgot wot men’s and women’s faceswos like, I see yourn. I drops my knife many a time in that hut when I wasa-eating my dinner or my supper, and I says, ‘Here’s the boy again,a looking at me whiles I eats and drinks!’ I see you there a many times,as plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes. ‘Lord strike medead!’ I says each time,—and I goes out in the air to say it underthe open heavens,—‘but wot, if I gets liberty and money, I’llmake that boy a gentleman!’ And I done it. Why, look at you, dear boy!Look at these here lodgings of yourn, fit for a lord! A lord? Ah! You shallshow money with lords for wagers, and beat ’em!”In his heat and triumph, and in his knowledge that I had been nearly fainting,he did not remark on my reception of all this. It was the one grain of relief Ihad.“Look’ee here!” he went on, taking my watch out of my pocket,and turning towards him a ring on my finger, while I recoiled from his touch asif he had been a snake, “a gold ’un and a beauty:that’s a gentleman’s, I hope! A diamond all set round withrubies; that’s a gentleman’s, I hope! Look at your linen;fine and beautiful! Look at your clothes; better ain’t to be got! Andyour books too,” turning his eyes round the room, “mounting up, ontheir shelves, by hundreds! And you read ’em; don’t you? I seeyou’d been a reading of ’em when I come in. Ha, ha, ha! You shallread ’em to me, dear boy! And if they’re in foreign languages wot Idon’t understand, I shall be just as proud as if I did.”Again he took both my hands and put them to his lips, while my blood ran coldwithin me.“Don’t you mind talking, Pip,” said he, after again drawinghis sleeve over his eyes and forehead, as the click came in his throat which Iwell remembered,—and he was all the more horrible to me that he was somuch in earnest; “you can’t do better nor keep quiet, dear boy. Youain’t looked slowly forward to this as I have; you wosn’t preparedfor this as I wos. But didn’t you never think it might be me?”“O no, no, no,” I returned, “Never, never!”“Well, you see it wos me, and single-handed. Never a soul in itbut my own self and Mr. Jaggers.”“Was there no one else?” I asked.“No,” said he, with a glance of surprise: “who else shouldthere be? And, dear boy, how good looking you have growed! There’s brighteyes somewheres—eh? Isn’t there bright eyes somewheres, wot youlove the thoughts on?”O Estella, Estella!“They shall be yourn, dear boy, if money can buy ’em. Not that agentleman like you, so well set up as you, can’t win ’em off of hisown game; but money shall back you! Let me finish wot I was a telling you, dearboy. From that there hut and that there hiring-out, I got money left me by mymaster (which died, and had been the same as me), and got my liberty and wentfor myself. In every single thing I went for, I went for you. ‘Lordstrike a blight upon it,’ I says, wotever it was I went for, ‘if itain’t for him!’ It all prospered wonderful. As I giv’ you tounderstand just now, I’m famous for it. It was the money left me, and thegains of the first few year wot I sent home to Mr. Jaggers—all foryou—when he first come arter you, agreeable to my letter.”O that he had never come! That he had left me at the forge,—far fromcontented, yet, by comparison happy!“And then, dear boy, it was a recompense to me, look’ee here, toknow in secret that I was making a gentleman. The blood horses of themcolonists might fling up the dust over me as I was walking; what do I say? Isays to myself, ‘I’m making a better gentleman nor everyou’ll be!’ When one of ’em says to another, ‘Hewas a convict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellow now, for allhe’s lucky,’ what do I say? I says to myself, ‘If Iain’t a gentleman, nor yet ain’t got no learning, I’m theowner of such. All on you owns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-upLondon gentleman?’ This way I kep myself a-going. And this way I heldsteady afore my mind that I would for certain come one day and see my boy, andmake myself known to him, on his own ground.”He laid his hand on my shoulder. I shuddered at the thought that for anything Iknew, his hand might be stained with blood.“It warn’t easy, Pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet itwarn’t safe. But I held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger Iheld, for I was determined, and my mind firm made up. At last I done it. Dearboy, I done it!”I tried to collect my thoughts, but I was stunned. Throughout, I had seemed tomyself to attend more to the wind and the rain than to him; even now, I couldnot separate his voice from those voices, though those were loud and his wassilent.“Where will you put me?” he asked, presently. “I must be putsomewheres, dear boy.”“To sleep?” said I.“Yes. And to sleep long and sound,” he answered; “forI’ve been sea-tossed and sea-washed, months and months.”“My friend and companion,” said I, rising from the sofa, “isabsent; you must have his room.”“He won’t come back to-morrow; will he?”“No,” said I, answering almost mechanically, in spite of my utmostefforts; “not to-morrow.”“Because, look’ee here, dear boy,” he said, dropping hisvoice, and laying a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner,“caution is necessary.”“How do you mean? Caution?”“By G——, it’s Death!”“What’s death?”“I was sent for life. It’s death to come back. There’s beenovermuch coming back of late years, and I should of a certainty be hanged iftook.”Nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loading wretched me withhis gold and silver chains for years, had risked his life to come to me, and Iheld it there in my keeping! If I had loved him instead of abhorring him; if Ihad been attracted to him by the strongest admiration and affection, instead ofshrinking from him with the strongest repugnance; it could have been no worse.On the contrary, it would have been better, for his preservation would thenhave naturally and tenderly addressed my heart.My first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be seen fromwithout, and then to close and make fast the doors. While I did so, he stood atthe table drinking rum and eating biscuit; and when I saw him thus engaged, Isaw my convict on the marshes at his meal again. It almost seemed to me as ifhe must stoop down presently, to file at his leg.When I had gone into Herbert’s room, and had shut off any othercommunication between it and the staircase than through the room in which ourconversation had been held, I asked him if he would go to bed? He said yes, butasked me for some of my “gentleman’s linen” to put on in themorning. I brought it out, and laid it ready for him, and my blood again rancold when he again took me by both hands to give me good-night.I got away from him, without knowing how I did it, and mended the fire in theroom where we had been together, and sat down by it, afraid to go to bed. Foran hour or more, I remained too stunned to think; and it was not until I beganto think, that I began fully to know how wrecked I was, and how the ship inwhich I had sailed was gone to pieces.Miss Havisham’s intentions towards me, all a mere dream; Estella notdesigned for me; I only suffered in Satis House as a convenience, a sting forthe greedy relations, a model with a mechanical heart to practise on when noother practice was at hand; those were the first smarts I had. But, sharpestand deepest pain of all,—it was for the convict, guilty of I knew notwhat crimes, and liable to be taken out of those rooms where I sat thinking,and hanged at the Old Bailey door, that I had deserted Joe.I would not have gone back to Joe now, I would not have gone back to Biddy now,for any consideration; simply, I suppose, because my sense of my own worthlessconduct to them was greater than every consideration. No wisdom on earth couldhave given me the comfort that I should have derived from their simplicity andfidelity; but I could never, never, undo what I had done.In every rage of wind and rush of rain, I heard pursuers. Twice, I could havesworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer door. With these fearsupon me, I began either to imagine or recall that I had had mysterious warningsof this man’s approach. That, for weeks gone by, I had passed faces inthe streets which I had thought like his. That these likenesses had grown morenumerous, as he, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer. That his wicked spirithad somehow sent these messengers to mine, and that now on this stormy night hewas as good as his word, and with me.Crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that I had seen him withmy childish eyes to be a desperately violent man; that I had heard that otherconvict reiterate that he had tried to murder him; that I had seen him down inthe ditch tearing and fighting like a wild beast. Out of such remembrances Ibrought into the light of the fire a half-formed terror that it might not besafe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night. Thisdilated until it filled the room, and impelled me to take a candle and go inand look at my dreadful burden.He had rolled a handkerchief round his head, and his face was set and loweringin his sleep. But he was asleep, and quietly too, though he had a pistol lyingon the pillow. Assured of this, I softly removed the key to the outside of hisdoor, and turned it on him before I again sat down by the fire. Gradually Islipped from the chair and lay on the floor. When I awoke without having partedin my sleep with the perception of my wretchedness, the clocks of the Eastwardchurches were striking five, the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead,and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness.THIS IS THE END OF THE SECOND STAGE OF PIP’S EXPECTATIONS.Chapter XL.It wasfortunate for me that I had to take precautions to ensure (so far as I could)the safety of my dreaded visitor; for, this thought pressing on me when Iawoke, held other thoughts in a confused concourse at a distance.The impossibility of keeping him concealed in the chambers was self-evident. Itcould not be done, and the attempt to do it would inevitably engendersuspicion. True, I had no Avenger in my service now, but I was looked after byan inflammatory old female, assisted by an animated rag-bag whom she called herniece, and to keep a room secret from them would be to invite curiosity andexaggeration. They both had weak eyes, which I had long attributed to theirchronically looking in at keyholes, and they were always at hand when notwanted; indeed that was their only reliable quality besides larceny. Not to getup a mystery with these people, I resolved to announce in the morning that myuncle had unexpectedly come from the country.This course I decided on while I was yet groping about in the darkness for themeans of getting a light. Not stumbling on the means after all, I was fain togo out to the adjacent Lodge and get the watchman there to come with hislantern. Now, in groping my way down the black staircase I fell over something,and that something was a man crouching in a corner.As the man made no answer when I asked him what he did there, but eluded mytouch in silence, I ran to the Lodge and urged the watchman to come quickly;telling him of the incident on the way back. The wind being as fierce as ever,we did not care to endanger the light in the lantern by rekindling theextinguished lamps on the staircase, but we examined the staircase from thebottom to the top and found no one there. It then occurred to me as possiblethat the man might have slipped into my rooms; so, lighting my candle at thewatchman’s, and leaving him standing at the door, I examined themcarefully, including the room in which my dreaded guest lay asleep. All wasquiet, and assuredly no other man was in those chambers.It troubled me that there should have been a lurker on the stairs, on thatnight of all nights in the year, and I asked the watchman, on the chance ofeliciting some hopeful explanation as I handed him a dram at the door, whetherhe had admitted at his gate any gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out?Yes, he said; at different times of the night, three. One lived in FountainCourt, and the other two lived in the Lane, and he had seen them all go home.Again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed apart had been in the country for some weeks, and he certainly had not returnedin the night, because we had seen his door with his seal on it as we cameupstairs.“The night being so bad, sir,” said the watchman, as he gave meback my glass, “uncommon few have come in at my gate. Besides them threegentlemen that I have named, I don’t call to mind another since abouteleven o’clock, when a stranger asked for you.”“My uncle,” I muttered. “Yes.”“You saw him, sir?”“Yes. Oh yes.”“Likewise the person with him?”“Person with him!” I repeated.“I judged the person to be with him,” returned the watchman.“The person stopped, when he stopped to make inquiry of me, and theperson took this way when he took this way.”“What sort of person?”The watchman had not particularly noticed; he should say a working person; tothe best of his belief, he had a dust-coloured kind of clothes on, under a darkcoat. The watchman made more light of the matter than I did, and naturally; nothaving my reason for attaching weight to it.When I had got rid of him, which I thought it well to do without prolongingexplanations, my mind was much troubled by these two circumstances takentogether. Whereas they were easy of innocent solution apart,—as, forinstance, some diner out or diner at home, who had not gone near thiswatchman’s gate, might have strayed to my staircase and dropped asleepthere,—and my nameless visitor might have brought some one with him toshow him the way,—still, joined, they had an ugly look to one as prone todistrust and fear as the changes of a few hours had made me.I lighted my fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of themorning, and fell into a doze before it. I seemed to have been dozing a wholenight when the clocks struck six. As there was full an hour and a half betweenme and daylight, I dozed again; now, waking up uneasily, with prolixconversations about nothing, in my ears; now, making thunder of the wind in thechimney; at length, falling off into a profound sleep from which the daylightwoke me with a start.All this time I had never been able to consider my own situation, nor could Ido so yet. I had not the power to attend to it. I was greatly dejected anddistressed, but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way. As to forming any planfor the future, I could as soon have formed an elephant. When I opened theshutters and looked out at the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when Iwalked from room to room; when I sat down again shivering, before the fire,waiting for my laundress to appear; I thought how miserable I was, but hardlyknew why, or how long I had been so, or on what day of the week I made thereflection, or even who I was that made it.At last, the old woman and the niece came in,—the latter with a head noteasily distinguishable from her dusty broom,—and testified surprise atsight of me and the fire. To whom I imparted how my uncle had come in the nightand was then asleep, and how the breakfast preparations were to be modifiedaccordingly. Then I washed and dressed while they knocked the furniture aboutand made a dust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, I found myselfsitting by the fire again, waiting for—Him—to come to breakfast.By and by, his door opened and he came out. I could not bring myself to bearthe sight of him, and I thought he had a worse look by daylight.“I do not even know,” said I, speaking low as he took his seat atthe table, “by what name to call you. I have given out that you are myuncle.”“That’s it, dear boy! Call me uncle.”“You assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship?”“Yes, dear boy. I took the name of Provis.”“Do you mean to keep that name?”“Why, yes, dear boy, it’s as good as another,—unlessyou’d like another.”“What is your real name?” I asked him in a whisper.“Magwitch,” he answered, in the same tone; “chrisen’dAbel.”“What were you brought up to be?”“A warmint, dear boy.”He answered quite seriously, and used the word as if it denoted someprofession.“When you came into the Temple last night—” said I, pausingto wonder whether that could really have been last night, which seemed so longago.“Yes, dear boy?”“When you came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here, hadyou any one with you?”“With me? No, dear boy.”“But there was some one there?”“I didn’t take particular notice,” he said, dubiously,“not knowing the ways of the place. But I think there was aperson, too, come in alonger me.”“Are you known in London?”“I hope not!” said he, giving his neck a jerk with his forefingerthat made me turn hot and sick.“Were you known in London, once?”“Not over and above, dear boy. I was in the provinces mostly.”“Were you—tried—in London?”“Which time?” said he, with a sharp look.“The last time.”He nodded. “First knowed Mr. Jaggers that way. Jaggers was for me.”It was on my lips to ask him what he was tried for, but he took up a knife,gave it a flourish, and with the words, “And what I done is worked outand paid for!” fell to at his breakfast.He ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all his actions wereuncouth, noisy, and greedy. Some of his teeth had failed him since I saw himeat on the marshes, and as he turned his food in his mouth, and turned his headsideways to bring his strongest fangs to bear upon it, he looked terribly likea hungry old dog. If I had begun with any appetite, he would have taken itaway, and I should have sat much as I did,—repelled from him by aninsurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth.“I’m a heavy grubber, dear boy,” he said, as a polite kind ofapology when he made an end of his meal, “but I always was. If it hadbeen in my constitution to be a lighter grubber, I might ha’ got intolighter trouble. Similarly, I must have my smoke. When I was first hired out asshepherd t’other side the world, it’s my belief I should ha’turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep myself, if I hadn’t a had mysmoke.”As he said so, he got up from table, and putting his hand into the breast ofthe pea-coat he wore, brought out a short black pipe, and a handful of loosetobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head. Having filled his pipe, he putthe surplus tobacco back again, as if his pocket were a drawer. Then, he took alive coal from the fire with the tongs, and lighted his pipe at it, and thenturned round on the hearth-rug with his back to the fire, and went through hisfavourite action of holding out both his hands for mine.“And this,” said he, dandling my hands up and down in his, as hepuffed at his pipe,—“and this is the gentleman what I made! Thereal genuine One! It does me good fur to look at you, Pip. All Istip’late, is, to stand by and look at you, dear boy!”I released my hands as soon as I could, and found that I was beginning slowlyto settle down to the contemplation of my condition. What I was chained to, andhow heavily, became intelligible to me, as I heard his hoarse voice, and satlooking up at his furrowed bald head with its iron grey hair at the sides.“I mustn’t see my gentleman a footing it in the mire of thestreets; there mustn’t be no mud on his boots. My gentleman musthave horses, Pip! Horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horses for hisservant to ride and drive as well. Shall colonists have their horses (and blood’uns, if you please, good Lord!) and not my London gentleman? No, no.We’ll show ’em another pair of shoes than that, Pip; won’tus?”He took out of his pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers, andtossed it on the table.“There’s something worth spending in that there book, dear boy.It’s yourn. All I’ve got ain’t mine; it’s yourn.Don’t you be afeerd on it. There’s more where that come from.I’ve come to the old country fur to see my gentleman spend his moneylike a gentleman. That’ll be my pleasure. Mypleasure ’ull be fur to see him do it. And blast you all!” he woundup, looking round the room and snapping his fingers once with a loud snap,“blast you every one, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist astirring up the dust, I’ll show a better gentleman than the whole kit onyou put together!”“Stop!” said I, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, “Iwant to speak to you. I want to know what is to be done. I want to know how youare to be kept out of danger, how long you are going to stay, what projects youhave.”“Look’ee here, Pip,” said he, laying his hand on my arm in asuddenly altered and subdued manner; “first of all, look’ee here. Iforgot myself half a minute ago. What I said was low; that’s what it was;low. Look’ee here, Pip. Look over it. I ain’t a-going to below.”“First,” I resumed, half groaning, “what precautions can betaken against your being recognised and seized?”“No, dear boy,” he said, in the same tone as before, “thatdon’t go first. Lowness goes first. I ain’t took so many year tomake a gentleman, not without knowing what’s due to him. Look’eehere, Pip. I was low; that’s what I was; low. Look over it, dearboy.”Some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved me to a fretful laugh, as I replied,“I have looked over it. In Heaven’s name, don’t harpupon it!”“Yes, but look’ee here,” he persisted. “Dear boy, Iain’t come so fur, not fur to be low. Now, go on, dear boy. You was asaying—”“How are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?”“Well, dear boy, the danger ain’t so great. Without I was informedagen, the danger ain’t so much to signify. There’s Jaggers, andthere’s Wemmick, and there’s you. Who else is there toinform?”“Is there no chance person who might identify you in the street?”said I.“Well,” he returned, “there ain’t many. Nor yet Idon’t intend to advertise myself in the newspapers by the name of A.M.come back from Botany Bay; and years have rolled away, and who’s to gainby it? Still, look’ee here, Pip. If the danger had been fifty times asgreat, I should ha’ come to see you, mind you, just the same.”“And how long do you remain?”“How long?” said he, taking his black pipe from his mouth, anddropping his jaw as he stared at me. “I’m not a-going back.I’ve come for good.”“Where are you to live?” said I. “What is to be done withyou? Where will you be safe?”“Dear boy,” he returned, “there’s disguising wigs canbe bought for money, and there’s hair powder, and spectacles, and blackclothes,—shorts and what not. Others has done it safe afore, and whatothers has done afore, others can do agen. As to the where and how of living,dear boy, give me your own opinions on it.”“You take it smoothly now,” said I, “but you were veryserious last night, when you swore it was Death.”“And so I swear it is Death,” said he, putting his pipe back in hismouth, “and Death by the rope, in the open street not fur from this, andit’s serious that you should fully understand it to be so. What then,when that’s once done? Here I am. To go back now ’ud be as bad asto stand ground—worse. Besides, Pip, I’m here, because I’vemeant it by you, years and years. As to what I dare, I’m a old bird now,as has dared all manner of traps since first he was fledged, and I’m notafeerd to perch upon a scarecrow. If there’s Death hid inside of it,there is, and let him come out, and I’ll face him, and then I’llbelieve in him and not afore. And now let me have a look at my gentlemanagen.”Once more, he took me by both hands and surveyed me with an air of admiringproprietorship: smoking with great complacency all the while.It appeared to me that I could do no better than secure him some quiet lodginghard by, of which he might take possession when Herbert returned: whom Iexpected in two or three days. That the secret must be confided to Herbert as amatter of unavoidable necessity, even if I could have put the immense relief Ishould derive from sharing it with him out of the question, was plain to me.But it was by no means so plain to Mr. Provis (I resolved to call him by thatname), who reserved his consent to Herbert’s participation until heshould have seen him and formed a favourable judgment of his physiognomy.“And even then, dear boy,” said he, pulling a greasy little claspedblack Testament out of his pocket, “we’ll have him on hisoath.”To state that my terrible patron carried this little black book about the worldsolely to swear people on in cases of emergency, would be to state what I neverquite established; but this I can say, that I never knew him put it to anyother use. The book itself had the appearance of having been stolen from somecourt of justice, and perhaps his knowledge of its antecedents, combined withhis own experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on its powers as a sort oflegal spell or charm. On this first occasion of his producing it, I recalledhow he had made me swear fidelity in the churchyard long ago, and how he haddescribed himself last night as always swearing to his resolutions in hissolitude.As he was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which he looked as ifhe had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, I next discussed with him whatdress he should wear. He cherished an extraordinary belief in the virtues of“shorts” as a disguise, and had in his own mind sketched a dressfor himself that would have made him something between a dean and a dentist. Itwas with considerable difficulty that I won him over to the assumption of adress more like a prosperous farmer’s; and we arranged that he should cuthis hair close, and wear a little powder. Lastly, as he had not yet been seenby the laundress or her niece, he was to keep himself out of their view untilhis change of dress was made.It would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions; but in my dazed,not to say distracted, state, it took so long, that I did not get out tofurther them until two or three in the afternoon. He was to remain shut up inthe chambers while I was gone, and was on no account to open the door.There being to my knowledge a respectable lodging-house in Essex Street, theback of which looked into the Temple, and was almost within hail of my windows,I first of all repaired to that house, and was so fortunate as to secure thesecond floor for my uncle, Mr. Provis. I then went from shop to shop, makingsuch purchases as were necessary to the change in his appearance. This businesstransacted, I turned my face, on my own account, to Little Britain. Mr. Jaggerswas at his desk, but, seeing me enter, got up immediately and stood before hisfire.“Now, Pip,” said he, “be careful.”“I will, sir,” I returned. For, coming along I had thought well ofwhat I was going to say.“Don’t commit yourself,” said Mr. Jaggers, “anddon’t commit any one. You understand—any one. Don’t tell meanything: I don’t want to know anything; I am not curious.”Of course I saw that he knew the man was come.“I merely want, Mr. Jaggers,” said I, “to assure myself thatwhat I have been told is true. I have no hope of its being untrue, but at leastI may verify it.”Mr. Jaggers nodded. “But did you say ‘told’ or‘informed’?” he asked me, with his head on one side, and notlooking at me, but looking in a listening way at the floor. “Told wouldseem to imply verbal communication. You can’t have verbal communicationwith a man in New South Wales, you know.”“I will say, informed, Mr. Jaggers.”“Good.”“I have been informed by a person named Abel Magwitch, that he is thebenefactor so long unknown to me.”“That is the man,” said Mr. Jaggers, “in New SouthWales.”“And only he?” said I.“And only he,” said Mr. Jaggers.“I am not so unreasonable, sir, as to think you at all responsible for mymistakes and wrong conclusions; but I always supposed it was MissHavisham.”“As you say, Pip,” returned Mr. Jaggers, turning his eyes upon mecoolly, and taking a bite at his forefinger, “I am not at all responsiblefor that.”“And yet it looked so like it, sir,” I pleaded with a downcastheart.“Not a particle of evidence, Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, shaking hishead and gathering up his skirts. “Take nothing on its looks; takeeverything on evidence. There’s no better rule.”“I have no more to say,” said I, with a sigh, after standing silentfor a little while. “I have verified my information, and there’s anend.”“And Magwitch—in New South Wales—having at last disclosedhimself,” said Mr. Jaggers, “you will comprehend, Pip, how rigidlythroughout my communication with you, I have always adhered to the strict lineof fact. There has never been the least departure from the strict line of fact.You are quite aware of that?”“Quite, sir.”“I communicated to Magwitch—in New South Wales—when he firstwrote to me—from New South Wales—the caution that he must notexpect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact. I also communicated tohim another caution. He appeared to me to have obscurely hinted in his letterat some distant idea he had of seeing you in England here. I cautioned him thatI must hear no more of that; that he was not at all likely to obtain a pardon;that he was expatriated for the term of his natural life; and that hispresenting himself in this country would be an act of felony, rendering himliable to the extreme penalty of the law. I gave Magwitch that caution,”said Mr. Jaggers, looking hard at me; “I wrote it to New South Wales. Heguided himself by it, no doubt.”“No doubt,” said I.“I have been informed by Wemmick,” pursued Mr. Jaggers, stilllooking hard at me, “that he has received a letter, under datePortsmouth, from a colonist of the name of Purvis, or—”“Or Provis,” I suggested.“Or Provis—thank you, Pip. Perhaps it is Provis? Perhaps youknow it’s Provis?”“Yes,” said I.“You know it’s Provis. A letter, under date Portsmouth, from acolonist of the name of Provis, asking for the particulars of your address, onbehalf of Magwitch. Wemmick sent him the particulars, I understand, by returnof post. Probably it is through Provis that you have received the explanationof Magwitch—in New South Wales?”“It came through Provis,” I replied.“Good day, Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, offering his hand; “gladto have seen you. In writing by post to Magwitch—in New SouthWales—or in communicating with him through Provis, have the goodness tomention that the particulars and vouchers of our long account shall be sent toyou, together with the balance; for there is still a balance remaining.Good-day, Pip!”We shook hands, and he looked hard at me as long as he could see me. I turnedat the door, and he was still looking hard at me, while the two vile casts onthe shelf seemed to be trying to get their eyelids open, and to force out oftheir swollen throats, “O, what a man he is!”Wemmick was out, and though he had been at his desk he could have done nothingfor me. I went straight back to the Temple, where I found the terrible Provisdrinking rum and water and smoking negro-head, in safety.Next day the clothes I had ordered all came home, and he put them on. Whateverhe put on, became him less (it dismally seemed to me) than what he had wornbefore. To my thinking, there was something in him that made it hopeless toattempt to disguise him. The more I dressed him and the better I dressed him,the more he looked like the slouching fugitive on the marshes. This effect onmy anxious fancy was partly referable, no doubt, to his old face and mannergrowing more familiar to me; but I believe too that he dragged one of his legsas if there were still a weight of iron on it, and that from head to foot therewas Convict in the very grain of the man.The influences of his solitary hut-life were upon him besides, and gave him asavage air that no dress could tame; added to these were the influences of hissubsequent branded life among men, and, crowning all, his consciousness that hewas dodging and hiding now. In all his ways of sitting and standing, and eatingand drinking,—of brooding about in a high-shouldered reluctantstyle,—of taking out his great horn-handled jackknife and wiping it onhis legs and cutting his food,—of lifting light glasses and cups to hislips, as if they were clumsy pannikins,—of chopping a wedge off hisbread, and soaking up with it the last fragments of gravy round and round hisplate, as if to make the most of an allowance, and then drying his finger-endson it, and then swallowing it,—in these ways and a thousand other smallnameless instances arising every minute in the day, there was Prisoner, Felon,Bondsman, plain as plain could be.It had been his own idea to wear that touch of powder, and I had conceded thepowder after overcoming the shorts. But I can compare the effect of it, whenon, to nothing but the probable effect of rouge upon the dead; so awful was themanner in which everything in him that it was most desirable to repress,started through that thin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out atthe crown of his head. It was abandoned as soon as tried, and he wore hisgrizzled hair cut short.Words cannot tell what a sense I had, at the same time, of the dreadful mysterythat he was to me. When he fell asleep of an evening, with his knotted handsclenching the sides of the easy-chair, and his bald head tattooed with deepwrinkles falling forward on his breast, I would sit and look at him, wonderingwhat he had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the Calendar, untilthe impulse was powerful on me to start up and fly from him. Every hour soincreased my abhorrence of him, that I even think I might have yielded to thisimpulse in the first agonies of being so haunted, notwithstanding all he haddone for me and the risk he ran, but for the knowledge that Herbert must sooncome back. Once, I actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin todress myself in my worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave him there witheverything else I possessed, and enlist for India as a private soldier.I doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in those lonelyrooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind and the rain alwaysrushing by. A ghost could not have been taken and hanged on my account, and theconsideration that he could be, and the dread that he would be, were no smalladdition to my horrors. When he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kindof Patience with a ragged pack of cards of his own,—a game that I neversaw before or since, and in which he recorded his winnings by sticking hisjackknife into the table,—when he was not engaged in either of thesepursuits, he would ask me to read to him,—“Foreign language, dearboy!” While I complied, he, not comprehending a single word, would standbefore the fire surveying me with the air of an Exhibitor, and I would see him,between the fingers of the hand with which I shaded my face, appealing in dumbshow to the furniture to take notice of my proficiency. The imaginary studentpursued by the misshapen creature he had impiously made, was not more wretchedthan I, pursued by the creature who had made me, and recoiling from him with astronger repulsion, the more he admired me and the fonder he was of me.This is written of, I am sensible, as if it had lasted a year. It lasted aboutfive days. Expecting Herbert all the time, I dared not go out, except when Itook Provis for an airing after dark. At length, one evening when dinner wasover and I had dropped into a slumber quite worn out,—for my nights hadbeen agitated and my rest broken by fearful dreams,—I was roused by thewelcome footstep on the staircase. Provis, who had been asleep too, staggeredup at the noise I made, and in an instant I saw his jackknife shining in hishand.“Quiet! It’s Herbert!” I said; and Herbert came bursting in,with the airy freshness of six hundred miles of France upon him.“Handel, my dear fellow, how are you, and again how are you, and againhow are you? I seem to have been gone a twelvemonth! Why, so I must have been,for you have grown quite thin and pale! Handel, my—Halloa! I beg yourpardon.”He was stopped in his running on and in his shaking hands with me, by seeingProvis. Provis, regarding him with a fixed attention, was slowly putting up hisjackknife, and groping in another pocket for something else.“Herbert, my dear friend,” said I, shutting the double doors, whileHerbert stood staring and wondering, “something very strange hashappened. This is—a visitor of mine.”“It’s all right, dear boy!” said Provis coming forward, withhis little clasped black book, and then addressing himself to Herbert.“Take it in your right hand. Lord strike you dead on the spot, if everyou split in any way sumever! Kiss it!”“Do so, as he wishes it,” I said to Herbert. So, Herbert, lookingat me with a friendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, and Provisimmediately shaking hands with him, said, “Now you’re on your oath,you know. And never believe me on mine, if Pip shan’t make a gentleman onyou!”Chapter XLI.Invain should I attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet of Herbert,when he and I and Provis sat down before the fire, and I recounted the whole ofthe secret. Enough, that I saw my own feelings reflected in Herbert’sface, and not least among them, my repugnance towards the man who had done somuch for me.What would alone have set a division between that man and us, if there had beenno other dividing circumstance, was his triumph in my story. Saving histroublesome sense of having been “low” on one occasion since hisreturn,—on which point he began to hold forth to Herbert, the moment myrevelation was finished,—he had no perception of the possibility of myfinding any fault with my good fortune. His boast that he had made me agentleman, and that he had come to see me support the character on his ampleresources, was made for me quite as much as for himself. And that it was ahighly agreeable boast to both of us, and that we must both be very proud ofit, was a conclusion quite established in his own mind.“Though, look’ee here, Pip’s comrade,” he said toHerbert, after having discoursed for some time, “I know very well thatonce since I come back—for half a minute—I’ve been low. Isaid to Pip, I knowed as I had been low. But don’t you fret yourself onthat score. I ain’t made Pip a gentleman, and Pip ain’t a-going tomake you a gentleman, not fur me not to know what’s due to ye both. Dearboy, and Pip’s comrade, you two may count upon me always having agenteel muzzle on. Muzzled I have been since that half a minute when I wasbetrayed into lowness, muzzled I am at the present time, muzzled I ever willbe.”Herbert said, “Certainly,” but looked as if there were no specificconsolation in this, and remained perplexed and dismayed. We were anxious forthe time when he would go to his lodging and leave us together, but he wasevidently jealous of leaving us together, and sat late. It was midnight beforeI took him round to Essex Street, and saw him safely in at his own dark door.When it closed upon him, I experienced the first moment of relief I had knownsince the night of his arrival.Never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on the stairs, I hadalways looked about me in taking my guest out after dark, and in bringing himback; and I looked about me now. Difficult as it is in a large city to avoidthe suspicion of being watched, when the mind is conscious of danger in thatregard, I could not persuade myself that any of the people within sight caredabout my movements. The few who were passing passed on their several ways, andthe street was empty when I turned back into the Temple. Nobody had come out atthe gate with us, nobody went in at the gate with me. As I crossed by thefountain, I saw his lighted back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when Istood for a few moments in the doorway of the building where I lived, beforegoing up the stairs, Garden Court was as still and lifeless as the staircasewas when I ascended it.Herbert received me with open arms, and I had never felt before so blessedlywhat it is to have a friend. When he had spoken some sound words of sympathyand encouragement, we sat down to consider the question, What was to be done?The chair that Provis had occupied still remaining where it hadstood,—for he had a barrack way with him of hanging about one spot, inone unsettled manner, and going through one round of observances with his pipeand his negro-head and his jackknife and his pack of cards, and what not, as ifit were all put down for him on a slate,—I say his chair remaining whereit had stood, Herbert unconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it,pushed it away, and took another. He had no occasion to say after that that hehad conceived an aversion for my patron, neither had I occasion to confess myown. We interchanged that confidence without shaping a syllable.“What,” said I to Herbert, when he was safe in anotherchair,—“what is to be done?”“My poor dear Handel,” he replied, holding his head, “I amtoo stunned to think.”“So was I, Herbert, when the blow first fell. Still, something must bedone. He is intent upon various new expenses,—horses, and carriages, andlavish appearances of all kinds. He must be stopped somehow.”“You mean that you can’t accept—”“How can I?” I interposed, as Herbert paused. “Think of him!Look at him!”An involuntary shudder passed over both of us.“Yet I am afraid the dreadful truth is, Herbert, that he is attached tome, strongly attached to me. Was there ever such a fate!”“My poor dear Handel,” Herbert repeated.“Then,” said I, “after all, stopping short here, never takinganother penny from him, think what I owe him already! Then again: I am heavilyin debt,—very heavily for me, who have now no expectations,—and Ihave been bred to no calling, and I am fit for nothing.”“Well, well, well!” Herbert remonstrated. “Don’t sayfit for nothing.”“What am I fit for? I know only one thing that I am fit for, and that is,to go for a soldier. And I might have gone, my dear Herbert, but for theprospect of taking counsel with your friendship and affection.”Of course I broke down there: and of course Herbert, beyond seizing a warm gripof my hand, pretended not to know it.“Anyhow, my dear Handel,” said he presently, “soldieringwon’t do. If you were to renounce this patronage and these favours, Isuppose you would do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what you havealready had. Not very strong, that hope, if you went soldiering! Besides,it’s absurd. You would be infinitely better in Clarriker’s house,small as it is. I am working up towards a partnership, you know.”Poor fellow! He little suspected with whose money.“But there is another question,” said Herbert. “This is anignorant, determined man, who has long had one fixed idea. More than that, heseems to me (I may misjudge him) to be a man of a desperate and fiercecharacter.”“I know he is,” I returned. “Let me tell you what evidence Ihave seen of it.” And I told him what I had not mentioned in mynarrative, of that encounter with the other convict.“See, then,” said Herbert; “think of this! He comes here atthe peril of his life, for the realisation of his fixed idea. In the moment ofrealisation, after all his toil and waiting, you cut the ground from under hisfeet, destroy his idea, and make his gains worthless to him. Do you see nothingthat he might do, under the disappointment?”“I have seen it, Herbert, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatal nightof his arrival. Nothing has been in my thoughts so distinctly as his puttinghimself in the way of being taken.”“Then you may rely upon it,” said Herbert, “that there wouldbe great danger of his doing it. That is his power over you as long as heremains in England, and that would be his reckless course if you forsookhim.”I was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed upon me from thefirst, and the working out of which would make me regard myself, in some sort,as his murderer, that I could not rest in my chair, but began pacing to andfro. I said to Herbert, meanwhile, that even if Provis were recognised andtaken, in spite of himself, I should be wretched as the cause, howeverinnocently. Yes; even though I was so wretched in having him at large and nearme, and even though I would far rather have worked at the forge all the days ofmy life than I would ever have come to this!But there was no staving off the question, What was to be done?“The first and the main thing to be done,” said Herbert, “isto get him out of England. You will have to go with him, and then he may beinduced to go.”“But get him where I will, could I prevent his coming back?”“My good Handel, is it not obvious that with Newgate in the next street,there must be far greater hazard in your breaking your mind to him and makinghim reckless, here, than elsewhere? If a pretext to get him away could be madeout of that other convict, or out of anything else in his life, now.”“There, again!” said I, stopping before Herbert, with my open handsheld out, as if they contained the desperation of the case. “I knownothing of his life. It has almost made me mad to sit here of a night and seehim before me, so bound up with my fortunes and misfortunes, and yet so unknownto me, except as the miserable wretch who terrified me two days in mychildhood!”Herbert got up, and linked his arm in mine, and we slowly walked to and frotogether, studying the carpet.“Handel,” said Herbert, stopping, “you feel convinced thatyou can take no further benefits from him; do you?”“Fully. Surely you would, too, if you were in my place?”“And you feel convinced that you must break with him?”“Herbert, can you ask me?”“And you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the life he hasrisked on your account, that you must save him, if possible, from throwing itaway. Then you must get him out of England before you stir a finger toextricate yourself. That done, extricate yourself, in Heaven’s name, andwe’ll see it out together, dear old boy.”It was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and down again, with onlythat done.“Now, Herbert,” said I, “with reference to gaining someknowledge of his history. There is but one way that I know of. I must ask himpoint blank.”“Yes. Ask him,” said Herbert, “when we sit at breakfast inthe morning.” For he had said, on taking leave of Herbert, that he wouldcome to breakfast with us.With this project formed, we went to bed. I had the wildest dreams concerninghim, and woke unrefreshed; I woke, too, to recover the fear which I had lost inthe night, of his being found out as a returned transport. Waking, I never lostthat fear.He came round at the appointed time, took out his jackknife, and sat down tohis meal. He was full of plans “for his gentleman’s coming outstrong, and like a gentleman,” and urged me to begin speedily upon thepocket-book which he had left in my possession. He considered the chambers andhis own lodging as temporary residences, and advised me to look out at once fora “fashionable crib” near Hyde Park, in which he could have“a shake-down.” When he had made an end of his breakfast, and waswiping his knife on his leg, I said to him, without a word of preface,—“After you were gone last night, I told my friend of the struggle thatthe soldiers found you engaged in on the marshes, when we came up. Youremember?”“Remember!” said he. “I think so!”“We want to know something about that man—and about you. It isstrange to know no more about either, and particularly you, than I was able totell last night. Is not this as good a time as another for our knowingmore?”“Well!” he said, after consideration. “You’re on youroath, you know, Pip’s comrade?”“Assuredly,” replied Herbert.“As to anything I say, you know,” he insisted. “The oathapplies to all.”“I understand it to do so.”“And look’ee here! Wotever I done is worked out and paidfor,” he insisted again.“So be it.”He took out his black pipe and was going to fill it with negro-head, when,looking at the tangle of tobacco in his hand, he seemed to think it mightperplex the thread of his narrative. He put it back again, stuck his pipe in abutton-hole of his coat, spread a hand on each knee, and after turning an angryeye on the fire for a few silent moments, looked round at us and said whatfollows.Chapter XLII.“Dear boy and Pip’s comrade. I am not a-going fur to tell you mylife like a song, or a story-book. But to give it you short and handy,I’ll put it at once into a mouthful of English. In jail and out of jail,in jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail. There, you’ve got it.That’s my life pretty much, down to such times as I got shippedoff, arter Pip stood my friend.“I’ve been done everything to, pretty well—except hanged.I’ve been locked up as much as a silver tea-kittle. I’ve beencarted here and carted there, and put out of this town, and put out of thattown, and stuck in the stocks, and whipped and worried and drove. I’ve nomore notion where I was born than you have—if so much. I first becomeaware of myself down in Essex, a thieving turnips for my living. Summun had runaway from me—a man—a tinker—and he’d took the fire withhim, and left me wery cold.“I know’d my name to be Magwitch, chrisen’d Abel. How did Iknow it? Much as I know’d the birds’ names in the hedges to bechaffinch, sparrer, thrush. I might have thought it was all lies together, onlyas the birds’ names come out true, I supposed mine did.“So fur as I could find, there warn’t a soul that see young AbelMagwitch, with us little on him as in him, but wot caught fright at him, andeither drove him off, or took him up. I was took up, took up, took up, to thatextent that I reg’larly grow’d up took up.“This is the way it was, that when I was a ragged little creetur as muchto be pitied as ever I see (not that I looked in the glass, for therewarn’t many insides of furnished houses known to me), I got the name ofbeing hardened. ‘This is a terrible hardened one,’ they says toprison wisitors, picking out me. ‘May be said to live in jails, thisboy.’ Then they looked at me, and I looked at them, and they measured myhead, some on ’em,—they had better a measured my stomach,—andothers on ’em giv me tracts what I couldn’t read, and made mespeeches what I couldn’t understand. They always went on agen me aboutthe Devil. But what the Devil was I to do? I must put something into mystomach, mustn’t I?—Howsomever, I’m a getting low, and I knowwhat’s due. Dear boy and Pip’s comrade, don’t you be afeerdof me being low.“Tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when Icould,—though that warn’t as often as you may think, till you putthe question whether you would ha’ been over-ready to give me workyourselves,—a bit of a poacher, a bit of a labourer, a bit of a wagoner,a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit of most things that don’tpay and lead to trouble, I got to be a man. A deserting soldier in aTraveller’s Rest, what lay hid up to the chin under a lot of taturs,learnt me to read; and a travelling Giant what signed his name at a penny atime learnt me to write. I warn’t locked up as often now as formerly, butI wore out my good share of key-metal still.“At Epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, I got acquaintedwi’ a man whose skull I’d crack wi’ this poker, like the clawof a lobster, if I’d got it on this hob. His right name was Compeyson;and that’s the man, dear boy, what you see me a pounding in the ditch,according to what you truly told your comrade arter I was gone last night.“He set up fur a gentleman, this Compeyson, and he’d been to apublic boarding-school and had learning. He was a smooth one to talk, and was adab at the ways of gentlefolks. He was good-looking too. It was the night aforethe great race, when I found him on the heath, in a booth that I know’don. Him and some more was a sitting among the tables when I went in, and thelandlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) called him out,and said, ‘I think this is a man that might suityou,’—meaning I was.“Compeyson, he looks at me very noticing, and I look at him. He has awatch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit of clothes.“‘To judge from appearances, you’re out of luck,’ saysCompeyson to me.“‘Yes, master, and I’ve never been in it much.’ (I hadcome out of Kingston Jail last on a vagrancy committal. Not but what it mighthave been for something else; but it warn’t.)“‘Luck changes,’ says Compeyson; ‘perhaps yours isgoing to change.’“I says, ‘I hope it may be so. There’s room.’“‘What can you do?’ says Compeyson.“‘Eat and drink,’ I says; ‘if you’ll find thematerials.’“Compeyson laughed, looked at me again very noticing, giv me fiveshillings, and appointed me for next night. Same place.“I went to Compeyson next night, same place, and Compeyson took me on tobe his man and pardner. And what was Compeyson’s business in which we wasto go pardners? Compeyson’s business was the swindling, handwritingforging, stolen bank-note passing, and such-like. All sorts of traps asCompeyson could set with his head, and keep his own legs out of and get theprofits from and let another man in for, was Compeyson’s business.He’d no more heart than a iron file, he was as cold as death, and he hadthe head of the Devil afore mentioned.“There was another in with Compeyson, as was called Arthur,—not asbeing so chrisen’d, but as a surname. He was in a Decline, and was ashadow to look at. Him and Compeyson had been in a bad thing with a rich ladysome years afore, and they’d made a pot of money by it; but Compeysonbetted and gamed, and he’d have run through the king’s taxes. So,Arthur was a dying, and a dying poor and with the horrors on him, andCompeyson’s wife (which Compeyson kicked mostly) was a having pity on himwhen she could, and Compeyson was a having pity on nothing and nobody.“I might a took warning by Arthur, but I didn’t; and I won’tpretend I was partick’ler—for where ’ud be the good on it,dear boy and comrade? So I begun wi’ Compeyson, and a poor tool I was inhis hands. Arthur lived at the top of Compeyson’s house (over nighBrentford it was), and Compeyson kept a careful account agen him for board andlodging, in case he should ever get better to work it out. But Arthur soonsettled the account. The second or third time as ever I see him, he come atearing down into Compeyson’s parlour late at night, in only a flannelgown, with his hair all in a sweat, and he says to Compeyson’s wife,‘Sally, she really is upstairs alonger me, now, and I can’t get ridof her. She’s all in white,’ he says, ‘wi’ whiteflowers in her hair, and she’s awful mad, and she’s got a shroudhanging over her arm, and she says she’ll put it on me at five in themorning.’“Says Compeyson: ‘Why, you fool, don’t you know she’sgot a living body? And how should she be up there, without coming through thedoor, or in at the window, and up the stairs?’“‘I don’t know how she’s there,’ says Arthur,shivering dreadful with the horrors, ‘but she’s standing in thecorner at the foot of the bed, awful mad. And over where her heart’sbroke—you broke it!—there’s drops of blood.’“Compeyson spoke hardy, but he was always a coward. ‘Go up alongerthis drivelling sick man,’ he says to his wife, ‘and Magwitch, lendher a hand, will you?’ But he never come nigh himself.“Compeyson’s wife and me took him up to bed agen, and he raved mostdreadful. ‘Why look at her!’ he cries out. ‘She’s ashaking the shroud at me! Don’t you see her? Look at her eyes!Ain’t it awful to see her so mad?’ Next he cries,‘She’ll put it on me, and then I’m done for! Take it awayfrom her, take it away!’ And then he catched hold of us, and kep on atalking to her, and answering of her, till I half believed I see her myself.“Compeyson’s wife, being used to him, giv him some liquor to getthe horrors off, and by and by he quieted. ‘O, she’s gone! Has herkeeper been for her?’ he says. ‘Yes,’ says Compeyson’swife. ‘Did you tell him to lock her and bar her in?’‘Yes.’ ‘And to take that ugly thing away from her?’‘Yes, yes, all right.’ ‘You’re a good creetur,’he says, ‘don’t leave me, whatever you do, and thank you!’“He rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five, andthen he starts up with a scream, and screams out, ‘Here she is!She’s got the shroud again. She’s unfolding it. She’s comingout of the corner. She’s coming to the bed. Hold me, both onyou—one of each side—don’t let her touch me with it. Hah! shemissed me that time. Don’t let her throw it over my shoulders.Don’t let her lift me up to get it round me. She’s lifting me up.Keep me down!’ Then he lifted himself up hard, and was dead.“Compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides. Him and me wassoon busy, and first he swore me (being ever artful) on my own book,—thishere little black book, dear boy, what I swore your comrade on.“Not to go into the things that Compeyson planned, and I done—which’ud take a week—I’ll simply say to you, dear boy, andPip’s comrade, that that man got me into such nets as made me his blackslave. I was always in debt to him, always under his thumb, always a working,always a getting into danger. He was younger than me, but he’d got craft,and he’d got learning, and he overmatched me five hundred times told andno mercy. My Missis as I had the hard time wi’—Stop though! Iain’t brought her in—”He looked about him in a confused way, as if he had lost his place in the bookof his remembrance; and he turned his face to the fire, and spread his handsbroader on his knees, and lifted them off and put them on again.“There ain’t no need to go into it,” he said, looking roundonce more. “The time wi’ Compeyson was a’most as hard a timeas ever I had; that said, all’s said. Did I tell you as I was tried,alone, for misdemeanor, while with Compeyson?”I answered, No.“Well!” he said, “I was, and got convicted. As to tookup on suspicion, that was twice or three times in the four or five year that itlasted; but evidence was wanting. At last, me and Compeyson was both committedfor felony,—on a charge of putting stolen notes in circulation,—andthere was other charges behind. Compeyson says to me, ‘Separate defences,no communication,’ and that was all. And I was so miserable poor, that Isold all the clothes I had, except what hung on my back, afore I could getJaggers.“When we was put in the dock, I noticed first of all what a gentlemanCompeyson looked, wi’ his curly hair and his black clothes and his whitepocket-handkercher, and what a common sort of a wretch I looked. When theprosecution opened and the evidence was put short, aforehand, I noticed howheavy it all bore on me, and how light on him. When the evidence was giv in thebox, I noticed how it was always me that had come for’ard, and could beswore to, how it was always me that the money had been paid to, how it wasalways me that had seemed to work the thing and get the profit. But when thedefence come on, then I see the plan plainer; for, says the counsellor forCompeyson, ‘My lord and gentlemen, here you has afore you, side by side,two persons as your eyes can separate wide; one, the younger, well brought up,who will be spoke to as such; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoketo as such; one, the younger, seldom if ever seen in these here transactions,and only suspected; t’other, the elder, always seen in ’em andalways wi’ his guilt brought home. Can you doubt, if there is but one init, which is the one, and, if there is two in it, which is much the worstone?’ And such-like. And when it come to character, warn’t itCompeyson as had been to the school, and warn’t it his schoolfellows aswas in this position and in that, and warn’t it him as had beenknow’d by witnesses in such clubs and societies, and nowt to hisdisadvantage? And warn’t it me as had been tried afore, and as had beenknow’d up hill and down dale in Bridewells and Lock-Ups! And when it cometo speech-making, warn’t it Compeyson as could speak to ’emwi’ his face dropping every now and then into his whitepocket-handkercher,—ah! and wi’ verses in his speech,too,—and warn’t it me as could only say, ‘Gentlemen, this manat my side is a most precious rascal’? And when the verdict come,warn’t it Compeyson as was recommended to mercy on account of goodcharacter and bad company, and giving up all the information he could agen me,and warn’t it me as got never a word but Guilty? And when I says toCompeyson, ‘Once out of this court, I’ll smash that face ofyourn!’ ain’t it Compeyson as prays the Judge to be protected, andgets two turnkeys stood betwixt us? And when we’re sentenced, ain’tit him as gets seven year, and me fourteen, and ain’t it him as the Judgeis sorry for, because he might a done so well, and ain’t it me as theJudge perceives to be a old offender of wiolent passion, likely to come toworse?”He had worked himself into a state of great excitement, but he checked it, tooktwo or three short breaths, swallowed as often, and stretching out his handtowards me said, in a reassuring manner, “I ain’t a-going to below, dear boy!”He had so heated himself that he took out his handkerchief and wiped his faceand head and neck and hands, before he could go on. “I had said to Compeyson that I’d smash that face of his, and Iswore Lord smash mine! to do it. We was in the same prison-ship, but Icouldn’t get at him for long, though I tried. At last I come behind himand hit him on the cheek to turn him round and get a smashing one at him, whenI was seen and seized. The black-hole of that ship warn’t a strong one,to a judge of black-holes that could swim and dive. I escaped to the shore, andI was a hiding among the graves there, envying them as was in ’em and allover, when I first see my boy!”He regarded me with a look of affection that made him almost abhorrent to meagain, though I had felt great pity for him.“By my boy, I was giv to understand as Compeyson was out on them marshestoo. Upon my soul, I half believe he escaped in his terror, to get quit of me,not knowing it was me as had got ashore. I hunted him down. I smashed his face.‘And now,’ says I ‘as the worst thing I can do, caringnothing for myself, I’ll drag you back.’ And I’d have swumoff, towing him by the hair, if it had come to that, and I’d a got himaboard without the soldiers.“Of course he’d much the best of it to the last,—hischaracter was so good. He had escaped when he was made half wild by me and mymurderous intentions; and his punishment was light. I was put in irons, broughtto trial again, and sent for life. I didn’t stop for life, dear boy andPip’s comrade, being here.”He wiped himself again, as he had done before, and then slowly took his tangleof tobacco from his pocket, and plucked his pipe from his button-hole, andslowly filled it, and began to smoke.“Is he dead?” I asked, after a silence.“Is who dead, dear boy?”“Compeyson.”“He hopes I am, if he’s alive, you may be sure,” witha fierce look. “I never heerd no more of him.”Herbert had been writing with his pencil in the cover of a book. He softlypushed the book over to me, as Provis stood smoking with his eyes on the fire,and I read in it:—“Young Havisham’s name was Arthur. Compeyson is the man whoprofessed to be Miss Havisham’s lover.”I shut the book and nodded slightly to Herbert, and put the book by; but weneither of us said anything, and both looked at Provis as he stood smoking bythe fire.Chapter XLIII.Whyshould I pause to ask how much of my shrinking from Provis might be traced toEstella? Why should I loiter on my road, to compare the state of mind in whichI had tried to rid myself of the stain of the prison before meeting her at thecoach-office, with the state of mind in which I now reflected on the abyssbetween Estella in her pride and beauty, and the returned transport whom Iharboured? The road would be none the smoother for it, the end would be none thebetter for it, he would not be helped, nor I extenuated.A new fear had been engendered in my mind by his narrative; or rather, hisnarrative had given form and purpose to the fear that was already there. IfCompeyson were alive and should discover his return, I could hardly doubt theconsequence. That Compeyson stood in mortal fear of him, neither of the twocould know much better than I; and that any such man as that man had beendescribed to be would hesitate to release himself for good from a dreaded enemyby the safe means of becoming an informer was scarcely to be imagined.Never had I breathed, and never would I breathe—or so I resolved—aword of Estella to Provis. But, I said to Herbert that, before I could goabroad, I must see both Estella and Miss Havisham. This was when we were leftalone on the night of the day when Provis told us his story. I resolved to goout to Richmond next day, and I went.On my presenting myself at Mrs. Brandley’s, Estella’s maid wascalled to tell that Estella had gone into the country. Where? To Satis House,as usual. Not as usual, I said, for she had never yet gone there without me;when was she coming back? There was an air of reservation in the answer whichincreased my perplexity, and the answer was, that her maid believed she wasonly coming back at all for a little while. I could make nothing of this,except that it was meant that I should make nothing of it, and I went homeagain in complete discomfiture.Another night consultation with Herbert after Provis was gone home (I alwaystook him home, and always looked well about me), led us to the conclusion thatnothing should be said about going abroad until I came back from MissHavisham’s. In the mean time, Herbert and I were to consider separatelywhat it would be best to say; whether we should devise any pretence of beingafraid that he was under suspicious observation; or whether I, who had neveryet been abroad, should propose an expedition. We both knew that I had but topropose anything, and he would consent. We agreed that his remaining many daysin his present hazard was not to be thought of.Next day I had the meanness to feign that I was under a binding promise to godown to Joe; but I was capable of almost any meanness towards Joe or his name.Provis was to be strictly careful while I was gone, and Herbert was to take thecharge of him that I had taken. I was to be absent only one night, and, on myreturn, the gratification of his impatience for my starting as a gentleman on agreater scale was to be begun. It occurred to me then, and as I afterwardsfound to Herbert also, that he might be best got away across the water, on thatpretence,—as, to make purchases, or the like.Having thus cleared the way for my expedition to Miss Havisham’s, I setoff by the early morning coach before it was yet light, and was out on the opencountry road when the day came creeping on, halting and whimpering andshivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud and rags of mist, like a beggar.When we drove up to the Blue Boar after a drizzly ride, whom should I see comeout under the gateway, toothpick in hand, to look at the coach, but BentleyDrummle!As he pretended not to see me, I pretended not to see him. It was a very lamepretence on both sides; the lamer, because we both went into the coffee-room,where he had just finished his breakfast, and where I ordered mine. It waspoisonous to me to see him in the town, for I very well knew why he had comethere.Pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which had nothing halfso legible in its local news, as the foreign matter of coffee, pickles, fishsauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine with which it was sprinkled all over, asif it had taken the measles in a highly irregular form, I sat at my table whilehe stood before the fire. By degrees it became an enormous injury to me that hestood before the fire. And I got up, determined to have my share of it. I hadto put my hand behind his legs for the poker when I went up to the fireplace tostir the fire, but still pretended not to know him.“Is this a cut?” said Mr. Drummle.“Oh!” said I, poker in hand; “it’s you, is it? How doyou do? I was wondering who it was, who kept the fire off.”With that, I poked tremendously, and having done so, planted myself side byside with Mr. Drummle, my shoulders squared and my back to the fire.“You have just come down?” said Mr. Drummle, edging me a littleaway with his shoulder.“Yes,” said I, edging him a little away with myshoulder.“Beastly place,” said Drummle. “Your part of the country, Ithink?”“Yes,” I assented. “I am told it’s very like yourShropshire.”“Not in the least like it,” said Drummle.Here Mr. Drummle looked at his boots and I looked at mine, and then Mr. Drummlelooked at my boots, and I looked at his.“Have you been here long?” I asked, determined not to yield an inchof the fire.“Long enough to be tired of it,” returned Drummle, pretending toyawn, but equally determined.“Do you stay here long?”“Can’t say,” answered Mr. Drummle. “Do you?”“Can’t say,” said I.I felt here, through a tingling in my blood, that if Mr. Drummle’sshoulder had claimed another hair’s breadth of room, I should have jerkedhim into the window; equally, that if my own shoulder had urged a similarclaim, Mr. Drummle would have jerked me into the nearest box. He whistled alittle. So did I.“Large tract of marshes about here, I believe?” said Drummle.“Yes. What of that?” said I.Mr. Drummle looked at me, and then at my boots, and then said,“Oh!” and laughed.“Are you amused, Mr. Drummle?”“No,” said he, “not particularly. I am going out for a ridein the saddle. I mean to explore those marshes for amusement. Out-of-the-wayvillages there, they tell me. Curious little public-houses—andsmithies—and that. Waiter!”“Yes, sir.”“Is that horse of mine ready?”“Brought round to the door, sir.”“I say. Look here, you sir. The lady won’t ride to-day; the weatherwon’t do.”“Very good, sir.”“And I don’t dine, because I’m going to dine at thelady’s.”“Very good, sir.”Then, Drummle glanced at me, with an insolent triumph on his great-jowled facethat cut me to the heart, dull as he was, and so exasperated me, that I feltinclined to take him in my arms (as the robber in the story-book is said tohave taken the old lady) and seat him on the fire.One thing was manifest to both of us, and that was, that until relief came,neither of us could relinquish the fire. There we stood, well squared up beforeit, shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot, with our hands behind us, notbudging an inch. The horse was visible outside in the drizzle at the door, mybreakfast was put on the table, Drummle’s was cleared away, the waiterinvited me to begin, I nodded, we both stood our ground.“Have you been to the Grove since?” said Drummle.“No,” said I, “I had quite enough of the Finches the lasttime I was there.”“Was that when we had a difference of opinion?”“Yes,” I replied, very shortly.“Come, come! They let you off easily enough,” sneered Drummle.“You shouldn’t have lost your temper.”“Mr. Drummle,” said I, “you are not competent to give adviceon that subject. When I lose my temper (not that I admit having done so on thatoccasion), I don’t throw glasses.”“I do,” said Drummle.After glancing at him once or twice, in an increased state of smoulderingferocity, I said,—“Mr. Drummle, I did not seek this conversation, and I don’t thinkit an agreeable one.”“I am sure it’s not,” said he, superciliously over hisshoulder; “I don’t think anything about it.”“And therefore,” I went on, “with your leave, I will suggestthat we hold no kind of communication in future.”“Quite my opinion,” said Drummle, “and what I should havesuggested myself, or done—more likely—without suggesting. Butdon’t lose your temper. Haven’t you lost enough withoutthat?”“What do you mean, sir?”“Waiter!” said Drummle, by way of answering me.The waiter reappeared.“Look here, you sir. You quite understand that the young lady don’tride to-day, and that I dine at the young lady’s?”“Quite so, sir!”When the waiter had felt my fast-cooling teapot with the palm of his hand, andhad looked imploringly at me, and had gone out, Drummle, careful not to movethe shoulder next me, took a cigar from his pocket and bit the end off, butshowed no sign of stirring. Choking and boiling as I was, I felt that we couldnot go a word further, without introducing Estella’s name, which I couldnot endure to hear him utter; and therefore I looked stonily at the oppositewall, as if there were no one present, and forced myself to silence. How longwe might have remained in this ridiculous position it is impossible to say, butfor the incursion of three thriving farmers—laid on by the waiter, Ithink—who came into the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats andrubbing their hands, and before whom, as they charged at the fire, we wereobliged to give way.I saw him through the window, seizing his horse’s mane, and mounting inhis blundering brutal manner, and sidling and backing away. I thought he wasgone, when he came back, calling for a light for the cigar in his mouth, whichhe had forgotten. A man in a dust-coloured dress appeared with what waswanted,—I could not have said from where: whether from the inn yard, orthe street, or where not,—and as Drummle leaned down from the saddle andlighted his cigar and laughed, with a jerk of his head towards the coffee-roomwindows, the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of this man whose back wastowards me reminded me of Orlick.Too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were he or no, orafter all to touch the breakfast, I washed the weather and the journey from myface and hands, and went out to the memorable old house that it would have beenso much the better for me never to have entered, never to have seen.Chapter XLIV.In theroom where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax-candles burnt on thewall, I found Miss Havisham and Estella; Miss Havisham seated on a settee nearthe fire, and Estella on a cushion at her feet. Estella was knitting, and MissHavisham was looking on. They both raised their eyes as I went in, and both sawan alteration in me. I derived that, from the look they interchanged.“And what wind,” said Miss Havisham, “blows you here,Pip?”Though she looked steadily at me, I saw that she was rather confused. Estella,pausing a moment in her knitting with her eyes upon me, and then going on, Ifancied that I read in the action of her fingers, as plainly as if she had toldme in the dumb alphabet, that she perceived I had discovered my realbenefactor.“Miss Havisham,” said I, “I went to Richmond yesterday, tospeak to Estella; and finding that some wind had blown her here, Ifollowed.”Miss Havisham motioning to me for the third or fourth time to sit down, I tookthe chair by the dressing-table, which I had often seen her occupy. With allthat ruin at my feet and about me, it seemed a natural place for me, that day.“What I had to say to Estella, Miss Havisham, I will say before you,presently—in a few moments. It will not surprise you, it will notdisplease you. I am as unhappy as you can ever have meant me to be.”Miss Havisham continued to look steadily at me. I could see in the action ofEstella’s fingers as they worked that she attended to what I said; butshe did not look up.“I have found out who my patron is. It is not a fortunate discovery, andis not likely ever to enrich me in reputation, station, fortune, anything.There are reasons why I must say no more of that. It is not my secret, butanother’s.”As I was silent for a while, looking at Estella and considering how to go on,Miss Havisham repeated, “It is not your secret, but another’s.Well?”“When you first caused me to be brought here, Miss Havisham, when Ibelonged to the village over yonder, that I wish I had never left, I suppose Idid really come here, as any other chance boy might have come,—as a kindof servant, to gratify a want or a whim, and to be paid for it?”“Ay, Pip,” replied Miss Havisham, steadily nodding her head;“you did.”“And that Mr. Jaggers—”“Mr. Jaggers,” said Miss Havisham, taking me up in a firm tone,“had nothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it. His being my lawyer,and his being the lawyer of your patron is a coincidence. He holds the samerelation towards numbers of people, and it might easily arise. Be that as itmay, it did arise, and was not brought about by any one.”Any one might have seen in her haggard face that there was no suppression orevasion so far.“But when I fell into the mistake I have so long remained in, at leastyou led me on?” said I.“Yes,” she returned, again nodding steadily, “I let you goon.”“Was that kind?”“Who am I,” cried Miss Havisham, striking her stick upon the floorand flashing into wrath so suddenly that Estella glanced up at her insurprise,—“who am I, for God’s sake, that I should bekind?”It was a weak complaint to have made, and I had not meant to make it. I toldher so, as she sat brooding after this outburst.“Well, well, well!” she said. “What else?”“I was liberally paid for my old attendance here,” I said, tosoothe her, “in being apprenticed, and I have asked these questions onlyfor my own information. What follows has another (and I hope moredisinterested) purpose. In humouring my mistake, Miss Havisham, youpunished—practised on—perhaps you will supply whatever termexpresses your intention, without offence—your self-seekingrelations?”“I did. Why, they would have it so! So would you. What has been myhistory, that I should be at the pains of entreating either them or you not tohave it so! You made your own snares. I never made them.”Waiting until she was quiet again,—for this, too, flashed out of her in awild and sudden way,—I went on.“I have been thrown among one family of your relations, Miss Havisham,and have been constantly among them since I went to London. I know them to havebeen as honestly under my delusion as I myself. And I should be false and baseif I did not tell you, whether it is acceptable to you or no, and whether youare inclined to give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both Mr.Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert, if you suppose them to be otherwise thangenerous, upright, open, and incapable of anything designing or mean.”“They are your friends,” said Miss Havisham.“They made themselves my friends,” said I, “when theysupposed me to have superseded them; and when Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, andMistress Camilla were not my friends, I think.”This contrasting of them with the rest seemed, I was glad to see, to do themgood with her. She looked at me keenly for a little while, and then saidquietly,—“What do you want for them?”“Only,” said I, “that you would not confound them with theothers. They may be of the same blood, but, believe me, they are not of thesame nature.”Still looking at me keenly, Miss Havisham repeated,—“What do you want for them?”“I am not so cunning, you see,” I said, in answer, conscious that Ireddened a little, “as that I could hide from you, even if I desired,that I do want something. Miss Havisham, if you would spare the money to do myfriend Herbert a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the casemust be done without his knowledge, I could show you how.”“Why must it be done without his knowledge?” she asked, settlingher hands upon her stick, that she might regard me the more attentively.“Because,” said I, “I began the service myself, more than twoyears ago, without his knowledge, and I don’t want to be betrayed. Why Ifail in my ability to finish it, I cannot explain. It is a part of the secretwhich is another person’s and not mine.”She gradually withdrew her eyes from me, and turned them on the fire. Afterwatching it for what appeared in the silence and by the light of the slowlywasting candles to be a long time, she was roused by the collapse of some ofthe red coals, and looked towards me again—at first, vacantly—then,with a gradually concentrating attention. All this time Estella knitted on.When Miss Havisham had fixed her attention on me, she said, speaking as ifthere had been no lapse in our dialogue,—“What else?”“Estella,” said I, turning to her now, and trying to command mytrembling voice, “you know I love you. You know that I have loved youlong and dearly.”She raised her eyes to my face, on being thus addressed, and her fingers pliedtheir work, and she looked at me with an unmoved countenance. I saw that MissHavisham glanced from me to her, and from her to me.“I should have said this sooner, but for my long mistake. It induced meto hope that Miss Havisham meant us for one another. While I thought you couldnot help yourself, as it were, I refrained from saying it. But I must say itnow.”Preserving her unmoved countenance, and with her fingers still going, Estellashook her head.“I know,” said I, in answer to that action,—“I know. Ihave no hope that I shall ever call you mine, Estella. I am ignorant what maybecome of me very soon, how poor I may be, or where I may go. Still, I loveyou. I have loved you ever since I first saw you in this house.”Looking at me perfectly unmoved and with her fingers busy, she shook her headagain.“It would have been cruel in Miss Havisham, horribly cruel, to practiseon the susceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture me through all these yearswith a vain hope and an idle pursuit, if she had reflected on the gravity ofwhat she did. But I think she did not. I think that, in the endurance of herown trial, she forgot mine, Estella.”I saw Miss Havisham put her hand to her heart and hold it there, as she satlooking by turns at Estella and at me.“It seems,” said Estella, very calmly, “that there aresentiments, fancies,—I don’t know how to call them,—which Iam not able to comprehend. When you say you love me, I know what you mean, as aform of words; but nothing more. You address nothing in my breast, you touchnothing there. I don’t care for what you say at all. I have tried to warnyou of this; now, have I not?”I said in a miserable manner, “Yes.”“Yes. But you would not be warned, for you thought I did not mean it.Now, did you not think so?”“I thought and hoped you could not mean it. You, so young, untried, andbeautiful, Estella! Surely it is not in Nature.”“It is in my nature,” she returned. And then she added, witha stress upon the words, “It is in the nature formed within me. I make agreat difference between you and all other people when I say so much. I can dono more.”“Is it not true,” said I, “that Bentley Drummle is in townhere, and pursuing you?”“It is quite true,” she replied, referring to him with theindifference of utter contempt.“That you encourage him, and ride out with him, and that he dines withyou this very day?”She seemed a little surprised that I should know it, but again replied,“Quite true.”“You cannot love him, Estella!”Her fingers stopped for the first time, as she retorted rather angrily,“What have I told you? Do you still think, in spite of it, that I do notmean what I say?”“You would never marry him, Estella?”She looked towards Miss Havisham, and considered for a moment with her work inher hands. Then she said, “Why not tell you the truth? I am going to bemarried to him.”I dropped my face into my hands, but was able to control myself better than Icould have expected, considering what agony it gave me to hear her say thosewords. When I raised my face again, there was such a ghastly look upon MissHavisham’s, that it impressed me, even in my passionate hurry and grief.“Estella, dearest Estella, do not let Miss Havisham lead you into thisfatal step. Put me aside for ever,—you have done so, I wellknow,—but bestow yourself on some worthier person than Drummle. MissHavisham gives you to him, as the greatest slight and injury that could be doneto the many far better men who admire you, and to the few who truly love you.Among those few there may be one who loves you even as dearly, though he hasnot loved you as long, as I. Take him, and I can bear it better, for yoursake!”My earnestness awoke a wonder in her that seemed as if it would have beentouched with compassion, if she could have rendered me at all intelligible toher own mind.“I am going,” she said again, in a gentler voice, “to bemarried to him. The preparations for my marriage are making, and I shall bemarried soon. Why do you injuriously introduce the name of my mother byadoption? It is my own act.”“Your own act, Estella, to fling yourself away upon a brute?”“On whom should I fling myself away?” she retorted, with a smile.“Should I fling myself away upon the man who would the soonest feel (ifpeople do feel such things) that I took nothing to him? There! It is done. Ishall do well enough, and so will my husband. As to leading me into what youcall this fatal step, Miss Havisham would have had me wait, and not marry yet;but I am tired of the life I have led, which has very few charms for me, and Iam willing enough to change it. Say no more. We shall never understand eachother.”“Such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!” I urged, in despair.“Don’t be afraid of my being a blessing to him,” saidEstella; “I shall not be that. Come! Here is my hand. Do we part on this,you visionary boy—or man?”“O Estella!” I answered, as my bitter tears fell fast on her hand,do what I would to restrain them; “even if I remained in England andcould hold my head up with the rest, how could I see you Drummle’swife?”“Nonsense,” she returned,—“nonsense. This will pass inno time.”“Never, Estella!”“You will get me out of your thoughts in a week.”“Out of my thoughts! You are part of my existence, part of myself. Youhave been in every line I have ever read since I first came here, the roughcommon boy whose poor heart you wounded even then. You have been in everyprospect I have ever seen since,—on the river, on the sails of the ships,on the marshes, in the clouds, in the light, in the darkness, in the wind, inthe woods, in the sea, in the streets. You have been the embodiment of everygraceful fancy that my mind has ever become acquainted with. The stones ofwhich the strongest London buildings are made are not more real, or moreimpossible to be displaced by your hands, than your presence and influence havebeen to me, there and everywhere, and will be. Estella, to the last hour of mylife, you cannot choose but remain part of my character, part of the littlegood in me, part of the evil. But, in this separation, I associate you onlywith the good; and I will faithfully hold you to that always, for you must havedone me far more good than harm, let me feel now what sharp distress I may. OGod bless you, God forgive you!”In what ecstasy of unhappiness I got these broken words out of myself, Idon’t know. The rhapsody welled up within me, like blood from an inwardwound, and gushed out. I held her hand to my lips some lingering moments, andso I left her. But ever afterwards, I remembered,—and soon afterwardswith stronger reason,—that while Estella looked at me merely withincredulous wonder, the spectral figure of Miss Havisham, her hand stillcovering her heart, seemed all resolved into a ghastly stare of pity andremorse.All done, all gone! So much was done and gone, that when I went out at thegate, the light of the day seemed of a darker colour than when I went in. For awhile, I hid myself among some lanes and by-paths, and then struck off to walkall the way to London. For, I had by that time come to myself so far as toconsider that I could not go back to the inn and see Drummle there; that Icould not bear to sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that I could do nothinghalf so good for myself as tire myself out.It was past midnight when I crossed London Bridge. Pursuing the narrowintricacies of the streets which at that time tended westward near theMiddlesex shore of the river, my readiest access to the Temple was close by theriver-side, through Whitefriars. I was not expected till to-morrow; but I hadmy keys, and, if Herbert were gone to bed, could get to bed myself withoutdisturbing him.As it seldom happened that I came in at that Whitefriars gate after the Templewas closed, and as I was very muddy and weary, I did not take it ill that thenight-porter examined me with much attention as he held the gate a little wayopen for me to pass in. To help his memory I mentioned my name.“I was not quite sure, sir, but I thought so. Here’s a note, sir.The messenger that brought it, said would you be so good as read it by mylantern?” Much surprised by the request, I took the note. It was directed to Philip Pip,Esquire, and on the top of the superscription were the words,“PLEASE READ THIS, HERE.” I opened it, the watchmanholding up his light, and read inside, in Wemmick’s writing,—“DON’T GO HOME.”Chapter XLV.Turning from the Temple gate as soon as I had read the warning,I made the best of my way to Fleet Street, and there got a late hackney chariotand drove to the Hummums in Covent Garden. In those times a bed was always tobe got there at any hour of the night, and the chamberlain, letting me in athis ready wicket, lighted the candle next in order on his shelf, and showed mestraight into the bedroom next in order on his list. It was a sort of vault onthe ground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-post bedsteadin it, straddling over the whole place, putting one of his arbitrary legs intothe fireplace and another into the doorway, and squeezing the wretched littlewashing-stand in quite a Divinely Righteous manner.As I had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought me in, before heleft me, the good old constitutional rushlight of those virtuous days—anobject like the ghost of a walking-cane, which instantly broke its back if itwere touched, which nothing could ever be lighted at, and which was placed insolitary confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated with roundholes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls. When I had gotinto bed, and lay there footsore, weary, and wretched, I found that I could nomore close my own eyes than I could close the eyes of this foolish Argus. Andthus, in the gloom and death of the night, we stared at one another.What a doleful night! How anxious, how dismal, how long! There was aninhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and, as I looked upinto the corners of the tester over my head, I thought what a number ofblue-bottle flies from the butchers’, and earwigs from the market, andgrubs from the country, must be holding on up there, lying by for next summer.This led me to speculate whether any of them ever tumbled down, and then Ifancied that I felt light falls on my face,—a disagreeable turn ofthought, suggesting other and more objectionable approaches up my back. When Ihad lain awake a little while, those extraordinary voices with which silenceteems began to make themselves audible. The closet whispered, the fireplacesighed, the little washing-stand ticked, and one guitar-string playedoccasionally in the chest of drawers. At about the same time, the eyes on thewall acquired a new expression, and in every one of those staring rounds I sawwritten, DON’T GO HOME.Whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on me, they never warded offthis DON’T GO HOME. It plaited itself intowhatever I thought of, as a bodily pain would have done. Not long before, I hadread in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the Hummums in thenight, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed himself, and had been found inthe morning weltering in blood. It came into my head that he must have occupiedthis very vault of mine, and I got out of bed to assure myself that there wereno red marks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages, andcheer myself with the companionship of a distant light, near which I knew thechamberlain to be dozing. But all this time, why I was not to go home, and whathad happened at home, and when I should go home, and whether Provis was safe athome, were questions occupying my mind so busily, that one might have supposedthere could be no more room in it for any other theme. Even when I thought ofEstella, and how we had parted that day forever, and when I recalled all thecircumstances of our parting, and all her looks and tones, and the action ofher fingers while she knitted,—even then I was pursuing, here and thereand everywhere, the caution, Don’t go home. When at last I dozed, insheer exhaustion of mind and body, it became a vast shadowy verb which I had toconjugate. Imperative mood, present tense: Do not thou go home, let him not gohome, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, let not them go home. Thenpotentially: I may not and I cannot go home; and I might not, could not, wouldnot, and should not go home; until I felt that I was going distracted, androlled over on the pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wallagain.I had left directions that I was to be called at seven; for it was plain that Imust see Wemmick before seeing any one else, and equally plain that this was acase in which his Walworth sentiments only could be taken. It was a relief toget out of the room where the night had been so miserable, and I needed nosecond knocking at the door to startle me from my uneasy bed.The Castle battlements arose upon my view at eight o’clock. The littleservant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls, I passedthrough the postern and crossed the drawbridge in her company, and so camewithout announcement into the presence of Wemmick as he was making tea forhimself and the Aged. An open door afforded a perspective view of the Aged inbed.“Halloa, Mr. Pip!” said Wemmick. “You did come home,then?”“Yes,” I returned; “but I didn’t go home.”“That’s all right,” said he, rubbing his hands. “I lefta note for you at each of the Temple gates, on the chance. Which gate did youcome to?”I told him.“I’ll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroythe notes,” said Wemmick; “it’s a good rule never to leavedocumentary evidence if you can help it, because you don’t know when itmay be put in. I’m going to take a liberty with you. Would youmind toasting this sausage for the Aged P.?”I said I should be delighted to do it.“Then you can go about your work, Mary Anne,” said Wemmick to thelittle servant; “which leaves us to ourselves, don’t you see, Mr.Pip?” he added, winking, as she disappeared.I thanked him for his friendship and caution, and our discourse proceeded in alow tone, while I toasted the Aged’s sausage and he buttered the crumb ofthe Aged’s roll.“Now, Mr. Pip, you know,” said Wemmick, “you and I understandone another. We are in our private and personal capacities, and we have beenengaged in a confidential transaction before to-day. Official sentiments areone thing. We are extra official.”I cordially assented. I was so very nervous, that I had already lighted theAged’s sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blow it out.“I accidentally heard, yesterday morning,” said Wemmick,“being in a certain place where I once took you,—even between youand me, it’s as well not to mention names when avoidable—”“Much better not,” said I. “I understand you.”“I heard there by chance, yesterday morning,” said Wemmick,“that a certain person not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and notunpossessed of portable property,—I don’t know who it may reallybe,—we won’t name this person—”“Not necessary,” said I.“—Had made some little stir in a certain part of the world where agood many people go, not always in gratification of their own inclinations, andnot quite irrespective of the government expense—”In watching his face, I made quite a firework of the Aged’s sausage, andgreatly discomposed both my own attention and Wemmick’s; for which Iapologised.“—By disappearing from such place, and being no more heard ofthereabouts. From which,” said Wemmick, “conjectures had beenraised and theories formed. I also heard that you at your chambers in GardenCourt, Temple, had been watched, and might be watched again.”“By whom?” said I.“I wouldn’t go into that,” said Wemmick, evasively, “itmight clash with official responsibilities. I heard it, as I have in my timeheard other curious things in the same place. I don’t tell it you oninformation received. I heard it.”He took the toasting-fork and sausage from me as he spoke, and set forth theAged’s breakfast neatly on a little tray. Previous to placing it beforehim, he went into the Aged’s room with a clean white cloth, and tied thesame under the old gentleman’s chin, and propped him up, and put hisnightcap on one side, and gave him quite a rakish air. Then he placed hisbreakfast before him with great care, and said, “All right, ain’tyou, Aged P.?” To which the cheerful Aged replied, “All right,John, my boy, all right!” As there seemed to be a tacit understandingthat the Aged was not in a presentable state, and was therefore to beconsidered invisible, I made a pretence of being in complete ignorance of theseproceedings.“This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason tosuspect),” I said to Wemmick when he came back, “is inseparablefrom the person to whom you have adverted; is it?”Wemmick looked very serious. “I couldn’t undertake to say that, ofmy own knowledge. I mean, I couldn’t undertake to say it was at first.But it either is, or it will be, or it’s in great danger of being.”As I saw that he was restrained by fealty to Little Britain from saying as muchas he could, and as I knew with thankfulness to him how far out of his way hewent to say what he did, I could not press him. But I told him, after a littlemeditation over the fire, that I would like to ask him a question, subject tohis answering or not answering, as he deemed right, and sure that his coursewould be right. He paused in his breakfast, and crossing his arms, and pinchinghis shirt-sleeves (his notion of in-door comfort was to sit without any coat),he nodded to me once, to put my question.“You have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name isCompeyson?”He answered with one other nod.“Is he living?”One other nod.“Is he in London?”He gave me one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly, gave me onelast nod, and went on with his breakfast.“Now,” said Wemmick, “questioning being over,” which heemphasised and repeated for my guidance, “I come to what I did, afterhearing what I heard. I went to Garden Court to find you; not finding you, Iwent to Clarriker’s to find Mr. Herbert.”“And him you found?” said I, with great anxiety.“And him I found. Without mentioning any names or going into any details,I gave him to understand that if he was aware of anybody—Tom, Jack, orRichard—being about the chambers, or about the immediate neighbourhood,he had better get Tom, Jack, or Richard out of the way while you were out ofthe way.”“He would be greatly puzzled what to do?”“He was puzzled what to do; not the less, because I gave him myopinion that it was not safe to try to get Tom, Jack, or Richard too far out ofthe way at present. Mr. Pip, I’ll tell you something. Under existingcircumstances, there is no place like a great city when you are once in it.Don’t break cover too soon. Lie close. Wait till things slacken, beforeyou try the open, even for foreign air.”I thanked him for his valuable advice, and asked him what Herbert had done?“Mr. Herbert,” said Wemmick, “after being all of a heap forhalf an hour, struck out a plan. He mentioned to me as a secret, that he iscourting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a bedridden Pa. WhichPa, having been in the Purser line of life, lies a-bed in a bow-window where hecan see the ships sail up and down the river. You are acquainted with the younglady, most probably?”“Not personally,” said I.The truth was, that she had objected to me as an expensive companion who didHerbert no good, and that, when Herbert had first proposed to present me toher, she had received the proposal with such very moderate warmth, that Herberthad felt himself obliged to confide the state of the case to me, with a view tothe lapse of a little time before I made her acquaintance. When I had begun toadvance Herbert’s prospects by stealth, I had been able to bear this withcheerful philosophy: he and his affianced, for their part, had naturally notbeen very anxious to introduce a third person into their interviews; and thus,although I was assured that I had risen in Clara’s esteem, and althoughthe young lady and I had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrancesby Herbert, I had never seen her. However, I did not trouble Wemmick with theseparticulars.“The house with the bow-window,” said Wemmick, “being by theriver-side, down the Pool there between Limehouse and Greenwich, and beingkept, it seems, by a very respectable widow who has a furnished upper floor tolet, Mr. Herbert put it to me, what did I think of that as a temporary tenementfor Tom, Jack, or Richard? Now, I thought very well of it, for three reasonsI’ll give you. That is to say: Firstly. It’s altogether outof all your beats, and is well away from the usual heap of streets great andsmall. Secondly. Without going near it yourself, you could always hearof the safety of Tom, Jack, or Richard, through Mr. Herbert. Thirdly.After a while and when it might be prudent, if you should want to slip Tom,Jack, or Richard on board a foreign packet-boat, there heis—ready.”Much comforted by these considerations, I thanked Wemmick again and again, andbegged him to proceed.“Well, sir! Mr. Herbert threw himself into the business with a will, andby nine o’clock last night he housed Tom, Jack, orRichard,—whichever it may be,—you and I don’t want toknow,—quite successfully. At the old lodgings it was understood that hewas summoned to Dover, and, in fact, he was taken down the Dover road andcornered out of it. Now, another great advantage of all this is, that it wasdone without you, and when, if any one was concerning himself about yourmovements, you must be known to be ever so many miles off and quite otherwiseengaged. This diverts suspicion and confuses it; and for the same reason Irecommended that, even if you came back last night, you should not go home. Itbrings in more confusion, and you want confusion.”Wemmick, having finished his breakfast, here looked at his watch, and began toget his coat on.“And now, Mr. Pip,” said he, with his hands still in the sleeves,“I have probably done the most I can do; but if I can ever domore,—from a Walworth point of view, and in a strictly private andpersonal capacity,—I shall be glad to do it. Here’s the address.There can be no harm in your going here to-night, and seeing for yourself thatall is well with Tom, Jack, or Richard, before you go home,—which isanother reason for your not going home last night. But, after you have gonehome, don’t go back here. You are very welcome, I am sure, Mr.Pip”; his hands were now out of his sleeves, and I was shaking them;“and let me finally impress one important point upon you.” He laidhis hands upon my shoulders, and added in a solemn whisper: “Availyourself of this evening to lay hold of his portable property. You don’tknow what may happen to him. Don’t let anything happen to the portableproperty.”Quite despairing of making my mind clear to Wemmick on this point, I forbore totry.“Time’s up,” said Wemmick, “and I must be off. If youhad nothing more pressing to do than to keep here till dark, that’s whatI should advise. You look very much worried, and it would do you good to have aperfectly quiet day with the Aged,—he’ll be up presently,—anda little bit of—you remember the pig?”“Of course,” said I.“Well; and a little bit of him. That sausage you toasted was his,and he was in all respects a first-rater. Do try him, if it is only for oldacquaintance sake. Good-bye, Aged Parent!” in a cheery shout.“All right, John; all right, my boy!” piped the old man fromwithin.I soon fell asleep before Wemmick’s fire, and the Aged and I enjoyed oneanother’s society by falling asleep before it more or less all day. Wehad loin of pork for dinner, and greens grown on the estate; and I nodded atthe Aged with a good intention whenever I failed to do it drowsily. When it wasquite dark, I left the Aged preparing the fire for toast; and I inferred fromthe number of teacups, as well as from his glances at the two little doors inthe wall, that Miss Skiffins was expected.Chapter XLVI.Eighto’clock had struck before I got into the air, that was scented, notdisagreeably, by the chips and shavings of the long-shore boat-builders, andmast, oar, and block makers. All that water-side region of the upper and lowerPool below Bridge was unknown ground to me; and when I struck down by theriver, I found that the spot I wanted was not where I had supposed it to be,and was anything but easy to find. It was called Mill Pond Bank, Chinks’sBasin; and I had no other guide to Chinks’s Basin than the Old GreenCopper Rope-walk.It matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks I lost myself among,what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to pieces, what ooze andslime and other dregs of tide, what yards of ship-builders and ship-breakers,what rusty anchors blindly biting into the ground, though for years off duty,what mountainous country of accumulated casks and timber, how many rope-walksthat were not the Old Green Copper. After several times falling short of mydestination and as often overshooting it, I came unexpectedly round a corner,upon Mill Pond Bank. It was a fresh kind of place, all circumstancesconsidered, where the wind from the river had room to turn itself round; andthere were two or three trees in it, and there was the stump of a ruinedwindmill, and there was the Old Green Copper Rope-walk,—whose long andnarrow vista I could trace in the moonlight, along a series of wooden framesset in the ground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which hadgrown old and lost most of their teeth.Selecting from the few queer houses upon Mill Pond Bank a house with a woodenfront and three stories of bow-window (not bay-window, which is another thing),I looked at the plate upon the door, and read there, Mrs. Whimple. That beingthe name I wanted, I knocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thrivingappearance responded. She was immediately deposed, however, by Herbert, whosilently led me into the parlour and shut the door. It was an odd sensation tosee his very familiar face established quite at home in that very unfamiliarroom and region; and I found myself looking at him, much as I looked at thecorner-cupboard with the glass and china, the shells upon the chimney-piece,and the coloured engravings on the wall, representing the death of CaptainCook, a ship-launch, and his Majesty King George the Third in a statecoachman’s wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on the terrace atWindsor.“All is well, Handel,” said Herbert, “and he is quitesatisfied, though eager to see you. My dear girl is with her father; and ifyou’ll wait till she comes down, I’ll make you known to her, andthen we’ll go upstairs. That’s her father.”I had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and had probably expressedthe fact in my countenance.“I am afraid he is a sad old rascal,” said Herbert, smiling,“but I have never seen him. Don’t you smell rum? He is always atit.”“At rum?” said I.“Yes,” returned Herbert, “and you may suppose how mild itmakes his gout. He persists, too, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in hisroom, and serving them out. He keeps them on shelves over his head, andwill weigh them all. His room must be like a chandler’sshop.”While he thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar, and then diedaway.“What else can be the consequence,” said Herbert, in explanation,“if he will cut the cheese? A man with the gout in his righthand—and everywhere else—can’t expect to get through a DoubleGloucester without hurting himself.”He seemed to have hurt himself very much, for he gave another furious roar.“To have Provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to Mrs.Whimple,” said Herbert, “for of course people in generalwon’t stand that noise. A curious place, Handel; isn’t it?”It was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean.“Mrs. Whimple,” said Herbert, when I told him so, “is thebest of housewives, and I really do not know what my Clara would do without hermotherly help. For, Clara has no mother of her own, Handel, and no relation inthe world but old Gruffandgrim.”“Surely that’s not his name, Herbert?”“No, no,” said Herbert, “that’s my name for him. Hisname is Mr. Barley. But what a blessing it is for the son of my father andmother to love a girl who has no relations, and who can never bother herself oranybody else about her family!”Herbert had told me on former occasions, and now reminded me, that he firstknew Miss Clara Barley when she was completing her education at anestablishment at Hammersmith, and that on her being recalled home to nurse herfather, he and she had confided their affection to the motherly Mrs. Whimple,by whom it had been fostered and regulated with equal kindness and discretion,ever since. It was understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly beconfided to old Barley, by reason of his being totally unequal to theconsideration of any subject more psychological than Gout, Rum, andPurser’s stores.As we were thus conversing in a low tone while Old Barley’s sustainedgrowl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, the room door opened, anda very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so came in with a basket inher hand: whom Herbert tenderly relieved of the basket, and presented,blushing, as “Clara.” She really was a most charming girl, andmight have passed for a captive fairy, whom that truculent Ogre, Old Barley,had pressed into his service.“Look here,” said Herbert, showing me the basket, with acompassionate and tender smile, after we had talked a little;“here’s poor Clara’s supper, served out every night.Here’s her allowance of bread, and here’s her slice of cheese, andhere’s her rum,—which I drink. This is Mr. Barley’s breakfastfor to-morrow, served out to be cooked. Two mutton-chops, three potatoes, somesplit peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, and all thisblack pepper. It’s stewed up together, and taken hot, and it’s anice thing for the gout, I should think!”There was something so natural and winning in Clara’s resigned way oflooking at these stores in detail, as Herbert pointed them out; and somethingso confiding, loving, and innocent in her modest manner of yielding herself toHerbert’s embracing arm; and something so gentle in her, so much needingprotection on Mill Pond Bank, by Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green CopperRope-walk, with Old Barley growling in the beam,—that I would not haveundone the engagement between her and Herbert for all the money in thepocket-book I had never opened.I was looking at her with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly the growlswelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise was heard above, as ifa giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore it through the ceiling to come atus. Upon this Clara said to Herbert, “Papa wants me, darling!” andran away.“There is an unconscionable old shark for you!” said Herbert.“What do you suppose he wants now, Handel?”“I don’t know,” said I. “Something to drink?”“That’s it!” cried Herbert, as if I had made a guess ofextraordinary merit. “He keeps his grog ready mixed in a little tub onthe table. Wait a moment, and you’ll hear Clara lift him up to take some.There he goes!” Another roar, with a prolonged shake at the end.“Now,” said Herbert, as it was succeeded by silence,“he’s drinking. Now,” said Herbert, as the growl resounded inthe beam once more, “he’s down again on his back!”Clara returned soon afterwards, and Herbert accompanied me upstairs to see ourcharge. As we passed Mr. Barley’s door, he was heard hoarsely mutteringwithin, in a strain that rose and fell like wind, the following Refrain, inwhich I substitute good wishes for something quite the reverse:—“Ahoy! Bless your eyes, here’s old Bill Barley. Here’s oldBill Barley, bless your eyes. Here’s old Bill Barley on the flat of hisback, by the Lord. Lying on the flat of his back like a drifting old deadflounder, here’s your old Bill Barley, bless your eyes. Ahoy! Blessyou.”In this strain of consolation, Herbert informed me the invisible Barley wouldcommune with himself by the day and night together; Often, while it was light,having, at the same time, one eye at a telescope which was fitted on his bedfor the convenience of sweeping the river.In his two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh and airy, andin which Mr. Barley was less audible than below, I found Provis comfortablysettled. He expressed no alarm, and seemed to feel none that was worthmentioning; but it struck me that he was softened,—indefinably, for Icould not have said how, and could never afterwards recall how when I tried,but certainly.The opportunity that the day’s rest had given me for reflection hadresulted in my fully determining to say nothing to him respecting Compeyson.For anything I knew, his animosity towards the man might otherwise lead to hisseeking him out and rushing on his own destruction. Therefore, when Herbert andI sat down with him by his fire, I asked him first of all whether he relied onWemmick’s judgment and sources of information?“Ay, ay, dear boy!” he answered, with a grave nod, “Jaggersknows.”“Then, I have talked with Wemmick,” said I, “and have come totell you what caution he gave me and what advice.”This I did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and I told him howWemmick had heard, in Newgate prison (whether from officers or prisoners Icould not say), that he was under some suspicion, and that my chambers had beenwatched; how Wemmick had recommended his keeping close for a time, and mykeeping away from him; and what Wemmick had said about getting him abroad. Iadded, that of course, when the time came, I should go with him, or shouldfollow close upon him, as might be safest in Wemmick’s judgment. What wasto follow that I did not touch upon; neither, indeed, was I at all clear orcomfortable about it in my own mind, now that I saw him in that softercondition, and in declared peril for my sake. As to altering my way of livingby enlarging my expenses, I put it to him whether in our present unsettled anddifficult circumstances, it would not be simply ridiculous, if it were noworse?He could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout. His comingback was a venture, he said, and he had always known it to be a venture. Hewould do nothing to make it a desperate venture, and he had very little fear ofhis safety with such good help.Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here said thatsomething had come into his thoughts arising out of Wemmick’s suggestion,which it might be worth while to pursue. “We are both good watermen,Handel, and could take him down the river ourselves when the right time comes.No boat would then be hired for the purpose, and no boatmen; that would save atleast a chance of suspicion, and any chance is worth saving. Never mind theseason; don’t you think it might be a good thing if you began at once tokeep a boat at the Temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowing up and downthe river? You fall into that habit, and then who notices or minds? Do ittwenty or fifty times, and there is nothing special in your doing it thetwenty-first or fifty-first.”I liked this scheme, and Provis was quite elated by it. We agreed that itshould be carried into execution, and that Provis should never recognise us ifwe came below Bridge, and rowed past Mill Pond Bank. But we further agreed thathe should pull down the blind in that part of his window which gave upon theeast, whenever he saw us and all was right.Our conference being now ended, and everything arranged, I rose to go;remarking to Herbert that he and I had better not go home together, and that Iwould take half an hour’s start of him. “I don’t like toleave you here,” I said to Provis, “though I cannot doubt yourbeing safer here than near me. Good-bye!”“Dear boy,” he answered, clasping my hands, “I don’tknow when we may meet again, and I don’t like good-bye. Saygood-night!”“Good-night! Herbert will go regularly between us, and when the timecomes you may be certain I shall be ready. Good-night, good-night!”We thought it best that he should stay in his own rooms; and we left him on thelanding outside his door, holding a light over the stair-rail to light usdownstairs. Looking back at him, I thought of the first night of his return,when our positions were reversed, and when I little supposed my heart couldever be as heavy and anxious at parting from him as it was now.Old Barley was growling and swearing when we repassed his door, with noappearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease. When we got to the foot ofthe stairs, I asked Herbert whether he had preserved the name of Provis. Hereplied, certainly not, and that the lodger was Mr. Campbell. He also explainedthat the utmost known of Mr. Campbell there was, that he (Herbert) had Mr.Campbell consigned to him, and felt a strong personal interest in his beingwell cared for, and living a secluded life. So, when we went into the parlourwhere Mrs. Whimple and Clara were seated at work, I said nothing of my owninterest in Mr. Campbell, but kept it to myself.When I had taken leave of the pretty, gentle, dark-eyed girl, and of themotherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with a little affair oftrue love, I felt as if the Old Green Copper Rope-walk had grown quite adifferent place. Old Barley might be as old as the hills, and might swear likea whole field of troopers, but there were redeeming youth and trust and hopeenough in Chinks’s Basin to fill it to overflowing. And then I thought ofEstella, and of our parting, and went home very sadly.All things were as quiet in the Temple as ever I had seen them. The windows ofthe rooms on that side, lately occupied by Provis, were dark and still, andthere was no lounger in Garden Court. I walked past the fountain twice orthrice before I descended the steps that were between me and my rooms, but Iwas quite alone. Herbert, coming to my bedside when he came in,—for Iwent straight to bed, dispirited and fatigued,—made the same report.Opening one of the windows after that, he looked out into the moonlight, andtold me that the pavement was as solemnly empty as the pavement of anycathedral at that same hour.Next day I set myself to get the boat. It was soon done, and the boat wasbrought round to the Temple stairs, and lay where I could reach her within aminute or two. Then, I began to go out as for training and practice: sometimesalone, sometimes with Herbert. I was often out in cold, rain, and sleet, butnobody took much note of me after I had been out a few times. At first, I keptabove Blackfriars Bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, I took towardsLondon Bridge. It was Old London Bridge in those days, and at certain states ofthe tide there was a race and fall of water there which gave it a badreputation. But I knew well enough how to ‘shoot’ the bridge afterseeing it done, and so began to row about among the shipping in the Pool, anddown to Erith. The first time I passed Mill Pond Bank, Herbert and I werepulling a pair of oars; and, both in going and returning, we saw the blindtowards the east come down. Herbert was rarely there less frequently than threetimes in a week, and he never brought me a single word of intelligence that wasat all alarming. Still, I knew that there was cause for alarm, and I could notget rid of the notion of being watched. Once received, it is a haunting idea;how many undesigning persons I suspected of watching me, it would be hard tocalculate.In short, I was always full of fears for the rash man who was in hiding.Herbert had sometimes said to me that he found it pleasant to stand at one ofour windows after dark, when the tide was running down, and to think that itwas flowing, with everything it bore, towards Clara. But I thought with dreadthat it was flowing towards Magwitch, and that any black mark on its surfacemight be his pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take him.Chapter XLVII.Someweeks passed without bringing any change. We waited for Wemmick, and he made nosign. If I had never known him out of Little Britain, and had never enjoyed theprivilege of being on a familiar footing at the Castle, I might have doubtedhim; not so for a moment, knowing him as I did.My worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and I was pressed formoney by more than one creditor. Even I myself began to know the want of money(I mean of ready money in my own pocket), and to relieve it by converting someeasily spared articles of jewelery into cash. But I had quite determined thatit would be a heartless fraud to take more money from my patron in the existingstate of my uncertain thoughts and plans. Therefore, I had sent him theunopened pocket-book by Herbert, to hold in his own keeping, and I felt a kindof satisfaction—whether it was a false kind or a true, I hardlyknow—in not having profited by his generosity since his revelation ofhimself.As the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon me that Estella wasmarried. Fearful of having it confirmed, though it was all but a conviction, Iavoided the newspapers, and begged Herbert (to whom I had confided thecircumstances of our last interview) never to speak of her to me. Why I hoardedup this last wretched little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given tothe winds, how do I know? Why did you who read this, commit that not dissimilarinconsistency of your own last year, last month, last week?It was an unhappy life that I lived; and its one dominant anxiety, toweringover all its other anxieties, like a high mountain above a range of mountains,never disappeared from my view. Still, no new cause for fear arose. Let mestart from my bed as I would, with the terror fresh upon me that he wasdiscovered; let me sit listening, as I would with dread, for Herbert’sreturning step at night, lest it should be fleeter than ordinary, and wingedwith evil news,—for all that, and much more to like purpose, the round ofthings went on. Condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness andsuspense, I rowed about in my boat, and waited, waited, waited, as I bestcould.There were states of the tide when, having been down the river, I could not getback through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings of old London Bridge; then, Ileft my boat at a wharf near the Custom House, to be brought up afterwards tothe Temple stairs. I was not averse to doing this, as it served to make me andmy boat a commoner incident among the water-side people there. From this slightoccasion sprang two meetings that I have now to tell of.One afternoon, late in the month of February, I came ashore at the wharf atdusk. I had pulled down as far as Greenwich with the ebb tide, and had turnedwith the tide. It had been a fine bright day, but had become foggy as the sundropped, and I had had to feel my way back among the shipping, prettycarefully. Both in going and returning, I had seen the signal in his window,All well.As it was a raw evening, and I was cold, I thought I would comfort myself withdinner at once; and as I had hours of dejection and solitude before me if Iwent home to the Temple, I thought I would afterwards go to the play. Thetheatre where Mr. Wopsle had achieved his questionable triumph was in thatwater-side neighbourhood (it is nowhere now), and to that theatre I resolved togo. I was aware that Mr. Wopsle had not succeeded in reviving the Drama, but,on the contrary, had rather partaken of its decline. He had been ominouslyheard of, through the play-bills, as a faithful Black, in connection with alittle girl of noble birth, and a monkey. And Herbert had seen him as apredatory Tartar of comic propensities, with a face like a red brick, and anoutrageous hat all over bells.I dined at what Herbert and I used to call a geographical chop-house, wherethere were maps of the world in porter-pot rims on every half-yard of thetablecloths, and charts of gravy on every one of the knives,—to this daythere is scarcely a single chop-house within the Lord Mayor’s dominionswhich is not geographical,—and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs,staring at gas, and baking in a hot blast of dinners. By and by, I rousedmyself, and went to the play.There, I found a virtuous boatswain in His Majesty’s service,—amost excellent man, though I could have wished his trousers not quite so tightin some places, and not quite so loose in others,—who knocked all thelittle men’s hats over their eyes, though he was very generous and brave,and who wouldn’t hear of anybody’s paying taxes, though he was verypatriotic. He had a bag of money in his pocket, like a pudding in the cloth,and on that property married a young person in bed-furniture, with greatrejoicings; the whole population of Portsmouth (nine in number at the lastcensus) turning out on the beach to rub their own hands and shake everybodyelse’s, and sing “Fill, fill!” A certain dark-complexionedSwab, however, who wouldn’t fill, or do anything else that was proposedto him, and whose heart was openly stated (by the boatswain) to be as black ashis figure-head, proposed to two other Swabs to get all mankind intodifficulties; which was so effectually done (the Swab family havingconsiderable political influence) that it took half the evening to set thingsright, and then it was only brought about through an honest little grocer witha white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock, with agridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knocking everybody down frombehind with the gridiron whom he couldn’t confute with what he hadoverheard. This led to Mr. Wopsle’s (who had never been heard of before)coming in with a star and garter on, as a plenipotentiary of great power directfrom the Admiralty, to say that the Swabs were all to go to prison on the spot,and that he had brought the boatswain down the Union Jack, as a slightacknowledgment of his public services. The boatswain, unmanned for the firsttime, respectfully dried his eyes on the Jack, and then cheering up, andaddressing Mr. Wopsle as Your Honour, solicited permission to take him by thefin. Mr. Wopsle, conceding his fin with a gracious dignity, was immediatelyshoved into a dusty corner, while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from thatcorner, surveying the public with a discontented eye, became aware of me.The second piece was the last new grand comic Christmas pantomime, in the firstscene of which, it pained me to suspect that I detected Mr. Wopsle with redworsted legs under a highly magnified phosphoric countenance and a shock of redcurtain-fringe for his hair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in amine, and displaying great cowardice when his gigantic master came home (veryhoarse) to dinner. But he presently presented himself under worthiercircumstances; for, the Genius of Youthful Love being in want ofassistance,—on account of the parental brutality of an ignorant farmerwho opposed the choice of his daughter’s heart, by purposely falling uponthe object, in a flour-sack, out of the first-floor window,—summoned asententious Enchanter; and he, coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily,after an apparently violent journey, proved to be Mr. Wopsle in a high-crownedhat, with a necromantic work in one volume under his arm. The business of thisenchanter on earth being principally to be talked at, sung at, butted at,danced at, and flashed at with fires of various colours, he had a good deal oftime on his hands. And I observed, with great surprise, that he devoted it tostaring in my direction as if he were lost in amazement.There was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of Mr. Wopsle’seye, and he seemed to be turning so many things over in his mind and to grow soconfused, that I could not make it out. I sat thinking of it long after he hadascended to the clouds in a large watch-case, and still I could not make itout. I was still thinking of it when I came out of the theatre an hourafterwards, and found him waiting for me near the door.“How do you do?” said I, shaking hands with him as we turned downthe street together. “I saw that you saw me.”“Saw you, Mr. Pip!” he returned. “Yes, of course I saw you.But who else was there?”“Who else?”“It is the strangest thing,” said Mr. Wopsle, drifting into hislost look again; “and yet I could swear to him.”Becoming alarmed, I entreated Mr. Wopsle to explain his meaning.“Whether I should have noticed him at first but for your beingthere,” said Mr. Wopsle, going on in the same lost way, “Ican’t be positive; yet I think I should.”Involuntarily I looked round me, as I was accustomed to look round me when Iwent home; for these mysterious words gave me a chill.“Oh! He can’t be in sight,” said Mr. Wopsle. “He wentout before I went off. I saw him go.”Having the reason that I had for being suspicious, I even suspected this pooractor. I mistrusted a design to entrap me into some admission. Therefore Iglanced at him as we walked on together, but said nothing.“I had a ridiculous fancy that he must be with you, Mr. Pip, till I sawthat you were quite unconscious of him, sitting behind you there like aghost.”My former chill crept over me again, but I was resolved not to speak yet, forit was quite consistent with his words that he might be set on to induce me toconnect these references with Provis. Of course, I was perfectly sure and safethat Provis had not been there.“I dare say you wonder at me, Mr. Pip; indeed, I see you do. But it is sovery strange! You’ll hardly believe what I am going to tell you. I couldhardly believe it myself, if you told me.”“Indeed?” said I.“No, indeed. Mr. Pip, you remember in old times a certain Christmas Day,when you were quite a child, and I dined at Gargery’s, and some soldierscame to the door to get a pair of handcuffs mended?”“I remember it very well.”“And you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, and that wejoined in it, and that Gargery took you on his back, and that I took the lead,and you kept up with me as well as you could?”“I remember it all very well.” Better than he thought,—exceptthe last clause.“And you remember that we came up with the two in a ditch, and that therewas a scuffle between them, and that one of them had been severely handled andmuch mauled about the face by the other?”“I see it all before me.”“And that the soldiers lighted torches, and put the two in the centre,and that we went on to see the last of them, over the black marshes, with thetorchlight shining on their faces,—I am particular about that,—withthe torchlight shining on their faces, when there was an outer ring of darknight all about us?”“Yes,” said I. “I remember all that.”“Then, Mr. Pip, one of those two prisoners sat behind you tonight. I sawhim over your shoulder.”“Steady!” I thought. I asked him then, “Which of the two doyou suppose you saw?”“The one who had been mauled,” he answered readily, “andI’ll swear I saw him! The more I think of him, the more certain I am ofhim.”“This is very curious!” said I, with the best assumption I couldput on of its being nothing more to me. “Very curious indeed!”I cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this conversation threwme, or the special and peculiar terror I felt at Compeyson’s having beenbehind me “like a ghost.” For if he had ever been out of mythoughts for a few moments together since the hiding had begun, it was in thosevery moments when he was closest to me; and to think that I should be sounconscious and off my guard after all my care was as if I had shut an avenueof a hundred doors to keep him out, and then had found him at my elbow. I couldnot doubt, either, that he was there, because I was there, and that, howeverslight an appearance of danger there might be about us, danger was always nearand active.I put such questions to Mr. Wopsle as, When did the man come in? He could nottell me that; he saw me, and over my shoulder he saw the man. It was not untilhe had seen him for some time that he began to identify him; but he had fromthe first vaguely associated him with me, and known him as somehow belonging tome in the old village time. How was he dressed? Prosperously, but notnoticeably otherwise; he thought, in black. Was his face at all disfigured? No,he believed not. I believed not too, for, although in my brooding state I hadtaken no especial notice of the people behind me, I thought it likely that aface at all disfigured would have attracted my attention.When Mr. Wopsle had imparted to me all that he could recall or I extract, andwhen I had treated him to a little appropriate refreshment, after the fatiguesof the evening, we parted. It was between twelve and one o’clock when Ireached the Temple, and the gates were shut. No one was near me when I went inand went home.Herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by the fire. But therewas nothing to be done, saving to communicate to Wemmick what I had that nightfound out, and to remind him that we waited for his hint. As I thought that Imight compromise him if I went too often to the Castle, I made thiscommunication by letter. I wrote it before I went to bed, and went out andposted it; and again no one was near me. Herbert and I agreed that we could donothing else but be very cautious. And we were very cautious indeed,—morecautious than before, if that were possible,—and I for my part never wentnear Chinks’s Basin, except when I rowed by, and then I only looked atMill Pond Bank as I looked at anything else.Chapter XLVIII.Thesecond of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter occurred about aweek after the first. I had again left my boat at the wharf below Bridge; thetime was an hour earlier in the afternoon; and, undecided where to dine, I hadstrolled up into Cheapside, and was strolling along it, surely the mostunsettled person in all the busy concourse, when a large hand was laid upon myshoulder by some one overtaking me. It was Mr. Jaggers’s hand, and hepassed it through my arm.“As we are going in the same direction, Pip, we may walk together. Whereare you bound for?”“For the Temple, I think,” said I.“Don’t you know?” said Mr. Jaggers.“Well,” I returned, glad for once to get the better of him incross-examination, “I do not know, for I have not made up mymind.”“You are going to dine?” said Mr. Jaggers. “You don’tmind admitting that, I suppose?”“No,” I returned, “I don’t mind admitting that.”“And are not engaged?”“I don’t mind admitting also that I am not engaged.”“Then,” said Mr. Jaggers, “come and dine with me.”I was going to excuse myself, when he added, “Wemmick’scoming.” So I changed my excuse into an acceptance,—the few words Ihad uttered, serving for the beginning of either,—and we went alongCheapside and slanted off to Little Britain, while the lights were springing upbrilliantly in the shop windows, and the street lamp-lighters, scarcely findingground enough to plant their ladders on in the midst of the afternoon’sbustle, were skipping up and down and running in and out, opening more red eyesin the gathering fog than my rushlight tower at the Hummums had opened whiteeyes in the ghostly wall.At the office in Little Britain there was the usual letter-writing,hand-washing, candle-snuffing, and safe-locking, that closed the business ofthe day. As I stood idle by Mr. Jaggers’s fire, its rising and fallingflame made the two casts on the shelf look as if they were playing a diabolicalgame at bo-peep with me; while the pair of coarse, fat office candles thatdimly lighted Mr. Jaggers as he wrote in a corner were decorated with dirtywinding-sheets, as if in remembrance of a host of hanged clients.We went to Gerrard Street, all three together, in a hackney-coach: And, as soonas we got there, dinner was served. Although I should not have thought ofmaking, in that place, the most distant reference by so much as a look toWemmick’s Walworth sentiments, yet I should have had no objection tocatching his eye now and then in a friendly way. But it was not to be done. Heturned his eyes on Mr. Jaggers whenever he raised them from the table, and wasas dry and distant to me as if there were twin Wemmicks, and this was the wrongone.“Did you send that note of Miss Havisham’s to Mr. Pip,Wemmick?” Mr. Jaggers asked, soon after we began dinner.“No, sir,” returned Wemmick; “it was going by post, when youbrought Mr. Pip into the office. Here it is.” He handed it to hisprincipal instead of to me.“It’s a note of two lines, Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, handing iton, “sent up to me by Miss Havisham on account of her not being sure ofyour address. She tells me that she wants to see you on a little matter ofbusiness you mentioned to her. You’ll go down?”“Yes,” said I, casting my eyes over the note, which was exactly inthose terms.“When do you think of going down?”“I have an impending engagement,” said I, glancing at Wemmick, whowas putting fish into the post-office, “that renders me rather uncertainof my time. At once, I think.”“If Mr. Pip has the intention of going at once,” said Wemmick toMr. Jaggers, “he needn’t write an answer, you know.”Receiving this as an intimation that it was best not to delay, I settled that Iwould go to-morrow, and said so. Wemmick drank a glass of wine, and looked witha grimly satisfied air at Mr. Jaggers, but not at me.“So, Pip! Our friend the Spider,” said Mr. Jaggers, “hasplayed his cards. He has won the pool.”It was as much as I could do to assent.“Hah! He is a promising fellow—in his way—but he may not haveit all his own way. The stronger will win in the end, but the stronger has tobe found out first. If he should turn to, and beat her—”“Surely,” I interrupted, with a burning face and heart, “youdo not seriously think that he is scoundrel enough for that, Mr.Jaggers?”“I didn’t say so, Pip. I am putting a case. If he should turn toand beat her, he may possibly get the strength on his side; if it should be aquestion of intellect, he certainly will not. It would be chance work to givean opinion how a fellow of that sort will turn out in such circumstances,because it’s a toss-up between two results.”“May I ask what they are?”“A fellow like our friend the Spider,” answered Mr. Jaggers,“either beats or cringes. He may cringe and growl, or cringe and notgrowl; but he either beats or cringes. Ask Wemmick his opinion.”“Either beats or cringes,” said Wemmick, not at all addressinghimself to me.“So here’s to Mrs. Bentley Drummle,” said Mr. Jaggers, takinga decanter of choicer wine from his dumb-waiter, and filling for each of us andfor himself, “and may the question of supremacy be settled to thelady’s satisfaction! To the satisfaction of the lady and thegentleman, it never will be. Now, Molly, Molly, Molly, Molly, how slow you areto-day!”She was at his elbow when he addressed her, putting a dish upon the table. Asshe withdrew her hands from it, she fell back a step or two, nervouslymuttering some excuse. And a certain action of her fingers, as she spoke,arrested my attention.“What’s the matter?” said Mr. Jaggers.“Nothing. Only the subject we were speaking of,” said I, “wasrather painful to me.”The action of her fingers was like the action of knitting. She stood looking ather master, not understanding whether she was free to go, or whether he hadmore to say to her and would call her back if she did go. Her look was veryintent. Surely, I had seen exactly such eyes and such hands on a memorableoccasion very lately!He dismissed her, and she glided out of the room. But she remained before me asplainly as if she were still there. I looked at those hands, I looked at thoseeyes, I looked at that flowing hair; and I compared them with other hands,other eyes, other hair, that I knew of, and with what those might be aftertwenty years of a brutal husband and a stormy life. I looked again at thosehands and eyes of the housekeeper, and thought of the inexplicable feeling thathad come over me when I last walked—not alone—in the ruined garden,and through the deserted brewery. I thought how the same feeling had come backwhen I saw a face looking at me, and a hand waving to me from a stage-coachwindow; and how it had come back again and had flashed about me like lightning,when I had passed in a carriage—not alone—through a sudden glare oflight in a dark street. I thought how one link of association had helped thatidentification in the theatre, and how such a link, wanting before, had beenriveted for me now, when I had passed by a chance swift from Estella’sname to the fingers with their knitting action, and the attentive eyes. And Ifelt absolutely certain that this woman was Estella’s mother.Mr. Jaggers had seen me with Estella, and was not likely to have missed thesentiments I had been at no pains to conceal. He nodded when I said the subjectwas painful to me, clapped me on the back, put round the wine again, and wenton with his dinner.Only twice more did the housekeeper reappear, and then her stay in the room wasvery short, and Mr. Jaggers was sharp with her. But her hands wereEstella’s hands, and her eyes were Estella’s eyes, and if she hadreappeared a hundred times I could have been neither more sure nor less surethat my conviction was the truth.It was a dull evening, for Wemmick drew his wine, when it came round, quite asa matter of business,—just as he might have drawn his salary when thatcame round,—and with his eyes on his chief, sat in a state of perpetualreadiness for cross-examination. As to the quantity of wine, his post-officewas as indifferent and ready as any other post-office for its quantity ofletters. From my point of view, he was the wrong twin all the time, and onlyexternally like the Wemmick of Walworth.We took our leave early, and left together. Even when we were groping among Mr.Jaggers’s stock of boots for our hats, I felt that the right twin was onhis way back; and we had not gone half a dozen yards down Gerrard Street in theWalworth direction, before I found that I was walking arm in arm with the righttwin, and that the wrong twin had evaporated into the evening air.“Well!” said Wemmick, “that’s over! He’s awonderful man, without his living likeness; but I feel that I have to screwmyself up when I dine with him,—and I dine more comfortablyunscrewed.”I felt that this was a good statement of the case, and told him so.“Wouldn’t say it to anybody but yourself,” he answered.“I know that what is said between you and me goes no further.”I asked him if he had ever seen Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs.Bentley Drummle. He said no. To avoid being too abrupt, I then spoke of theAged and of Miss Skiffins. He looked rather sly when I mentioned Miss Skiffins,and stopped in the street to blow his nose, with a roll of the head, and aflourish not quite free from latent boastfulness.“Wemmick,” said I, “do you remember telling me, before Ifirst went to Mr. Jaggers’s private house, to notice thathousekeeper?”“Did I?” he replied. “Ah, I dare say I did. Deuce takeme,” he added, suddenly, “I know I did. I find I am not quiteunscrewed yet.”“A wild beast tamed, you called her.”“And what do you call her?”“The same. How did Mr. Jaggers tame her, Wemmick?”“That’s his secret. She has been with him many a long year.”“I wish you would tell me her story. I feel a particular interest inbeing acquainted with it. You know that what is said between you and me goes nofurther.”“Well!” Wemmick replied, “I don’t know herstory,—that is, I don’t know all of it. But what I do knowI’ll tell you. We are in our private and personal capacities, ofcourse.”“Of course.”“A score or so of years ago, that woman was tried at the Old Bailey formurder, and was acquitted. She was a very handsome young woman, and I believehad some gypsy blood in her. Anyhow, it was hot enough when it was up, as youmay suppose.”“But she was acquitted.”“Mr. Jaggers was for her,” pursued Wemmick, with a look full ofmeaning, “and worked the case in a way quite astonishing. It was adesperate case, and it was comparatively early days with him then, and heworked it to general admiration; in fact, it may almost be said to have madehim. He worked it himself at the police-office, day after day for many days,contending against even a committal; and at the trial where he couldn’twork it himself, sat under counsel, and—every one knew—put in allthe salt and pepper. The murdered person was a woman,—a woman a good tenyears older, very much larger, and very much stronger. It was a case ofjealousy. They both led tramping lives, and this woman in Gerrard Street herehad been married very young, over the broomstick (as we say), to a trampingman, and was a perfect fury in point of jealousy. The murderedwoman,—more a match for the man, certainly, in point of years—wasfound dead in a barn near Hounslow Heath. There had been a violent struggle,perhaps a fight. She was bruised and scratched and torn, and had been held bythe throat, at last, and choked. Now, there was no reasonable evidence toimplicate any person but this woman, and on the improbabilities of her havingbeen able to do it Mr. Jaggers principally rested his case. You may besure,” said Wemmick, touching me on the sleeve, “that he neverdwelt upon the strength of her hands then, though he sometimes does now.”I had told Wemmick of his showing us her wrists, that day of the dinner party.“Well, sir!” Wemmick went on; “it happened—happened,don’t you see?—that this woman was so very artfully dressed fromthe time of her apprehension, that she looked much slighter than she reallywas; in particular, her sleeves are always remembered to have been so skilfullycontrived that her arms had quite a delicate look. She had only a bruise or twoabout her,—nothing for a tramp,—but the backs of her hands werelacerated, and the question was, Was it with finger-nails? Now, Mr. Jaggersshowed that she had struggled through a great lot of brambles which were not ashigh as her face; but which she could not have got through and kept her handsout of; and bits of those brambles were actually found in her skin and put inevidence, as well as the fact that the brambles in question were found onexamination to have been broken through, and to have little shreds of her dressand little spots of blood upon them here and there. But the boldest point hemade was this: it was attempted to be set up, in proof of her jealousy, thatshe was under strong suspicion of having, at about the time of the murder,frantically destroyed her child by this man—some three years old—torevenge herself upon him. Mr. Jaggers worked that in this way: “We saythese are not marks of finger-nails, but marks of brambles, and we show you thebrambles. You say they are marks of finger-nails, and you set up the hypothesisthat she destroyed her child. You must accept all consequences of thathypothesis. For anything we know, she may have destroyed her child, and thechild in clinging to her may have scratched her hands. What then? You are nottrying her for the murder of her child; why don’t you? As to this case,if you will have scratches, we say that, for anything we know, you mayhave accounted for them, assuming for the sake of argument that you have notinvented them?” “To sum up, sir,” said Wemmick, “Mr.Jaggers was altogether too many for the jury, and they gave in.”“Has she been in his service ever since?”“Yes; but not only that,” said Wemmick, “she went into hisservice immediately after her acquittal, tamed as she is now. She has sincebeen taught one thing and another in the way of her duties, but she was tamedfrom the beginning.”“Do you remember the sex of the child?”“Said to have been a girl.”“You have nothing more to say to me to-night?”“Nothing. I got your letter and destroyed it. Nothing.”We exchanged a cordial good-night, and I went home, with new matter for mythoughts, though with no relief from the old.Chapter XLIX.Putting Miss Havisham’s note in my pocket, that it mightserve as my credentials for so soon reappearing at Satis House, in case herwaywardness should lead her to express any surprise at seeing me, I went downagain by the coach next day. But I alighted at the Halfway House, andbreakfasted there, and walked the rest of the distance; for I sought to getinto the town quietly by the unfrequented ways, and to leave it in the samemanner.The best light of the day was gone when I passed along the quiet echoing courtsbehind the High Street. The nooks of ruin where the old monks had once hadtheir refectories and gardens, and where the strong walls were now pressed intothe service of humble sheds and stables, were almost as silent as the old monksin their graves. The cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remotesound to me, as I hurried on avoiding observation, than they had ever hadbefore; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to my ears like funeral music;and the rooks, as they hovered about the grey tower and swung in the bare hightrees of the priory garden, seemed to call to me that the place was changed,and that Estella was gone out of it for ever.An elderly woman, whom I had seen before as one of the servants who lived inthe supplementary house across the back courtyard, opened the gate. The lightedcandle stood in the dark passage within, as of old, and I took it up andascended the staircase alone. Miss Havisham was not in her own room, but was inthe larger room across the landing. Looking in at the door, after knocking invain, I saw her sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lostin the contemplation of, the ashy fire.Doing as I had often done, I went in, and stood touching the old chimney-piece,where she could see me when she raised her eyes. There was an air of utterloneliness upon her, that would have moved me to pity though she had wilfullydone me a deeper injury than I could charge her with. As I stoodcompassionating her, and thinking how, in the progress of time, I too had cometo be a part of the wrecked fortunes of that house, her eyes rested on me. Shestared, and said in a low voice, “Is it real?”“It is I, Pip. Mr. Jaggers gave me your note yesterday, and I have lostno time.”“Thank you. Thank you.”As I brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat down, Iremarked a new expression on her face, as if she were afraid of me.“I want,” she said, “to pursue that subject you mentioned tome when you were last here, and to show you that I am not all stone. Butperhaps you can never believe, now, that there is anything human in myheart?”When I said some reassuring words, she stretched out her tremulous right hand,as though she was going to touch me; but she recalled it again before Iunderstood the action, or knew how to receive it.“You said, speaking for your friend, that you could tell me how to dosomething useful and good. Something that you would like done, is itnot?”“Something that I would like done very much.”“What is it?”I began explaining to her that secret history of the partnership. I had not gotfar into it, when I judged from her looks that she was thinking in a discursiveway of me, rather than of what I said. It seemed to be so; for, when I stoppedspeaking, many moments passed before she showed that she was conscious of thefact.“Do you break off,” she asked then, with her former air of beingafraid of me, “because you hate me too much to bear to speak tome?”“No, no,” I answered, “how can you think so, Miss Havisham! Istopped because I thought you were not following what I said.”“Perhaps I was not,” she answered, putting a hand to her head.“Begin again, and let me look at something else. Stay! Now tellme.”She set her hand upon her stick in the resolute way that sometimes was habitualto her, and looked at the fire with a strong expression of forcing herself toattend. I went on with my explanation, and told her how I had hoped to completethe transaction out of my means, but how in this I was disappointed. That partof the subject (I reminded her) involved matters which could form no part of myexplanation, for they were the weighty secrets of another.“So!” said she, assenting with her head, but not looking at me.“And how much money is wanting to complete the purchase?”I was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum. “Ninehundred pounds.”“If I give you the money for this purpose, will you keep my secret as youhave kept your own?”“Quite as faithfully.”“And your mind will be more at rest?”“Much more at rest.”“Are you very unhappy now?”She asked this question, still without looking at me, but in an unwonted toneof sympathy. I could not reply at the moment, for my voice failed me. She puther left arm across the head of her stick, and softly laid her forehead on it.“I am far from happy, Miss Havisham; but I have other causes of disquietthan any you know of. They are the secrets I have mentioned.”After a little while, she raised her head, and looked at the fire again.“It is noble in you to tell me that you have other causes of unhappiness.Is it true?”“Too true.”“Can I only serve you, Pip, by serving your friend? Regarding that asdone, is there nothing I can do for you yourself?”“Nothing. I thank you for the question. I thank you even more for thetone of the question. But there is nothing.”She presently rose from her seat, and looked about the blighted room for themeans of writing. There were none there, and she took from her pocket a yellowset of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold, and wrote upon them with apencil in a case of tarnished gold that hung from her neck.“You are still on friendly terms with Mr. Jaggers?”“Quite. I dined with him yesterday.”“This is an authority to him to pay you that money, to lay out at yourirresponsible discretion for your friend. I keep no money here; but if youwould rather Mr. Jaggers knew nothing of the matter, I will send it toyou.”“Thank you, Miss Havisham; I have not the least objection to receiving itfrom him.”She read me what she had written; and it was direct and clear, and evidentlyintended to absolve me from any suspicion of profiting by the receipt of themoney. I took the tablets from her hand, and it trembled again, and it trembledmore as she took off the chain to which the pencil was attached, and put it inmine. All this she did without looking at me.“My name is on the first leaf. If you can ever write under my name,“I forgive her,” though ever so long after my broken heart is dustpray do it!”“O Miss Havisham,” said I, “I can do it now. There have beensore mistakes; and my life has been a blind and thankless one; and I wantforgiveness and direction far too much, to be bitter with you.”She turned her face to me for the first time since she had averted it, and, tomy amazement, I may even add to my terror, dropped on her knees at my feet;with her folded hands raised to me in the manner in which, when her poor heartwas young and fresh and whole, they must often have been raised to heaven fromher mother’s side.To see her with her white hair and her worn face kneeling at my feet gave me ashock through all my frame. I entreated her to rise, and got my arms about herto help her up; but she only pressed that hand of mine which was nearest to hergrasp, and hung her head over it and wept. I had never seen her shed a tearbefore, and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, I bent over herwithout speaking. She was not kneeling now, but was down upon the ground.“O!” she cried, despairingly. “What have I done! What have Idone!”“If you mean, Miss Havisham, what have you done to injure me, let meanswer. Very little. I should have loved her under any circumstances. Is shemarried?”“Yes.”It was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolate house had toldme so.“What have I done! What have I done!” She wrung her hands, andcrushed her white hair, and returned to this cry over and over again.“What have I done!”I knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her. That she had done a grievousthing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the form that her wildresentment, spurned affection, and wounded pride found vengeance in, I knewfull well. But that, in shutting out the light of day, she had shut outinfinitely more; that, in seclusion, she had secluded herself from a thousandnatural and healing influences; that, her mind, brooding solitary, had growndiseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse the appointed order oftheir Maker, I knew equally well. And could I look upon her without compassion,seeing her punishment in the ruin she was, in her profound unfitness for thisearth on which she was placed, in the vanity of sorrow which had become amaster mania, like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanityof unworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in thisworld?“Until you spoke to her the other day, and until I saw in you alooking-glass that showed me what I once felt myself, I did not know what I haddone. What have I done! What have I done!” And so again, twenty, fiftytimes over, What had she done!“Miss Havisham,” I said, when her cry had died away, “you maydismiss me from your mind and conscience. But Estella is a different case, andif you can ever undo any scrap of what you have done amiss in keeping a part ofher right nature away from her, it will be better to do that than to bemoan thepast through a hundred years.”“Yes, yes, I know it. But, Pip—my dear!” There was an earnestwomanly compassion for me in her new affection. “My dear! Believe this:when she first came to me, I meant to save her from misery like my own. Atfirst, I meant no more.”“Well, well!” said I. “I hope so.”“But as she grew, and promised to be very beautiful, I gradually didworse, and with my praises, and with my jewels, and with my teachings, and withthis figure of myself always before her, a warning to back and point mylessons, I stole her heart away, and put ice in its place.”“Better,” I could not help saying, “to have left her anatural heart, even to be bruised or broken.”With that, Miss Havisham looked distractedly at me for a while, and then burstout again, What had she done!“If you knew all my story,” she pleaded, “you would have somecompassion for me and a better understanding of me.”“Miss Havisham,” I answered, as delicately as I could, “Ibelieve I may say that I do know your story, and have known it ever since Ifirst left this neighbourhood. It has inspired me with great commiseration, andI hope I understand it and its influences. Does what has passed between us giveme any excuse for asking you a question relative to Estella? Not as she is, butas she was when she first came here?”She was seated on the ground, with her arms on the ragged chair, and her headleaning on them. She looked full at me when I said this, and replied, “Goon.”“Whose child was Estella?”She shook her head.“You don’t know?”She shook her head again.“But Mr. Jaggers brought her here, or sent her here?”“Brought her here.”“Will you tell me how that came about?”She answered in a low whisper and with caution: “I had been shut up inthese rooms a long time (I don’t know how long; you know what time theclocks keep here), when I told him that I wanted a little girl to rear andlove, and save from my fate. I had first seen him when I sent for him to laythis place waste for me; having read of him in the newspapers, before I and theworld parted. He told me that he would look about him for such an orphan child.One night he brought her here asleep, and I called her Estella.”“Might I ask her age then?”“Two or three. She herself knows nothing, but that she was left an orphanand I adopted her.”So convinced I was of that woman’s being her mother, that I wanted noevidence to establish the fact in my own mind. But, to any mind, I thought, theconnection here was clear and straight.What more could I hope to do by prolonging the interview? I had succeeded onbehalf of Herbert, Miss Havisham had told me all she knew of Estella, I hadsaid and done what I could to ease her mind. No matter with what other words weparted; we parted.Twilight was closing in when I went downstairs into the natural air. I calledto the woman who had opened the gate when I entered, that I would not troubleher just yet, but would walk round the place before leaving. For I had apresentiment that I should never be there again, and I felt that the dyinglight was suited to my last view of it.By the wilderness of casks that I had walked on long ago, and on which the rainof years had fallen since, rotting them in many places, and leaving miniatureswamps and pools of water upon those that stood on end, I made my way to theruined garden. I went all round it; round by the corner where Herbert and I hadfought our battle; round by the paths where Estella and I had walked. So cold,so lonely, so dreary all!Taking the brewery on my way back, I raised the rusty latch of a little door atthe garden end of it, and walked through. I was going out at the oppositedoor,—not easy to open now, for the damp wood had started and swelled,and the hinges were yielding, and the threshold was encumbered with a growth offungus,—when I turned my head to look back. A childish associationrevived with wonderful force in the moment of the slight action, and I fanciedthat I saw Miss Havisham hanging to the beam. So strong was the impression,that I stood under the beam shuddering from head to foot before I knew it was afancy,—though to be sure I was there in an instant.The mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror of this illusion,though it was but momentary, caused me to feel an indescribable awe as I cameout between the open wooden gates where I had once wrung my hair after Estellahad wrung my heart. Passing on into the front courtyard, I hesitated whether tocall the woman to let me out at the locked gate of which she had the key, orfirst to go upstairs and assure myself that Miss Havisham was as safe and wellas I had left her. I took the latter course and went up.I looked into the room where I had left her, and I saw her seated in the raggedchair upon the hearth close to the fire, with her back towards me. In themoment when I was withdrawing my head to go quietly away, I saw a great flaminglight spring up. In the same moment I saw her running at me, shrieking, with awhirl of fire blazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet aboveher head as she was high.I had a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick coat. That Igot them off, closed with her, threw her down, and got them over her; that Idragged the great cloth from the table for the same purpose, and with itdragged down the heap of rottenness in the midst, and all the ugly things thatsheltered there; that we were on the ground struggling like desperate enemies,and that the closer I covered her, the more wildly she shrieked and tried tofree herself,—that this occurred I knew through the result, but notthrough anything I felt, or thought, or knew I did. I knew nothing until I knewthat we were on the floor by the great table, and that patches of tinder yetalight were floating in the smoky air, which, a moment ago, had been her fadedbridal dress.Then, I looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders running awayover the floor, and the servants coming in with breathless cries at the door. Istill held her forcibly down with all my strength, like a prisoner who mightescape; and I doubt if I even knew who she was, or why we had struggled, orthat she had been in flames, or that the flames were out, until I saw thepatches of tinder that had been her garments no longer alight but falling in ablack shower around us.She was insensible, and I was afraid to have her moved, or even touched.Assistance was sent for, and I held her until it came, as if I unreasonablyfancied (I think I did) that, if I let her go, the fire would break out againand consume her. When I got up, on the surgeon’s coming to her with otheraid, I was astonished to see that both my hands were burnt; for, I had noknowledge of it through the sense of feeling.On examination it was pronounced that she had received serious hurts, but thatthey of themselves were far from hopeless; the danger lay mainly in the nervousshock. By the surgeon’s directions, her bed was carried into that roomand laid upon the great table, which happened to be well suited to the dressingof her injuries. When I saw her again, an hour afterwards, she lay, indeed,where I had seen her strike her stick, and had heard her say that she would lieone day.Though every vestige of her dress was burnt, as they told me, she still hadsomething of her old ghastly bridal appearance; for, they had covered her tothe throat with white cotton-wool, and as she lay with a white sheet looselyoverlying that, the phantom air of something that had been and was changed wasstill upon her.I found, on questioning the servants, that Estella was in Paris, and I got apromise from the surgeon that he would write to her by the next post. MissHavisham’s family I took upon myself; intending to communicate with Mr.Matthew Pocket only, and leave him to do as he liked about informing the rest.This I did next day, through Herbert, as soon as I returned to town.There was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what hadhappened, though with a certain terrible vivacity. Towards midnight she beganto wander in her speech; and after that it gradually set in that she saidinnumerable times in a low solemn voice, “What have I done!” Andthen, “When she first came, I meant to save her from misery likemine.” And then, “Take the pencil and write under my name, ‘Iforgive her!’” She never changed the order of these threesentences, but she sometimes left out a word in one or other of them; neverputting in another word, but always leaving a blank and going on to the nextword.As I could do no service there, and as I had, nearer home, that pressing reasonfor anxiety and fear which even her wanderings could not drive out of my mind,I decided, in the course of the night that I would return by the early morningcoach, walking on a mile or so, and being taken up clear of the town. At aboutsix o’clock of the morning, therefore, I leaned over her and touched herlips with mine, just as they said, not stopping for being touched, “Takethe pencil and write under my name, ‘I forgive her.’”Chapter L.Myhands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and again in the morning.My left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow, and, less severely, as high asthe shoulder; it was very painful, but the flames had set in that direction,and I felt thankful it was no worse. My right hand was not so badly burnt butthat I could move the fingers. It was bandaged, of course, but much lessinconveniently than my left hand and arm; those I carried in a sling; and Icould only wear my coat like a cloak, loose over my shoulders and fastened atthe neck. My hair had been caught by the fire, but not my head or face.When Herbert had been down to Hammersmith and seen his father, he came back tome at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on me. He was the kindestof nurses, and at stated times took off the bandages, and steeped them in thecooling liquid that was kept ready, and put them on again, with a patienttenderness that I was deeply grateful for.At first, as I lay quiet on the sofa, I found it painfully difficult, I mightsay impossible, to get rid of the impression of the glare of the flames, theirhurry and noise, and the fierce burning smell. If I dozed for a minute, I wasawakened by Miss Havisham’s cries, and by her running at me with all thatheight of fire above her head. This pain of the mind was much harder to striveagainst than any bodily pain I suffered; and Herbert, seeing that, did hisutmost to hold my attention engaged.Neither of us spoke of the boat, but we both thought of it. That was madeapparent by our avoidance of the subject, and by our agreeing—withoutagreement—to make my recovery of the use of my hands a question of somany hours, not of so many weeks.My first question when I saw Herbert had been of course, whether all was welldown the river? As he replied in the affirmative, with perfect confidence andcheerfulness, we did not resume the subject until the day was wearing away. Butthen, as Herbert changed the bandages, more by the light of the fire than bythe outer light, he went back to it spontaneously.“I sat with Provis last night, Handel, two good hours.”“Where was Clara?”“Dear little thing!” said Herbert. “She was up and down withGruffandgrim all the evening. He was perpetually pegging at the floor themoment she left his sight. I doubt if he can hold out long, though. What withrum and pepper,—and pepper and rum,—I should think his pegging mustbe nearly over.”“And then you will be married, Herbert?”“How can I take care of the dear child otherwise?—Lay your arm outupon the back of the sofa, my dear boy, and I’ll sit down here, and getthe bandage off so gradually that you shall not know when it comes. I wasspeaking of Provis. Do you know, Handel, he improves?”“I said to you I thought he was softened when I last saw him.”“So you did. And so he is. He was very communicative last night, and toldme more of his life. You remember his breaking off here about some woman thathe had had great trouble with.—Did I hurt you?”I had started, but not under his touch. His words had given me a start.“I had forgotten that, Herbert, but I remember it now you speak ofit.”“Well! He went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part it is.Shall I tell you? Or would it worry you just now?”“Tell me by all means. Every word.”Herbert bent forward to look at me more nearly, as if my reply had been rathermore hurried or more eager than he could quite account for. “Your head iscool?” he said, touching it.“Quite,” said I. “Tell me what Provis said, my dearHerbert.”“It seems,” said Herbert, “—there’s a bandage offmost charmingly, and now comes the cool one,—makes you shrink at first,my poor dear fellow, don’t it? but it will be comfortablepresently,—it seems that the woman was a young woman, and a jealouswoman, and a revengeful woman; revengeful, Handel, to the last degree.”“To what last degree?”“Murder.—Does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?”“I don’t feel it. How did she murder? Whom did she murder?”“Why, the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name,” saidHerbert, “but, she was tried for it, and Mr. Jaggers defended her, andthe reputation of that defence first made his name known to Provis. It wasanother and a stronger woman who was the victim, and there had been astruggle—in a barn. Who began it, or how fair it was, or how unfair, maybe doubtful; but how it ended is certainly not doubtful, for the victim wasfound throttled.”“Was the woman brought in guilty?”“No; she was acquitted.—My poor Handel, I hurt you!”“It is impossible to be gentler, Herbert. Yes? What else?”“This acquitted young woman and Provis had a little child; a little childof whom Provis was exceedingly fond. On the evening of the very night when theobject of her jealousy was strangled as I tell you, the young woman presentedherself before Provis for one moment, and swore that she would destroy thechild (which was in her possession), and he should never see it again; then shevanished.—There’s the worst arm comfortably in the sling once more,and now there remains but the right hand, which is a far easier job. I can doit better by this light than by a stronger, for my hand is steadiest when Idon’t see the poor blistered patches too distinctly.—Youdon’t think your breathing is affected, my dear boy? You seem to breathequickly.”“Perhaps I do, Herbert. Did the woman keep her oath?”“There comes the darkest part of Provis’s life. She did.”“That is, he says she did.”“Why, of course, my dear boy,” returned Herbert, in a tone ofsurprise, and again bending forward to get a nearer look at me. “He saysit all. I have no other information.”“No, to be sure.”“Now, whether,” pursued Herbert, “he had used thechild’s mother ill, or whether he had used the child’s mother well,Provis doesn’t say; but she had shared some four or five years of thewretched life he described to us at this fireside, and he seems to have feltpity for her, and forbearance towards her. Therefore, fearing he should becalled upon to depose about this destroyed child, and so be the cause of herdeath, he hid himself (much as he grieved for the child), kept himself dark, ashe says, out of the way and out of the trial, and was only vaguely talked of asa certain man called Abel, out of whom the jealousy arose. After the acquittalshe disappeared, and thus he lost the child and the child’smother.”“I want to ask—”“A moment, my dear boy, and I have done. That evil genius, Compeyson, theworst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing of his keeping out of theway at that time and of his reasons for doing so, of course afterwards held theknowledge over his head as a means of keeping him poorer and working himharder. It was clear last night that this barbed the point of Provis’sanimosity.”“I want to know,” said I, “and particularly, Herbert, whetherhe told you when this happened?”“Particularly? Let me remember, then, what he said as to that. Hisexpression was, ‘a round score o’ year ago, and a’mostdirectly after I took up wi’ Compeyson.’ How old were you when youcame upon him in the little churchyard?”“I think in my seventh year.”“Ay. It had happened some three or four years then, he said, and youbrought into his mind the little girl so tragically lost, who would have beenabout your age.”“Herbert,” said I, after a short silence, in a hurried way,“can you see me best by the light of the window, or the light of thefire?”“By the firelight,” answered Herbert, coming close again.“Look at me.”“I do look at you, my dear boy.”“Touch me.”“I do touch you, my dear boy.”“You are not afraid that I am in any fever, or that my head is muchdisordered by the accident of last night?”“N-no, my dear boy,” said Herbert, after taking time to examine me.“You are rather excited, but you are quite yourself.”“I know I am quite myself. And the man we have in hiding down the river,is Estella’s Father.”Chapter LI.Whatpurpose I had in view when I was hot on tracing out and proving Estella’sparentage, I cannot say. It will presently be seen that the question was notbefore me in a distinct shape until it was put before me by a wiser head thanmy own.But when Herbert and I had held our momentous conversation, I was seized with afeverish conviction that I ought to hunt the matter down,—that I oughtnot to let it rest, but that I ought to see Mr. Jaggers, and come at the baretruth. I really do not know whether I felt that I did this for Estella’ssake, or whether I was glad to transfer to the man in whose preservation I wasso much concerned some rays of the romantic interest that had so longsurrounded me. Perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth.Any way, I could scarcely be withheld from going out to Gerrard Street thatnight. Herbert’s representations that, if I did, I should probably belaid up and stricken useless, when our fugitive’s safety would dependupon me, alone restrained my impatience. On the understanding, again and againreiterated, that, come what would, I was to go to Mr. Jaggers to-morrow, I atlength submitted to keep quiet, and to have my hurts looked after, and to stayat home. Early next morning we went out together, and at the corner of GiltspurStreet by Smithfield, I left Herbert to go his way into the City, and took myway to Little Britain.There were periodical occasions when Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick went over theoffice accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all things straight. Onthese occasions, Wemmick took his books and papers into Mr. Jaggers’sroom, and one of the upstairs clerks came down into the outer office. Findingsuch clerk on Wemmick’s post that morning, I knew what was going on; butI was not sorry to have Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick together, as Wemmick would thenhear for himself that I said nothing to compromise him.My appearance, with my arm bandaged and my coat loose over my shoulders,favoured my object. Although I had sent Mr. Jaggers a brief account of theaccident as soon as I had arrived in town, yet I had to give him all thedetails now; and the speciality of the occasion caused our talk to be less dryand hard, and less strictly regulated by the rules of evidence, than it hadbeen before. While I described the disaster, Mr. Jaggers stood, according tohis wont, before the fire. Wemmick leaned back in his chair, staring at me,with his hands in the pockets of his trousers, and his pen put horizontallyinto the post. The two brutal casts, always inseparable in my mind from theofficial proceedings, seemed to be congestively considering whether theydidn’t smell fire at the present moment.My narrative finished, and their questions exhausted, I then produced MissHavisham’s authority to receive the nine hundred pounds for Herbert. Mr.Jaggers’s eyes retired a little deeper into his head when I handed himthe tablets, but he presently handed them over to Wemmick, with instructions todraw the check for his signature. While that was in course of being done, Ilooked on at Wemmick as he wrote, and Mr. Jaggers, poising and swaying himselfon his well-polished boots, looked on at me. “I am sorry, Pip,”said he, as I put the check in my pocket, when he had signed it, “that wedo nothing for you.”“Miss Havisham was good enough to ask me,” I returned,“whether she could do nothing for me, and I told her No.”“Everybody should know his own business,” said Mr. Jaggers. And Isaw Wemmick’s lips form the words “portable property.”“I should not have told her No, if I had been you,” said MrJaggers; “but every man ought to know his own business best.”“Every man’s business,” said Wemmick, rather reproachfullytowards me, “is portable property.”As I thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme I had at heart, Isaid, turning on Mr. Jaggers:—“I did ask something of Miss Havisham, however, sir. I asked her to giveme some information relative to her adopted daughter, and she gave me all shepossessed.”“Did she?” said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at his bootsand then straightening himself. “Hah! I don’t think I should havedone so, if I had been Miss Havisham. But she ought to know her ownbusiness best.”“I know more of the history of Miss Havisham’s adopted child thanMiss Havisham herself does, sir. I know her mother.”Mr. Jaggers looked at me inquiringly, and repeated “Mother?”“I have seen her mother within these three days.”“Yes?” said Mr. Jaggers.“And so have you, sir. And you have seen her still more recently.”“Yes?” said Mr. Jaggers.“Perhaps I know more of Estella’s history than even you do,”said I. “I know her father too.”A certain stop that Mr. Jaggers came to in his manner—he was tooself-possessed to change his manner, but he could not help its being brought toan indefinably attentive stop—assured me that he did not know who herfather was. This I had strongly suspected from Provis’s account (asHerbert had repeated it) of his having kept himself dark; which I pieced on tothe fact that he himself was not Mr. Jaggers’s client until some fouryears later, and when he could have no reason for claiming his identity. But, Icould not be sure of this unconsciousness on Mr. Jaggers’s part before,though I was quite sure of it now.“So! You know the young lady’s father, Pip?” said Mr.Jaggers.“Yes,” I replied, “and his name is Provis—from NewSouth Wales.”Even Mr. Jaggers started when I said those words. It was the slightest startthat could escape a man, the most carefully repressed and the sooner checked,but he did start, though he made it a part of the action of taking out hispocket-handkerchief. How Wemmick received the announcement I am unable to say;for I was afraid to look at him just then, lest Mr. Jaggers’s sharpnessshould detect that there had been some communication unknown to him between us.“And on what evidence, Pip,” asked Mr. Jaggers, very coolly, as hepaused with his handkerchief half way to his nose, “does Provis make thisclaim?”“He does not make it,” said I, “and has never made it, andhas no knowledge or belief that his daughter is in existence.”For once, the powerful pocket-handkerchief failed. My reply was so unexpected,that Mr. Jaggers put the handkerchief back into his pocket without completingthe usual performance, folded his arms, and looked with stern attention at me,though with an immovable face.Then I told him all I knew, and how I knew it; with the one reservation that Ileft him to infer that I knew from Miss Havisham what I in fact knew fromWemmick. I was very careful indeed as to that. Nor did I look towards Wemmickuntil I had finished all I had to tell, and had been for some time silentlymeeting Mr. Jaggers’s look. When I did at last turn my eyes inWemmick’s direction, I found that he had unposted his pen, and was intentupon the table before him.“Hah!” said Mr. Jaggers at last, as he moved towards the papers onthe table. “What item was it you were at, Wemmick, when Mr. Pip camein?”But I could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and I made a passionate,almost an indignant appeal, to him to be more frank and manly with me. Ireminded him of the false hopes into which I had lapsed, the length of timethey had lasted, and the discovery I had made: and I hinted at the danger thatweighed upon my spirits. I represented myself as being surely worthy of somelittle confidence from him, in return for the confidence I had just nowimparted. I said that I did not blame him, or suspect him, or mistrust him, butI wanted assurance of the truth from him. And if he asked me why I wanted it,and why I thought I had any right to it, I would tell him, little as he caredfor such poor dreams, that I had loved Estella dearly and long, and thatalthough I had lost her, and must live a bereaved life, whatever concerned herwas still nearer and dearer to me than anything else in the world. And seeingthat Mr. Jaggers stood quite still and silent, and apparently quite obdurate,under this appeal, I turned to Wemmick, and said, “Wemmick, I know you tobe a man with a gentle heart. I have seen your pleasant home, and your oldfather, and all the innocent, cheerful playful ways with which you refresh yourbusiness life. And I entreat you to say a word for me to Mr. Jaggers, and torepresent to him that, all circumstances considered, he ought to be more openwith me!”I have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than Mr. Jaggers andWemmick did after this apostrophe. At first, a misgiving crossed me thatWemmick would be instantly dismissed from his employment; but it melted as Isaw Mr. Jaggers relax into something like a smile, and Wemmick become bolder.“What’s all this?” said Mr. Jaggers. “You with an oldfather, and you with pleasant and playful ways?”“Well!” returned Wemmick. “If I don’t bring ’emhere, what does it matter?”“Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, laying his hand upon my arm, and smilingopenly, “this man must be the most cunning impostor in all London.”“Not a bit of it,” returned Wemmick, growing bolder and bolder.“I think you’re another.”Again they exchanged their former odd looks, each apparently still distrustfulthat the other was taking him in.“You with a pleasant home?” said Mr. Jaggers.“Since it don’t interfere with business,” returned Wemmick,“let it be so. Now, I look at you, sir, I shouldn’t wonder ifyou might be planning and contriving to have a pleasant home of your ownone of these days, when you’re tired of all this work.”Mr. Jaggers nodded his head retrospectively two or three times, and actuallydrew a sigh. “Pip,” said he, “we won’t talk about‘poor dreams;’ you know more about such things than I, having muchfresher experience of that kind. But now about this other matter. I’llput a case to you. Mind! I admit nothing.”He waited for me to declare that I quite understood that he expressly said thathe admitted nothing.“Now, Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, “put this case. Put the casethat a woman, under such circumstances as you have mentioned, held her childconcealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to her legal adviser, on hisrepresenting to her that he must know, with an eye to the latitude of hisdefence, how the fact stood about that child. Put the case that, at the sametime he held a trust to find a child for an eccentric rich lady to adopt andbring up.”“I follow you, sir.”“Put the case that he lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that all he sawof children was their being generated in great numbers for certain destruction.Put the case that he often saw children solemnly tried at a criminal bar, wherethey were held up to be seen; put the case that he habitually knew of theirbeing imprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified in allways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged. Put the case that prettynigh all the children he saw in his daily business life he had reason to lookupon as so much spawn, to develop into the fish that were to come to hisnet,—to be prosecuted, defended, forsworn, made orphans, bedevilledsomehow.”“I follow you, sir.”“Put the case, Pip, that here was one pretty little child out of the heapwho could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stirabout; as to whom, over the mother, the legal adviser had this power: “Iknow what you did, and how you did it. You came so and so, you did such andsuch things to divert suspicion. I have tracked you through it all, and I tellit you all. Part with the child, unless it should be necessary to produce it toclear you, and then it shall be produced. Give the child into my hands, and Iwill do my best to bring you off. If you are saved, your child is saved too; ifyou are lost, your child is still saved.” Put the case that this wasdone, and that the woman was cleared.”“I understand you perfectly.”“But that I make no admissions?”“That you make no admissions.” And Wemmick repeated, “Noadmissions.”“Put the case, Pip, that passion and the terror of death had a littleshaken the woman’s intellects, and that when she was set at liberty, shewas scared out of the ways of the world, and went to him to be sheltered. Putthe case that he took her in, and that he kept down the old, wild, violentnature whenever he saw an inkling of its breaking out, by asserting his powerover her in the old way. Do you comprehend the imaginary case?”“Quite.”“Put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money. That themother was still living. That the father was still living. That the mother andfather, unknown to one another, were dwelling within so many miles, furlongs,yards if you like, of one another. That the secret was still a secret, exceptthat you had got wind of it. Put that last case to yourself verycarefully.”“I do.”“I ask Wemmick to put it to himself very carefully.”And Wemmick said, “I do.”“For whose sake would you reveal the secret? For the father’s? Ithink he would not be much the better for the mother. For the mother’s? Ithink if she had done such a deed she would be safer where she was. For thedaughter’s? I think it would hardly serve her to establish her parentagefor the information of her husband, and to drag her back to disgrace, after anescape of twenty years, pretty secure to last for life. But add the case thatyou had loved her, Pip, and had made her the subject of those ‘poordreams’ which have, at one time or another, been in the heads of more menthan you think likely, then I tell you that you had better—and would muchsooner when you had thought well of it—chop off that bandaged left handof yours with your bandaged right hand, and then pass the chopper on to Wemmickthere, to cut that off too.”I looked at Wemmick, whose face was very grave. He gravely touched his lipswith his forefinger. I did the same. Mr. Jaggers did the same. “Now,Wemmick,” said the latter then, resuming his usual manner, “whatitem was it you were at when Mr. Pip came in?”Standing by for a little, while they were at work, I observed that the oddlooks they had cast at one another were repeated several times: with thisdifference now, that each of them seemed suspicious, not to say conscious, ofhaving shown himself in a weak and unprofessional light to the other. For thisreason, I suppose, they were now inflexible with one another; Mr. Jaggers beinghighly dictatorial, and Wemmick obstinately justifying himself whenever therewas the smallest point in abeyance for a moment. I had never seen them on suchill terms; for generally they got on very well indeed together.But they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of Mike, theclient with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose on his sleeve, whom Ihad seen on the very first day of my appearance within those walls. Thisindividual, who, either in his own person or in that of some member of hisfamily, seemed to be always in trouble (which in that place meant Newgate),called to announce that his eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion ofshoplifting. As he imparted this melancholy circumstance to Wemmick, Mr.Jaggers standing magisterially before the fire and taking no share in theproceedings, Mike’s eye happened to twinkle with a tear.“What are you about?” demanded Wemmick, with the utmostindignation. “What do you come snivelling here for?”“I didn’t go to do it, Mr. Wemmick.”“You did,” said Wemmick. “How dare you? You’re not in afit state to come here, if you can’t come here without spluttering like abad pen. What do you mean by it?”“A man can’t help his feelings, Mr. Wemmick,” pleaded Mike.“His what?” demanded Wemmick, quite savagely. “Say thatagain!”“Now look here my man,” said Mr. Jaggers, advancing a step, andpointing to the door. “Get out of this office. I’ll have nofeelings here. Get out.”“It serves you right,” said Wemmick, “Get out.”So, the unfortunate Mike very humbly withdrew, and Mr. Jaggers and Wemmickappeared to have re-established their good understanding, and went to workagain with an air of refreshment upon them as if they had just had lunch.Chapter LII.FromLittle Britain I went, with my check in my pocket, to Miss Skiffins’sbrother, the accountant; and Miss Skiffins’s brother, the accountant,going straight to Clarriker’s and bringing Clarriker to me, I had thegreat satisfaction of concluding that arrangement. It was the only good thing Ihad done, and the only completed thing I had done, since I was first apprisedof my great expectations.Clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of the House weresteadily progressing, that he would now be able to establish a smallbranch-house in the East which was much wanted for the extension of thebusiness, and that Herbert in his new partnership capacity would go out andtake charge of it, I found that I must have prepared for a separation from myfriend, even though my own affairs had been more settled. And now, indeed, Ifelt as if my last anchor were loosening its hold, and I should soon be drivingwith the winds and waves.But there was recompense in the joy with which Herbert would come home of anight and tell me of these changes, little imagining that he told me no news,and would sketch airy pictures of himself conducting Clara Barley to the landof the Arabian Nights, and of me going out to join them (with a caravan ofcamels, I believe), and of our all going up the Nile and seeing wonders.Without being sanguine as to my own part in those bright plans, I felt thatHerbert’s way was clearing fast, and that old Bill Barley had but tostick to his pepper and rum, and his daughter would soon be happily providedfor.We had now got into the month of March. My left arm, though it presented no badsymptoms, took, in the natural course, so long to heal that I was still unableto get a coat on. My right arm was tolerably restored; disfigured, but fairlyserviceable.On a Monday morning, when Herbert and I were at breakfast, I received thefollowing letter from Wemmick by the post.“Walworth. Burn this as soon as read. Early in the week, or sayWednesday, you might do what you know of, if you felt disposed to try it. Nowburn.”When I had shown this to Herbert and had put it in the fire—but notbefore we had both got it by heart—we considered what to do. For, ofcourse my being disabled could now be no longer kept out of view.“I have thought it over again and again,” said Herbert, “andI think I know a better course than taking a Thames waterman. Take Startop. Agood fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic andhonourable.”I had thought of him more than once.“But how much would you tell him, Herbert?”“It is necessary to tell him very little. Let him suppose it a merefreak, but a secret one, until the morning comes: then let him know that thereis urgent reason for your getting Provis aboard and away. You go withhim?”“No doubt.”“Where?”It had seemed to me, in the many anxious considerations I had given the point,almost indifferent what port we made for,—Hamburg, Rotterdam,Antwerp,—the place signified little, so that he was out of England. Anyforeign steamer that fell in our way and would take us up would do. I hadalways proposed to myself to get him well down the river in the boat; certainlywell beyond Gravesend, which was a critical place for search or inquiry ifsuspicion were afoot. As foreign steamers would leave London at about the timeof high-water, our plan would be to get down the river by a previous ebb-tide,and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off to one. The time when onewould be due where we lay, wherever that might be, could be calculated prettynearly, if we made inquiries beforehand.Herbert assented to all this, and we went out immediately after breakfast topursue our investigations. We found that a steamer for Hamburg was likely tosuit our purpose best, and we directed our thoughts chiefly to that vessel. Butwe noted down what other foreign steamers would leave London with the sametide, and we satisfied ourselves that we knew the build and colour of each. Wethen separated for a few hours: I, to get at once such passports as werenecessary; Herbert, to see Startop at his lodgings. We both did what we had todo without any hindrance, and when we met again at one o’clock reportedit done. I, for my part, was prepared with passports; Herbert had seen Startop,and he was more than ready to join.Those two should pull a pair of oars, we settled, and I would steer; our chargewould be sitter, and keep quiet; as speed was not our object, we should makeway enough. We arranged that Herbert should not come home to dinner beforegoing to Mill Pond Bank that evening; that he should not go there at allto-morrow evening, Tuesday; that he should prepare Provis to come down to somestairs hard by the house, on Wednesday, when he saw us approach, and notsooner; that all the arrangements with him should be concluded that Mondaynight; and that he should be communicated with no more in any way, until wetook him on board.These precautions well understood by both of us, I went home.On opening the outer door of our chambers with my key, I found a letter in thebox, directed to me; a very dirty letter, though not ill-written. It had beendelivered by hand (of course, since I left home), and its contents werethese:—“If you are not afraid to come to the old marshes to-night or to-morrownight at nine, and to come to the little sluice-house by the limekiln, you hadbetter come. If you want information regarding your uncle Provis, youhad much better come and tell no one, and lose no time. You must comealone. Bring this with you.”I had had load enough upon my mind before the receipt of this strange letter.What to do now, I could not tell. And the worst was, that I must decidequickly, or I should miss the afternoon coach, which would take me down in timefor to-night. To-morrow night I could not think of going, for it would be tooclose upon the time of the flight. And again, for anything I knew, theproffered information might have some important bearing on the flight itself.If I had had ample time for consideration, I believe I should still have gone.Having hardly any time for consideration,—my watch showing me that thecoach started within half an hour,—I resolved to go. I should certainlynot have gone, but for the reference to my Uncle Provis. That, coming onWemmick’s letter and the morning’s busy preparation, turned thescale.It is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents of almost anyletter, in a violent hurry, that I had to read this mysterious epistle againtwice, before its injunction to me to be secret got mechanically into my mind.Yielding to it in the same mechanical kind of way, I left a note in pencil forHerbert, telling him that as I should be so soon going away, I knew not for howlong, I had decided to hurry down and back, to ascertain for myself how MissHavisham was faring. I had then barely time to get my great-coat, lock up thechambers, and make for the coach-office by the short by-ways. If I had taken ahackney-chariot and gone by the streets, I should have missed my aim; going asI did, I caught the coach just as it came out of the yard. I was the onlyinside passenger, jolting away knee-deep in straw, when I came to myself.For I really had not been myself since the receipt of the letter; it had sobewildered me, ensuing on the hurry of the morning. The morning hurry andflutter had been great; for, long and anxiously as I had waited for Wemmick,his hint had come like a surprise at last. And now I began to wonder at myselffor being in the coach, and to doubt whether I had sufficient reason for beingthere, and to consider whether I should get out presently and go back, and toargue against ever heeding an anonymous communication, and, in short, to passthrough all those phases of contradiction and indecision to which I supposevery few hurried people are strangers. Still, the reference to Provis by namemastered everything. I reasoned as I had reasoned already without knowingit,—if that be reasoning,—in case any harm should befall himthrough my not going, how could I ever forgive myself!It was dark before we got down, and the journey seemed long and dreary to me,who could see little of it inside, and who could not go outside in my disabledstate. Avoiding the Blue Boar, I put up at an inn of minor reputation down thetown, and ordered some dinner. While it was preparing, I went to Satis Houseand inquired for Miss Havisham; she was still very ill, though consideredsomething better.My inn had once been a part of an ancient ecclesiastical house, and I dined ina little octagonal common-room, like a font. As I was not able to cut mydinner, the old landlord with a shining bald head did it for me. This bringingus into conversation, he was so good as to entertain me with my ownstory,—of course with the popular feature that Pumblechook was myearliest benefactor and the founder of my fortunes.“Do you know the young man?” said I.“Know him!” repeated the landlord. “Ever since hewas—no height at all.”“Does he ever come back to this neighbourhood?”“Ay, he comes back,” said the landlord, “to his greatfriends, now and again, and gives the cold shoulder to the man that madehim.”“What man is that?”“Him that I speak of,” said the landlord. “Mr.Pumblechook.”“Is he ungrateful to no one else?”“No doubt he would be, if he could,” returned the landlord,“but he can’t. And why? Because Pumblechook done everything forhim.”“Does Pumblechook say so?”“Say so!” replied the landlord. “He han’t no call tosay so.”“But does he say so?”“It would turn a man’s blood to white wine winegar to hear him tellof it, sir,” said the landlord.I thought, “Yet Joe, dear Joe, you never tell of it.Long-suffering and loving Joe, you never complain. Nor you,sweet-tempered Biddy!”“Your appetite’s been touched like by your accident,” saidthe landlord, glancing at the bandaged arm under my coat. “Try a tendererbit.”“No, thank you,” I replied, turning from the table to brood overthe fire. “I can eat no more. Please take it away.”I had never been struck at so keenly, for my thanklessness to Joe, as throughthe brazen impostor Pumblechook. The falser he, the truer Joe; the meaner he,the nobler Joe.My heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as I mused over the fire for anhour or more. The striking of the clock aroused me, but not from my dejectionor remorse, and I got up and had my coat fastened round my neck, and went out.I had previously sought in my pockets for the letter, that I might refer to itagain; but I could not find it, and was uneasy to think that it must have beendropped in the straw of the coach. I knew very well, however, that theappointed place was the little sluice-house by the limekiln on the marshes, andthe hour nine. Towards the marshes I now went straight, having no time tospare. Chapter LIII.It wasa dark night, though the full moon rose as I left the enclosed lands, andpassed out upon the marshes. Beyond their dark line there was a ribbon of clearsky, hardly broad enough to hold the red large moon. In a few minutes she hadascended out of that clear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud.There was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal. A stranger wouldhave found them insupportable, and even to me they were so oppressive that Ihesitated, half inclined to go back. But I knew them well, and could have foundmy way on a far darker night, and had no excuse for returning, being there. So,having come there against my inclination, I went on against it.The direction that I took was not that in which my old home lay, nor that inwhich we had pursued the convicts. My back was turned towards the distant Hulksas I walked on, and, though I could see the old lights away on the spits ofsand, I saw them over my shoulder. I knew the limekiln as well as I knew theold Battery, but they were miles apart; so that, if a light had been burning ateach point that night, there would have been a long strip of the blank horizonbetween the two bright specks.At first, I had to shut some gates after me, and now and then to stand stillwhile the cattle that were lying in the banked-up pathway arose and blundereddown among the grass and reeds. But after a little while I seemed to have thewhole flats to myself.It was another half-hour before I drew near to the kiln. The lime was burningwith a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made up and left, and noworkmen were visible. Hard by was a small stone-quarry. It lay directly in myway, and had been worked that day, as I saw by the tools and barrows that werelying about.Coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation,—for the rudepath lay through it,—I saw a light in the old sluice-house. I quickenedmy pace, and knocked at the door with my hand. Waiting for some reply, I lookedabout me, noticing how the sluice was abandoned and broken, and how thehouse—of wood with a tiled roof—would not be proof against theweather much longer, if it were so even now, and how the mud and ooze werecoated with lime, and how the choking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly waytowards me. Still there was no answer, and I knocked again. No answer still,and I tried the latch.It rose under my hand, and the door yielded. Looking in, I saw a lighted candleon a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle bedstead. As there was a loftabove, I called, “Is there any one here?” but no voice answered.Then I looked at my watch, and, finding that it was past nine, called again,“Is there any one here?” There being still no answer, I went out atthe door, irresolute what to do.It was beginning to rain fast. Seeing nothing save what I had seen already, Iturned back into the house, and stood just within the shelter of the doorway,looking out into the night. While I was considering that some one must havebeen there lately and must soon be coming back, or the candle would not beburning, it came into my head to look if the wick were long. I turned round todo so, and had taken up the candle in my hand, when it was extinguished by someviolent shock; and the next thing I comprehended was, that I had been caught ina strong running noose, thrown over my head from behind.“Now,” said a suppressed voice with an oath, “I’ve gotyou!”“What is this?” I cried, struggling. “Who is it? Help, help,help!”Not only were my arms pulled close to my sides, but the pressure on my bad armcaused me exquisite pain. Sometimes, a strong man’s hand, sometimes astrong man’s breast, was set against my mouth to deaden my cries, andwith a hot breath always close to me, I struggled ineffectually in the dark,while I was fastened tight to the wall. “And now,” said thesuppressed voice with another oath, “call out again, and I’ll makeshort work of you!”Faint and sick with the pain of my injured arm, bewildered by the surprise, andyet conscious how easily this threat could be put in execution, I desisted, andtried to ease my arm were it ever so little. But, it was bound too tight forthat. I felt as if, having been burnt before, it were now being boiled.The sudden exclusion of the night, and the substitution of black darkness inits place, warned me that the man had closed a shutter. After groping about fora little, he found the flint and steel he wanted, and began to strike a light.I strained my sight upon the sparks that fell among the tinder, and upon whichhe breathed and breathed, match in hand, but I could only see his lips, and theblue point of the match; even those but fitfully. The tinder was damp,—nowonder there,—and one after another the sparks died out.The man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel. As thesparks fell thick and bright about him, I could see his hands, and touches ofhis face, and could make out that he was seated and bending over the table; butnothing more. Presently I saw his blue lips again, breathing on the tinder, andthen a flare of light flashed up, and showed me Orlick.Whom I had looked for, I don’t know. I had not looked for him. Seeinghim, I felt that I was in a dangerous strait indeed, and I kept my eyes uponhim.He lighted the candle from the flaring match with great deliberation, anddropped the match, and trod it out. Then he put the candle away from him on thetable, so that he could see me, and sat with his arms folded on the table andlooked at me. I made out that I was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder afew inches from the wall,—a fixture there,—the means of ascent tothe loft above.“Now,” said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time,“I’ve got you.”“Unbind me. Let me go!”“Ah!” he returned, “I’ll let you go. I’lllet you go to the moon, I’ll let you go to the stars. All in goodtime.”“Why have you lured me here?”“Don’t you know?” said he, with a deadly look.“Why have you set upon me in the dark?”“Because I mean to do it all myself. One keeps a secret better than two.O you enemy, you enemy!”His enjoyment of the spectacle I furnished, as he sat with his arms folded onthe table, shaking his head at me and hugging himself, had a malignity in itthat made me tremble. As I watched him in silence, he put his hand into thecorner at his side, and took up a gun with a brass-bound stock.“Do you know this?” said he, making as if he would take aim at me.“Do you know where you saw it afore? Speak, wolf!”“Yes,” I answered. “You cost me that place. You did. Speak!”“What else could I do?”“You did that, and that would be enough, without more. How dared you tocome betwixt me and a young woman I liked?”“When did I?”“When didn’t you? It was you as always give Old Orlick a bad nameto her.”“You gave it to yourself; you gained it for yourself. I could have doneyou no harm, if you had done yourself none.”“You’re a liar. And you’ll take any pains, and spend anymoney, to drive me out of this country, will you?” said he, repeating mywords to Biddy in the last interview I had with her. “Now, I’lltell you a piece of information. It was never so well worth your while to getme out of this country as it is to-night. Ah! If it was all your money twentytimes told, to the last brass farden!” As he shook his heavy hand at me,with his mouth snarling like a tiger’s, I felt that it was true.“What are you going to do to me?”“I’m a-going,” said he, bringing his fist down upon the tablewith a heavy blow, and rising as the blow fell to give it greaterforce,—“I’m a-going to have your life!”He leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his hand and drew it acrosshis mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and sat down again.“You was always in Old Orlick’s way since ever you was a child. Yougoes out of his way this present night. He’ll have no more on you.You’re dead.”I felt that I had come to the brink of my grave. For a moment I looked wildlyround my trap for any chance of escape; but there was none.“More than that,” said he, folding his arms on the table again,“I won’t have a rag of you, I won’t have a bone of you, lefton earth. I’ll put your body in the kiln,—I’d carry two suchto it, on my shoulders—and, let people suppose what they may of you,they shall never know nothing.”My mind, with inconceivable rapidity followed out all the consequences of sucha death. Estella’s father would believe I had deserted him, would betaken, would die accusing me; even Herbert would doubt me, when he compared theletter I had left for him with the fact that I had called at MissHavisham’s gate for only a moment; Joe and Biddy would never know howsorry I had been that night, none would ever know what I had suffered, how trueI had meant to be, what an agony I had passed through. The death close beforeme was terrible, but far more terrible than death was the dread of beingmisremembered after death. And so quick were my thoughts, that I saw myselfdespised by unborn generations,—Estella’s children, and theirchildren,—while the wretch’s words were yet on his lips.“Now, wolf,” said he, “afore I kill you like any otherbeast,—which is wot I mean to do and wot I have tied you upfor,—I’ll have a good look at you and a good goad at you. O youenemy!”It had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again; though few couldknow better than I, the solitary nature of the spot, and the hopelessness ofaid. But as he sat gloating over me, I was supported by a scornful detestationof him that sealed my lips. Above all things, I resolved that I would notentreat him, and that I would die making some last poor resistance to him.Softened as my thoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity;humbly beseeching pardon, as I did, of Heaven; melted at heart, as I was, bythe thought that I had taken no farewell, and never now could take farewell ofthose who were dear to me, or could explain myself to them, or ask for theircompassion on my miserable errors,—still, if I could have killed him,even in dying, I would have done it.He had been drinking, and his eyes were red and bloodshot. Around his neck wasslung a tin bottle, as I had often seen his meat and drink slung about him inother days. He brought the bottle to his lips, and took a fiery drink from it;and I smelt the strong spirits that I saw flash into his face.“Wolf!” said he, folding his arms again, “Old Orlick’sa-going to tell you somethink. It was you as did for your shrew sister.”Again my mind, with its former inconceivable rapidity, had exhausted the wholesubject of the attack upon my sister, her illness, and her death, before hisslow and hesitating speech had formed these words.“It was you, villain,” said I.“I tell you it was your doing,—I tell you it was done throughyou,” he retorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with the stockat the vacant air between us. “I come upon her from behind, as I comeupon you to-night. I giv’ it her! I left her for dead, and ifthere had been a limekiln as nigh her as there is now nigh you, sheshouldn’t have come to life again. But it warn’t Old Orlick as didit; it was you. You was favoured, and he was bullied and beat. Old Orlickbullied and beat, eh? Now you pays for it. You done it; now you pays forit.”He drank again, and became more ferocious. I saw by his tilting of the bottlethat there was no great quantity left in it. I distinctly understood that hewas working himself up with its contents to make an end of me. I knew thatevery drop it held was a drop of my life. I knew that when I was changed into apart of the vapour that had crept towards me but a little while before, like myown warning ghost, he would do as he had done in my sister’scase,—make all haste to the town, and be seen slouching about theredrinking at the alehouses. My rapid mind pursued him to the town, made apicture of the street with him in it, and contrasted its lights and life withthe lonely marsh and the white vapour creeping over it, into which I shouldhave dissolved.It was not only that I could have summed up years and years and years while hesaid a dozen words, but that what he did say presented pictures to me, and notmere words. In the excited and exalted state of my brain, I could not think ofa place without seeing it, or of persons without seeing them. It is impossibleto overstate the vividness of these images, and yet I was so intent, all thetime, upon him himself,—who would not be intent on the tiger crouching tospring!—that I knew of the slightest action of his fingers.When he had drunk this second time, he rose from the bench on which he sat, andpushed the table aside. Then, he took up the candle, and, shading it with hismurderous hand so as to throw its light on me, stood before me, looking at meand enjoying the sight.“Wolf, I’ll tell you something more. It was Old Orlick as youtumbled over on your stairs that night.”I saw the staircase with its extinguished lamps. I saw the shadows of the heavystair-rails, thrown by the watchman’s lantern on the wall. I saw therooms that I was never to see again; here, a door half open; there, a doorclosed; all the articles of furniture around.“And why was Old Orlick there? I’ll tell you something more, wolf.You and her have pretty well hunted me out of this country, so far asgetting a easy living in it goes, and I’ve took up with new companions,and new masters. Some of ’em writes my letters when I wants ’emwrote,—do you mind?—writes my letters, wolf! They writes fiftyhands; they’re not like sneaking you, as writes but one. I’ve had afirm mind and a firm will to have your life, since you was down here at yoursister’s burying. I han’t seen a way to get you safe, andI’ve looked arter you to know your ins and outs. For, says Old Orlick tohimself, ‘Somehow or another I’ll have him!’ What! When Ilooks for you, I finds your uncle Provis, eh?”Mill Pond Bank, and Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-walk,all so clear and plain! Provis in his rooms, the signal whose use was over,pretty Clara, the good motherly woman, old Bill Barley on his back, alldrifting by, as on the swift stream of my life fast running out to sea!“You with a uncle too! Why, I know’d you at Gargery’swhen you was so small a wolf that I could have took your weazen betwixt thisfinger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as I’d thoughts o’doing, odd times, when I see you loitering amongst the pollards on a Sunday),and you hadn’t found no uncles then. No, not you! But when Old Orlickcome for to hear that your uncle Provis had most like wore the leg-iron wot OldOrlick had picked up, filed asunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, andwot he kep by him till he dropped your sister with it, like a bullock, as hemeans to drop you—hey?—when he come for to hearthat—hey?”In his savage taunting, he flared the candle so close at me that I turned myface aside to save it from the flame.“Ah!” he cried, laughing, after doing it again, “the burntchild dreads the fire! Old Orlick knowed you was burnt, Old Orlick knowed youwas smuggling your uncle Provis away, Old Orlick’s a match for you andknow’d you’d come to-night! Now I’ll tell you something more,wolf, and this ends it. There’s them that’s as good a match foryour uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you. Let him ’ware them,when he’s lost his nevvy! Let him ’ware them, when no mancan’t find a rag of his dear relation’s clothes, nor yet a bone ofhis body. There’s them that can’t and that won’t haveMagwitch,—yes, I know the name!—alive in the same land withthem, and that’s had such sure information of him when he was alive inanother land, as that he couldn’t and shouldn’t leave it unbeknownand put them in danger. P’raps it’s them that writes fifty hands,and that’s not like sneaking you as writes but one. ’WareCompeyson, Magwitch, and the gallows!”He flared the candle at me again, smoking my face and hair, and for an instantblinding me, and turned his powerful back as he replaced the light on thetable. I had thought a prayer, and had been with Joe and Biddy and Herbert,before he turned towards me again.There was a clear space of a few feet between the table and the opposite wall.Within this space, he now slouched backwards and forwards. His great strengthseemed to sit stronger upon him than ever before, as he did this with his handshanging loose and heavy at his sides, and with his eyes scowling at me. I hadno grain of hope left. Wild as my inward hurry was, and wonderful the force ofthe pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, I could yet clearlyunderstand that, unless he had resolved that I was within a few moments ofsurely perishing out of all human knowledge, he would never have told me whathe had told.Of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of his bottle, and tossed it away.Light as it was, I heard it fall like a plummet. He swallowed slowly, tiltingup the bottle by little and little, and now he looked at me no more. The lastfew drops of liquor he poured into the palm of his hand, and licked up. Then,with a sudden hurry of violence and swearing horribly, he threw the bottle fromhim, and stooped; and I saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavyhandle.The resolution I had made did not desert me, for, without uttering one vainword of appeal to him, I shouted out with all my might, and struggled with allmy might. It was only my head and my legs that I could move, but to that extentI struggled with all the force, until then unknown, that was within me. In thesame instant I heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dashin at the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw Orlick emerge from a struggleof men, as if it were tumbling water, clear the table at a leap, and fly outinto the night.After a blank, I found that I was lying unbound, on the floor, in the sameplace, with my head on some one’s knee. My eyes were fixed on the ladderagainst the wall, when I came to myself,—had opened on it before my mindsaw it,—and thus as I recovered consciousness, I knew that I was in theplace where I had lost it.Too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascertain who supported me, Iwas lying looking at the ladder, when there came between me and it a face. Theface of Trabb’s boy!“I think he’s all right!” said Trabb’s boy, in a sobervoice; “but ain’t he just pale though!”At these words, the face of him who supported me looked over into mine, and Isaw my supporter to be—“Herbert! Great Heaven!”“Softly,” said Herbert. “Gently, Handel. Don’t be tooeager.”“And our old comrade, Startop!” I cried, as he too bent over me.“Remember what he is going to assist us in,” said Herbert,“and be calm.”The allusion made me spring up; though I dropped again from the pain in my arm.“The time has not gone by, Herbert, has it? What night is to-night? Howlong have I been here?” For, I had a strange and strong misgiving that Ihad been lying there a long time—a day and a night,—two days andnights,—more.“The time has not gone by. It is still Monday night.”“Thank God!”“And you have all to-morrow, Tuesday, to rest in,” said Herbert.“But you can’t help groaning, my dear Handel. What hurt have yougot? Can you stand?”“Yes, yes,” said I, “I can walk. I have no hurt but in thisthrobbing arm.”They laid it bare, and did what they could. It was violently swollen andinflamed, and I could scarcely endure to have it touched. But, they tore uptheir handkerchiefs to make fresh bandages, and carefully replaced it in thesling, until we could get to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to putupon it. In a little while we had shut the door of the dark and emptysluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on our way back.Trabb’s boy—Trabb’s overgrown young man now—went beforeus with a lantern, which was the light I had seen come in at the door. But, themoon was a good two hours higher than when I had last seen the sky, and thenight, though rainy, was much lighter. The white vapour of the kiln was passingfrom us as we went by, and as I had thought a prayer before, I thought athanksgiving now.Entreating Herbert to tell me how he had come to my rescue,—which atfirst he had flatly refused to do, but had insisted on my remainingquiet,—I learnt that I had in my hurry dropped the letter, open, in ourchambers, where he, coming home to bring with him Startop whom he had met inthe street on his way to me, found it, very soon after I was gone. Its tonemade him uneasy, and the more so because of the inconsistency between it andthe hasty letter I had left for him. His uneasiness increasing instead ofsubsiding, after a quarter of an hour’s consideration, he set off for thecoach-office with Startop, who volunteered his company, to make inquiry whenthe next coach went down. Finding that the afternoon coach was gone, andfinding that his uneasiness grew into positive alarm, as obstacles came in hisway, he resolved to follow in a post-chaise. So he and Startop arrived at theBlue Boar, fully expecting there to find me, or tidings of me; but, findingneither, went on to Miss Havisham’s, where they lost me. Hereupon theywent back to the hotel (doubtless at about the time when I was hearing thepopular local version of my own story) to refresh themselves and to get someone to guide them out upon the marshes. Among the loungers under theBoar’s archway happened to be Trabb’s Boy,—true to hisancient habit of happening to be everywhere where he had no business,—andTrabb’s boy had seen me passing from Miss Havisham’s in thedirection of my dining-place. Thus Trabb’s boy became their guide, andwith him they went out to the sluice-house, though by the town way to themarshes, which I had avoided. Now, as they went along, Herbert reflected, thatI might, after all, have been brought there on some genuine and serviceableerrand tending to Provis’s safety, and, bethinking himself that in thatcase interruption must be mischievous, left his guide and Startop on the edgeof the quarry, and went on by himself, and stole round the house two or threetimes, endeavouring to ascertain whether all was right within. As he could hearnothing but indistinct sounds of one deep rough voice (this was while my mindwas so busy), he even at last began to doubt whether I was there, when suddenlyI cried out loudly, and he answered the cries, and rushed in, closely followedby the other two.When I told Herbert what had passed within the house, he was for ourimmediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at night as it was, andgetting out a warrant. But, I had already considered that such a course, bydetaining us there, or binding us to come back, might be fatal to Provis. Therewas no gainsaying this difficulty, and we relinquished all thoughts of pursuingOrlick at that time. For the present, under the circumstances, we deemed itprudent to make rather light of the matter to Trabb’s boy; who, I amconvinced, would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had knownthat his intervention saved me from the limekiln. Not that Trabb’s boywas of a malignant nature, but that he had too much spare vivacity, and that itwas in his constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody’sexpense. When we parted, I presented him with two guineas (which seemed to meethis views), and told him that I was sorry ever to have had an ill opinion ofhim (which made no impression on him at all).Wednesday being so close upon us, we determined to go back to London thatnight, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as we should then be clear awaybefore the night’s adventure began to be talked of. Herbert got a largebottle of stuff for my arm; and by dint of having this stuff dropped over itall the night through, I was just able to bear its pain on the journey. It wasdaylight when we reached the Temple, and I went at once to bed, and lay in bedall day.My terror, as I lay there, of falling ill, and being unfitted for to-morrow,was so besetting, that I wonder it did not disable me of itself. It would havedone so, pretty surely, in conjunction with the mental wear and tear I hadsuffered, but for the unnatural strain upon me that to-morrow was. So anxiouslylooked forward to, charged with such consequences, its results so impenetrablyhidden, though so near.No precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining fromcommunication with him that day; yet this again increased my restlessness. Istarted at every footstep and every sound, believing that he was discovered andtaken, and this was the messenger to tell me so. I persuaded myself that I knewhe was taken; that there was something more upon my mind than a fear or apresentiment; that the fact had occurred, and I had a mysterious knowledge ofit. As the days wore on, and no ill news came, as the day closed in anddarkness fell, my overshadowing dread of being disabled by illness beforeto-morrow morning altogether mastered me. My burning arm throbbed, and myburning head throbbed, and I fancied I was beginning to wander. I counted up tohigh numbers, to make sure of myself, and repeated passages that I knew inprose and verse. It happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatiguedmind, I dozed for some moments or forgot; then I would say to myself with astart, “Now it has come, and I am turning delirious!”They kept me very quiet all day, and kept my arm constantly dressed, and gaveme cooling drinks. Whenever I fell asleep, I awoke with the notion I had had inthe sluice-house, that a long time had elapsed and the opportunity to save himwas gone. About midnight I got out of bed and went to Herbert, with theconviction that I had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and that Wednesdaywas past. It was the last self-exhausting effort of my fretfulness, for afterthat I slept soundly.Wednesday morning was dawning when I looked out of window. The winking lightsupon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun was like a marsh of fire onthe horizon. The river, still dark and mysterious, was spanned by bridges thatwere turning coldly grey, with here and there at top a warm touch from theburning in the sky. As I looked along the clustered roofs, with church-towersand spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and a veilseemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles burst out upon itswaters. From me too, a veil seemed to be drawn, and I felt strong and well.Herbert lay asleep in his bed, and our old fellow-student lay asleep on thesofa. I could not dress myself without help; but I made up the fire, which wasstill burning, and got some coffee ready for them. In good time they toostarted up strong and well, and we admitted the sharp morning air at thewindows, and looked at the tide that was still flowing towards us.“When it turns at nine o’clock,” said Herbert, cheerfully,“look out for us, and stand ready, you over there at Mill PondBank!”Chapter LIV.It wasone of those March days when the sun shines hot and the wind blows cold: whenit is summer in the light, and winter in the shade. We had our pea-coats withus, and I took a bag. Of all my worldly possessions I took no more than the fewnecessaries that filled the bag. Where I might go, what I might do, or when Imight return, were questions utterly unknown to me; nor did I vex my mind withthem, for it was wholly set on Provis’s safety. I only wondered for thepassing moment, as I stopped at the door and looked back, under what alteredcircumstances I should next see those rooms, if ever.We loitered down to the Temple stairs, and stood loitering there, as if we werenot quite decided to go upon the water at all. Of course, I had taken care thatthe boat should be ready and everything in order. After a little show ofindecision, which there were none to see but the two or three amphibiouscreatures belonging to our Temple stairs, we went on board and cast off;Herbert in the bow, I steering. It was then about high-water,—half-pasteight.Our plan was this. The tide, beginning to run down at nine, and being with usuntil three, we intended still to creep on after it had turned, and row againstit until dark. We should then be well in those long reaches below Gravesend,between Kent and Essex, where the river is broad and solitary, where thewater-side inhabitants are very few, and where lone public-houses are scatteredhere and there, of which we could choose one for a resting-place. There, wemeant to lie by all night. The steamer for Hamburg and the steamer forRotterdam would start from London at about nine on Thursday morning. We shouldknow at what time to expect them, according to where we were, and would hailthe first; so that, if by any accident we were not taken abroad, we should haveanother chance. We knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel.The relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the purpose was sogreat to me that I felt it difficult to realise the condition in which I hadbeen a few hours before. The crisp air, the sunlight, the movement on theriver, and the moving river itself,—the road that ran with us, seeming tosympathise with us, animate us, and encourage us on,—freshened me withnew hope. I felt mortified to be of so little use in the boat; but, there werefew better oarsmen than my two friends, and they rowed with a steady strokethat was to last all day.At that time, the steam-traffic on the Thames was far below its present extent,and watermen’s boats were far more numerous. Of barges, sailing colliers,and coasting-traders, there were perhaps, as many as now; but of steam-ships,great and small, not a tithe or a twentieth part so many. Early as it was,there were plenty of scullers going here and there that morning, and plenty ofbarges dropping down with the tide; the navigation of the river betweenbridges, in an open boat, was a much easier and commoner matter in those daysthan it is in these; and we went ahead among many skiffs and wherries briskly.Old London Bridge was soon passed, and old Billingsgate Market with itsoyster-boats and Dutchmen, and the White Tower and Traitor’s Gate, and wewere in among the tiers of shipping. Here were the Leith, Aberdeen, and Glasgowsteamers, loading and unloading goods, and looking immensely high out of thewater as we passed alongside; here, were colliers by the score and score, withthe coal-whippers plunging off stages on deck, as counterweights to measures ofcoal swinging up, which were then rattled over the side into barges; here, ather moorings was to-morrow’s steamer for Rotterdam, of which we took goodnotice; and here to-morrow’s for Hamburg, under whose bowsprit wecrossed. And now I, sitting in the stern, could see, with a faster beatingheart, Mill Pond Bank and Mill Pond stairs.“Is he there?” said Herbert.“Not yet.”“Right! He was not to come down till he saw us. Can you see hissignal?”“Not well from here; but I think I see it.—Now I see him! Pullboth. Easy, Herbert. Oars!”We touched the stairs lightly for a single moment, and he was on board, and wewere off again. He had a boat-cloak with him, and a black canvas bag; and helooked as like a river-pilot as my heart could have wished.“Dear boy!” he said, putting his arm on my shoulder, as he took hisseat. “Faithful dear boy, well done. Thankye, thankye!”Again among the tiers of shipping, in and out, avoiding rusty chain-cablesfrayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys, sinking for the moment floating brokenbaskets, scattering floating chips of wood and shaving, cleaving floating scumof coal, in and out, under the figure-head of the John of Sunderlandmaking a speech to the winds (as is done by many Johns), and the Betsy ofYarmouth with a firm formality of bosom and her knobby eyes starting twoinches out of her head; in and out, hammers going in ship-builders’yards, saws going at timber, clashing engines going at things unknown, pumpsgoing in leaky ships, capstans going, ships going out to sea, andunintelligible sea-creatures roaring curses over the bulwarks at respondentlightermen, in and out,—out at last upon the clearer river, where theships’ boys might take their fenders in, no longer fishing in troubledwaters with them over the side, and where the festooned sails might fly out tothe wind.At the stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, I had lookedwarily for any token of our being suspected. I had seen none. We certainly hadnot been, and at that time as certainly we were not either attended or followedby any boat. If we had been waited on by any boat, I should have run in toshore, and have obliged her to go on, or to make her purpose evident. But weheld our own without any appearance of molestation.He had his boat-cloak on him, and looked, as I have said, a natural part of thescene. It was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life he had led accountedfor it) that he was the least anxious of any of us. He was not indifferent, forhe told me that he hoped to live to see his gentleman one of the best ofgentlemen in a foreign country; he was not disposed to be passive or resigned,as I understood it; but he had no notion of meeting danger half way. When itcame upon him, he confronted it, but it must come before he troubled himself.“If you knowed, dear boy,” he said to me, “what it is to sithere alonger my dear boy and have my smoke, arter having been day by daybetwixt four walls, you’d envy me. But you don’t know what itis.”“I think I know the delights of freedom,” I answered.“Ah,” said he, shaking his head gravely. “But you don’tknow it equal to me. You must have been under lock and key, dear boy, to knowit equal to me,—but I ain’t a-going to be low.”It occurred to me as inconsistent, that, for any mastering idea, he should haveendangered his freedom, and even his life. But I reflected that perhaps freedomwithout danger was too much apart from all the habit of his existence to be tohim what it would be to another man. I was not far out, since he said, aftersmoking a little:—“You see, dear boy, when I was over yonder, t’other side the world,I was always a looking to this side; and it come flat to be there, for all Iwas a growing rich. Everybody knowed Magwitch, and Magwitch could come, andMagwitch could go, and nobody’s head would be troubled about him. Theyain’t so easy concerning me here, dear boy,—wouldn’t be,leastwise, if they knowed where I was.”“If all goes well,” said I, “you will be perfectly free andsafe again within a few hours.”“Well,” he returned, drawing a long breath, “I hopeso.”“And think so?”He dipped his hand in the water over the boat’s gunwale, and said,smiling with that softened air upon him which was not new to me:—“Ay, I s’pose I think so, dear boy. We’d be puzzled to bemore quiet and easy-going than we are at present. But—it’s aflowing so soft and pleasant through the water, p’raps, as makes me thinkit—I was a thinking through my smoke just then, that we can no more seeto the bottom of the next few hours than we can see to the bottom of this riverwhat I catches hold of. Nor yet we can’t no more hold their tide than Ican hold this. And it’s run through my fingers and gone, you see!”holding up his dripping hand.“But for your face I should think you were a little despondent,”said I.“Not a bit on it, dear boy! It comes of flowing on so quiet, and of thatthere rippling at the boat’s head making a sort of a Sunday tune. MaybeI’m a growing a trifle old besides.”He put his pipe back in his mouth with an undisturbed expression of face, andsat as composed and contented as if we were already out of England. Yet he wasas submissive to a word of advice as if he had been in constant terror; for,when we ran ashore to get some bottles of beer into the boat, and he wasstepping out, I hinted that I thought he would be safest where he was, and hesaid. “Do you, dear boy?” and quietly sat down again.The air felt cold upon the river, but it was a bright day, and the sunshine wasvery cheering. The tide ran strong, I took care to lose none of it, and oursteady stroke carried us on thoroughly well. By imperceptible degrees, as thetide ran out, we lost more and more of the nearer woods and hills, and droppedlower and lower between the muddy banks, but the tide was yet with us when wewere off Gravesend. As our charge was wrapped in his cloak, I purposely passedwithin a boat or two’s length of the floating Custom House, and so out tocatch the stream, alongside of two emigrant ships, and under the bows of alarge transport with troops on the forecastle looking down at us. And soon thetide began to slacken, and the craft lying at anchor to swing, and presentlythey had all swung round, and the ships that were taking advantage of the newtide to get up to the Pool began to crowd upon us in a fleet, and we kept underthe shore, as much out of the strength of the tide now as we could, standingcarefully off from low shallows and mudbanks.Our oarsmen were so fresh, by dint of having occasionally let her drive withthe tide for a minute or two, that a quarter of an hour’s rest provedfull as much as they wanted. We got ashore among some slippery stones while weate and drank what we had with us, and looked about. It was like my own marshcountry, flat and monotonous, and with a dim horizon; while the winding riverturned and turned, and the great floating buoys upon it turned and turned, andeverything else seemed stranded and still. For now the last of the fleet ofships was round the last low point we had headed; and the last green barge,straw-laden, with a brown sail, had followed; and some ballast-lighters, shapedlike a child’s first rude imitation of a boat, lay low in the mud; and alittle squat shoal-lighthouse on open piles stood crippled in the mud on stiltsand crutches; and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud, and slimy stones stuck outof the mud, and red landmarks and tidemarks stuck out of the mud, and an oldlanding-stage and an old roofless building slipped into the mud, and all aboutus was stagnation and mud.We pushed off again, and made what way we could. It was much harder work now,but Herbert and Startop persevered, and rowed and rowed and rowed until the sunwent down. By that time the river had lifted us a little, so that we could seeabove the bank. There was the red sun, on the low level of the shore, in apurple haze, fast deepening into black; and there was the solitary flat marsh;and far away there were the rising grounds, between which and us there seemedto be no life, save here and there in the foreground a melancholy gull.As the night was fast falling, and as the moon, being past the full, would notrise early, we held a little council; a short one, for clearly our course wasto lie by at the first lonely tavern we could find. So, they plied their oarsonce more, and I looked out for anything like a house. Thus we held on,speaking little, for four or five dull miles. It was very cold, and, a colliercoming by us, with her galley-fire smoking and flaring, looked like acomfortable home. The night was as dark by this time as it would be untilmorning; and what light we had, seemed to come more from the river than thesky, as the oars in their dipping struck at a few reflected stars.At this dismal time we were evidently all possessed by the idea that we werefollowed. As the tide made, it flapped heavily at irregular intervals againstthe shore; and whenever such a sound came, one or other of us was sure tostart, and look in that direction. Here and there, the set of the current hadworn down the bank into a little creek, and we were all suspicious of suchplaces, and eyed them nervously. Sometimes, “What was that ripple?”one of us would say in a low voice. Or another, “Is that a boatyonder?” And afterwards we would fall into a dead silence, and I wouldsit impatiently thinking with what an unusual amount of noise the oars workedin the thowels.At length we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwards ranalongside a little causeway made of stones that had been picked up hard by.Leaving the rest in the boat, I stepped ashore, and found the light to be in awindow of a public-house. It was a dirty place enough, and I dare say notunknown to smuggling adventurers; but there was a good fire in the kitchen, andthere were eggs and bacon to eat, and various liquors to drink. Also, therewere two double-bedded rooms,—“such as they were,” thelandlord said. No other company was in the house than the landlord, his wife,and a grizzled male creature, the “Jack” of the little causeway,who was as slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too.With this assistant, I went down to the boat again, and we all came ashore, andbrought out the oars, and rudder and boat-hook, and all else, and hauled her upfor the night. We made a very good meal by the kitchen fire, and thenapportioned the bedrooms: Herbert and Startop were to occupy one; I and ourcharge the other. We found the air as carefully excluded from both, as if airwere fatal to life; and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under thebeds than I should have thought the family possessed. But we consideredourselves well off, notwithstanding, for a more solitary place we could nothave found.While we were comforting ourselves by the fire after our meal, theJack—who was sitting in a corner, and who had a bloated pair of shoes on,which he had exhibited while we were eating our eggs and bacon, as interestingrelics that he had taken a few days ago from the feet of a drowned seamanwashed ashore—asked me if we had seen a four-oared galley going up withthe tide? When I told him No, he said she must have gone down then, and yet she“took up too,” when she left there.“They must ha’ thought better on’t for some reason oranother,” said the Jack, “and gone down.”“A four-oared galley, did you say?” said I.“A four,” said the Jack, “and two sitters.”“Did they come ashore here?”“They put in with a stone two-gallon jar for some beer. I’dha’ been glad to pison the beer myself,” said the Jack, “orput some rattling physic in it.”“Why?”“I know why,” said the Jack. He spoke in a slushy voice, asif much mud had washed into his throat.“He thinks,” said the landlord, a weakly meditative man with a paleeye, who seemed to rely greatly on his Jack,—“he thinks they was,what they wasn’t.”“I knows what I thinks,” observed the Jack.“You thinks Custom ’Us, Jack?” said the landlord.“I do,” said the Jack.“Then you’re wrong, Jack.”“AM I!”In the infinite meaning of his reply and his boundless confidence in his views,the Jack took one of his bloated shoes off, looked into it, knocked a fewstones out of it on the kitchen floor, and put it on again. He did this withthe air of a Jack who was so right that he could afford to do anything.“Why, what do you make out that they done with their buttons then,Jack?” asked the landlord, vacillating weakly.“Done with their buttons?” returned the Jack. “Chucked’em overboard. Swallered ’em. Sowed ’em, to come up smallsalad. Done with their buttons!”“Don’t be cheeky, Jack,” remonstrated the landlord, in amelancholy and pathetic way.“A Custom ’Us officer knows what to do with his Buttons,”said the Jack, repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt,“when they comes betwixt him and his own light. A four and two sittersdon’t go hanging and hovering, up with one tide and down with another,and both with and against another, without there being Custom ’Us at thebottom of it.” Saying which he went out in disdain; and the landlord,having no one to reply upon, found it impracticable to pursue the subject.This dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy. The dismal wind wasmuttering round the house, the tide was flapping at the shore, and I had afeeling that we were caged and threatened. A four-oared galley hovering aboutin so unusual a way as to attract this notice was an ugly circumstance that Icould not get rid of. When I had induced Provis to go up to bed, I went outsidewith my two companions (Startop by this time knew the state of the case), andheld another council. Whether we should remain at the house until near thesteamer’s time, which would be about one in the afternoon, or whether weshould put off early in the morning, was the question we discussed. On thewhole we deemed it the better course to lie where we were, until within an houror so of the steamer’s time, and then to get out in her track, and drifteasily with the tide. Having settled to do this, we returned into the house andwent to bed.I lay down with the greater part of my clothes on, and slept well for a fewhours. When I awoke, the wind had risen, and the sign of the house (the Ship)was creaking and banging about, with noises that startled me. Rising softly,for my charge lay fast asleep, I looked out of the window. It commanded thecauseway where we had hauled up our boat, and, as my eyes adapted themselves tothe light of the clouded moon, I saw two men looking into her. They passed byunder the window, looking at nothing else, and they did not go down to thelanding-place which I could discern to be empty, but struck across the marsh inthe direction of the Nore.My first impulse was to call up Herbert, and show him the two men going away.But reflecting, before I got into his room, which was at the back of the houseand adjoined mine, that he and Startop had had a harder day than I, and werefatigued, I forbore. Going back to my window, I could see the two men movingover the marsh. In that light, however, I soon lost them, and, feeling verycold, lay down to think of the matter, and fell asleep again.We were up early. As we walked to and fro, all four together, before breakfast,I deemed it right to recount what I had seen. Again our charge was the leastanxious of the party. It was very likely that the men belonged to the CustomHouse, he said quietly, and that they had no thought of us. I tried to persuademyself that it was so,—as, indeed, it might easily be. However, Iproposed that he and I should walk away together to a distant point we couldsee, and that the boat should take us aboard there, or as near there as mightprove feasible, at about noon. This being considered a good precaution, soonafter breakfast he and I set forth, without saying anything at the tavern.He smoked his pipe as we went along, and sometimes stopped to clap me on theshoulder. One would have supposed that it was I who was in danger, not he, andthat he was reassuring me. We spoke very little. As we approached the point, Ibegged him to remain in a sheltered place, while I went on to reconnoitre; forit was towards it that the men had passed in the night. He complied, and I wenton alone. There was no boat off the point, nor any boat drawn up anywhere nearit, nor were there any signs of the men having embarked there. But, to be sure,the tide was high, and there might have been some footprints under water.When he looked out from his shelter in the distance, and saw that I waved myhat to him to come up, he rejoined me, and there we waited; sometimes lying onthe bank, wrapped in our coats, and sometimes moving about to warm ourselves,until we saw our boat coming round. We got aboard easily, and rowed out intothe track of the steamer. By that time it wanted but ten minutes of oneo’clock, and we began to look out for her smoke.But, it was half-past one before we saw her smoke, and soon afterwards we sawbehind it the smoke of another steamer. As they were coming on at full speed,we got the two bags ready, and took that opportunity of saying good-bye toHerbert and Startop. We had all shaken hands cordially, and neitherHerbert’s eyes nor mine were quite dry, when I saw a four-oared galleyshoot out from under the bank but a little way ahead of us, and row out intothe same track.A stretch of shore had been as yet between us and the steamer’s smoke, byreason of the bend and wind of the river; but now she was visible, coming headon. I called to Herbert and Startop to keep before the tide, that she might seeus lying by for her, and I adjured Provis to sit quite still, wrapped in hiscloak. He answered cheerily, “Trust to me, dear boy,” and sat likea statue. Meantime the galley, which was very skilfully handled, had crossedus, let us come up with her, and fallen alongside. Leaving just room enough forthe play of the oars, she kept alongside, drifting when we drifted, and pullinga stroke or two when we pulled. Of the two sitters one held the rudder-lines,and looked at us attentively,—as did all the rowers; the other sitter waswrapped up, much as Provis was, and seemed to shrink, and whisper someinstruction to the steerer as he looked at us. Not a word was spoken in eitherboat.Startop could make out, after a few minutes, which steamer was first, and gaveme the word “Hamburg,” in a low voice, as we sat face to face. Shewas nearing us very fast, and the beating of her peddles grew louder andlouder. I felt as if her shadow were absolutely upon us, when the galley hailedus. I answered.“You have a returned Transport there,” said the man who held thelines. “That’s the man, wrapped in the cloak. His name is AbelMagwitch, otherwise Provis. I apprehend that man, and call upon him tosurrender, and you to assist.”At the same moment, without giving any audible direction to his crew, he ranthe galley abroad of us. They had pulled one sudden stroke ahead, had got theiroars in, had run athwart us, and were holding on to our gunwale, before we knewwhat they were doing. This caused great confusion on board the steamer, and Iheard them calling to us, and heard the order given to stop the paddles, andheard them stop, but felt her driving down upon us irresistibly. In the samemoment, I saw the steersman of the galley lay his hand on his prisoner’sshoulder, and saw that both boats were swinging round with the force of thetide, and saw that all hands on board the steamer were running forward quitefrantically. Still, in the same moment, I saw the prisoner start up, leanacross his captor, and pull the cloak from the neck of the shrinking sitter inthe galley. Still in the same moment, I saw that the face disclosed, was theface of the other convict of long ago. Still, in the same moment, I saw theface tilt backward with a white terror on it that I shall never forget, andheard a great cry on board the steamer, and a loud splash in the water, andfelt the boat sink from under me.It was but for an instant that I seemed to struggle with a thousand mill-weirsand a thousand flashes of light; that instant past, I was taken on board thegalley. Herbert was there, and Startop was there; but our boat was gone, andthe two convicts were gone.What with the cries aboard the steamer, and the furious blowing off of hersteam, and her driving on, and our driving on, I could not at first distinguishsky from water or shore from shore; but the crew of the galley righted her withgreat speed, and, pulling certain swift strong strokes ahead, lay upon theiroars, every man looking silently and eagerly at the water astern. Presently adark object was seen in it, bearing towards us on the tide. No man spoke, butthe steersman held up his hand, and all softly backed water, and kept the boatstraight and true before it. As it came nearer, I saw it to be Magwitch,swimming, but not swimming freely. He was taken on board, and instantlymanacled at the wrists and ankles.The galley was kept steady, and the silent, eager look-out at the water wasresumed. But, the Rotterdam steamer now came up, and apparently notunderstanding what had happened, came on at speed. By the time she had beenhailed and stopped, both steamers were drifting away from us, and we wererising and falling in a troubled wake of water. The look-out was kept, longafter all was still again and the two steamers were gone; but everybody knewthat it was hopeless now.At length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards the tavern we hadlately left, where we were received with no little surprise. Here I was able toget some comforts for Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had receivedsome very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head.He told me that he believed himself to have gone under the keel of the steamer,and to have been struck on the head in rising. The injury to his chest (whichrendered his breathing extremely painful) he thought he had received againstthe side of the galley. He added that he did not pretend to say what he mightor might not have done to Compeyson, but that, in the moment of his laying hishand on his cloak to identify him, that villain had staggered up and staggeredback, and they had both gone overboard together, when the sudden wrenching ofhim (Magwitch) out of our boat, and the endeavour of his captor to keep him init, had capsized us. He told me in a whisper that they had gone down fiercelylocked in each other’s arms, and that there had been a struggle underwater, and that he had disengaged himself, struck out, and swum away.I never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what he thus told me. Theofficer who steered the galley gave the same account of their going overboard.When I asked this officer’s permission to change the prisoner’s wetclothes by purchasing any spare garments I could get at the public-house, hegave it readily: merely observing that he must take charge of everything hisprisoner had about him. So the pocket-book which had once been in my handspassed into the officer’s. He further gave me leave to accompany theprisoner to London; but declined to accord that grace to my two friends.The Jack at the Ship was instructed where the drowned man had gone down, andundertook to search for the body in the places where it was likeliest to comeashore. His interest in its recovery seemed to me to be much heightened when heheard that it had stockings on. Probably, it took about a dozen drowned men tofit him out completely; and that may have been the reason why the differentarticles of his dress were in various stages of decay.We remained at the public-house until the tide turned, and then Magwitch wascarried down to the galley and put on board. Herbert and Startop were to get toLondon by land, as soon as they could. We had a doleful parting, and when Itook my place by Magwitch’s side, I felt that that was my placehenceforth while he lived.For now, my repugnance to him had all melted away; and in the hunted, wounded,shackled creature who held my hand in his, I only saw a man who had meant to bemy benefactor, and who had felt affectionately, gratefully, and generously,towards me with great constancy through a series of years. I only saw in him amuch better man than I had been to Joe.His breathing became more difficult and painful as the night drew on, and oftenhe could not repress a groan. I tried to rest him on the arm I could use, inany easy position; but it was dreadful to think that I could not be sorry atheart for his being badly hurt, since it was unquestionably best that he shoulddie. That there were, still living, people enough who were able and willing toidentify him, I could not doubt. That he would be leniently treated, I couldnot hope. He who had been presented in the worst light at his trial, who hadsince broken prison and had been tried again, who had returned fromtransportation under a life sentence, and who had occasioned the death of theman who was the cause of his arrest.As we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind us, and asthe stream of our hopes seemed all running back, I told him how grieved I wasto think that he had come home for my sake.“Dear boy,” he answered, “I’m quite content to take mychance. I’ve seen my boy, and he can be a gentleman without me.”No. I had thought about that, while we had been there side by side. No. Apartfrom any inclinations of my own, I understood Wemmick’s hint now. Iforesaw that, being convicted, his possessions would be forfeited to the Crown.“Lookee here, dear boy,” said he “It’s best as agentleman should not be knowed to belong to me now. Only come to see me as ifyou come by chance alonger Wemmick. Sit where I can see you when I am swore to,for the last o’ many times, and I don’t ask no more.”“I will never stir from your side,” said I, “when I amsuffered to be near you. Please God, I will be as true to you as you have beento me!”I felt his hand tremble as it held mine, and he turned his face away as he layin the bottom of the boat, and I heard that old sound in histhroat,—softened now, like all the rest of him. It was a good thing thathe had touched this point, for it put into my mind what I might not otherwisehave thought of until too late,—that he need never know how his hopes ofenriching me had perished.Chapter LV.He wastaken to the Police Court next day, and would have been immediately committedfor trial, but that it was necessary to send down for an old officer of theprison-ship from which he had once escaped, to speak to his identity. Nobodydoubted it; but Compeyson, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on thetides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time any prison officerin London who could give the required evidence. I had gone direct to Mr.Jaggers at his private house, on my arrival over night, to retain hisassistance, and Mr. Jaggers on the prisoner’s behalf would admit nothing.It was the sole resource; for he told me that the case must be over in fiveminutes when the witness was there, and that no power on earth could preventits going against us.I imparted to Mr. Jaggers my design of keeping him in ignorance of the fate ofhis wealth. Mr. Jaggers was querulous and angry with me for having “letit slip through my fingers,” and said we must memorialise by and by, andtry at all events for some of it. But he did not conceal from me that, althoughthere might be many cases in which the forfeiture would not be exacted, therewere no circumstances in this case to make it one of them. I understood thatvery well. I was not related to the outlaw, or connected with him by anyrecognisable tie; he had put his hand to no writing or settlement in my favourbefore his apprehension, and to do so now would be idle. I had no claim, and Ifinally resolved, and ever afterwards abided by the resolution, that my heartshould never be sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.There appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informer had hopedfor a reward out of this forfeiture, and had obtained some accurate knowledgeof Magwitch’s affairs. When his body was found, many miles from the sceneof his death, and so horribly disfigured that he was only recognisable by thecontents of his pockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried.Among these were the name of a banking-house in New South Wales, where a sum ofmoney was, and the designation of certain lands of considerable value. Boththese heads of information were in a list that Magwitch, while in prison, gaveto Mr. Jaggers, of the possessions he supposed I should inherit. His ignorance,poor fellow, at last served him; he never mistrusted but that my inheritancewas quite safe, with Mr. Jaggers’s aid.After three days’ delay, during which the crown prosecution stood overfor the production of the witness from the prison-ship, the witness came, andcompleted the easy case. He was committed to take his trial at the nextSessions, which would come on in a month.It was at this dark time of my life that Herbert returned home one evening, agood deal cast down, and said,—“My dear Handel, I fear I shall soon have to leave you.”His partner having prepared me for that, I was less surprised than he thought.“We shall lose a fine opportunity if I put off going to Cairo, and I amvery much afraid I must go, Handel, when you most need me.”“Herbert, I shall always need you, because I shall always love you; butmy need is no greater now than at another time.”“You will be so lonely.”“I have not leisure to think of that,” said I. “You know thatI am always with him to the full extent of the time allowed, and that I shouldbe with him all day long, if I could. And when I come away from him, you knowthat my thoughts are with him.”The dreadful condition to which he was brought, was so appalling to both of us,that we could not refer to it in plainer words.“My dear fellow,” said Herbert, “let the near prospect of ourseparation—for, it is very near—be my justification for troublingyou about yourself. Have you thought of your future?”“No, for I have been afraid to think of any future.”“But yours cannot be dismissed; indeed, my dear dear Handel, it must notbe dismissed. I wish you would enter on it now, as far as a few friendly wordsgo, with me.”“I will,” said I.“In this branch house of ours, Handel, we must have a—”I saw that his delicacy was avoiding the right word, so I said, “Aclerk.”“A clerk. And I hope it is not at all unlikely that he may expand (as aclerk of your acquaintance has expanded) into a partner. Now, Handel,—inshort, my dear boy, will you come to me?”There was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner in whichafter saying “Now, Handel,” as if it were the grave beginning of aportentous business exordium, he had suddenly given up that tone, stretched outhis honest hand, and spoken like a schoolboy.“Clara and I have talked about it again and again,” Herbertpursued, “and the dear little thing begged me only this evening, withtears in her eyes, to say to you that, if you will live with us when we cometogether, she will do her best to make you happy, and to convince herhusband’s friend that he is her friend too. We should get on so well,Handel!”I thanked her heartily, and I thanked him heartily, but said I could not yetmake sure of joining him as he so kindly offered. Firstly, my mind was toopreoccupied to be able to take in the subject clearly. Secondly,—Yes!Secondly, there was a vague something lingering in my thoughts that will comeout very near the end of this slight narrative.“But if you thought, Herbert, that you could, without doing any injury toyour business, leave the question open for a little while—”“For any while,” cried Herbert. “Six months, a year!”“Not so long as that,” said I. “Two or three months atmost.”Herbert was highly delighted when we shook hands on this arrangement, and saidhe could now take courage to tell me that he believed he must go away at theend of the week.“And Clara?” said I.“The dear little thing,” returned Herbert, “holds dutifullyto her father as long as he lasts; but he won’t last long. Mrs. Whimpleconfides to me that he is certainly going.”“Not to say an unfeeling thing,” said I, “he cannot do betterthan go.”“I am afraid that must be admitted,” said Herbert; “and thenI shall come back for the dear little thing, and the dear little thing and Iwill walk quietly into the nearest church. Remember! The blessed darling comesof no family, my dear Handel, and never looked into the red book, andhasn’t a notion about her grandpapa. What a fortune for the son of mymother!”On the Saturday in that same week, I took my leave of Herbert,—full ofbright hope, but sad and sorry to leave me,—as he sat on one of theseaport mail coaches. I went into a coffee-house to write a little note toClara, telling her he had gone off, sending his love to her over and overagain, and then went to my lonely home,—if it deserved the name; for itwas now no home to me, and I had no home anywhere.On the stairs I encountered Wemmick, who was coming down, after an unsuccessfulapplication of his knuckles to my door. I had not seen him alone since thedisastrous issue of the attempted flight; and he had come, in his private andpersonal capacity, to say a few words of explanation in reference to thatfailure.“The late Compeyson,” said Wemmick, “had by little and littlegot at the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted; and it wasfrom the talk of some of his people in trouble (some of his people being alwaysin trouble) that I heard what I did. I kept my ears open, seeming to have themshut, until I heard that he was absent, and I thought that would be the besttime for making the attempt. I can only suppose now, that it was a part of hispolicy, as a very clever man, habitually to deceive his own instruments. Youdon’t blame me, I hope, Mr. Pip? I am sure I tried to serve you, with allmy heart.”“I am as sure of that, Wemmick, as you can be, and I thank you mostearnestly for all your interest and friendship.”“Thank you, thank you very much. It’s a bad job,” saidWemmick, scratching his head, “and I assure you I haven’t been socut up for a long time. What I look at is the sacrifice of so much portableproperty. Dear me!”“What I think of, Wemmick, is the poor owner of theproperty.”“Yes, to be sure,” said Wemmick. “Of course, there can be noobjection to your being sorry for him, and I’d put down a five-pound notemyself to get him out of it. But what I look at is this. The late Compeysonhaving been beforehand with him in intelligence of his return, and being sodetermined to bring him to book, I do not think he could have been saved.Whereas, the portable property certainly could have been saved. That’sthe difference between the property and the owner, don’t you see?”I invited Wemmick to come upstairs, and refresh himself with a glass of grogbefore walking to Walworth. He accepted the invitation. While he was drinkinghis moderate allowance, he said, with nothing to lead up to it, and afterhaving appeared rather fidgety,—“What do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on Monday, Mr.Pip?”“Why, I suppose you have not done such a thing these twelvemonths.”“These twelve years, more likely,” said Wemmick. “Yes.I’m going to take a holiday. More than that; I’m going to take awalk. More than that; I’m going to ask you to take a walk with me.”I was about to excuse myself, as being but a bad companion just then, whenWemmick anticipated me.“I know your engagements,” said he, “and I know you are outof sorts, Mr. Pip. But if you could oblige me, I should take it as akindness. It ain’t a long walk, and it’s an early one. Say it mightoccupy you (including breakfast on the walk) from eight to twelve.Couldn’t you stretch a point and manage it?”He had done so much for me at various times, that this was very little to dofor him. I said I could manage it,—would manage it,—and he was sovery much pleased by my acquiescence, that I was pleased too. At his particularrequest, I appointed to call for him at the Castle at half past eight on Mondaymorning, and so we parted for the time.Punctual to my appointment, I rang at the Castle gate on the Monday morning,and was received by Wemmick himself, who struck me as looking tighter thanusual, and having a sleeker hat on. Within, there were two glasses of rum andmilk prepared, and two biscuits. The Aged must have been stirring with thelark, for, glancing into the perspective of his bedroom, I observed that hisbed was empty.When we had fortified ourselves with the rum and milk and biscuits, and weregoing out for the walk with that training preparation on us, I was considerablysurprised to see Wemmick take up a fishing-rod, and put it over his shoulder.“Why, we are not going fishing!” said I. “No,” returnedWemmick, “but I like to walk with one.”I thought this odd; however, I said nothing, and we set off. We went towardsCamberwell Green, and when we were thereabouts, Wemmick said suddenly,—“Halloa! Here’s a church!”There was nothing very surprising in that; but again, I was rather surprised,when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliant idea,—“Let’s go in!”We went in, Wemmick leaving his fishing-rod in the porch, and looked all round.In the mean time, Wemmick was diving into his coat-pockets, and gettingsomething out of paper there.“Halloa!” said he. “Here’s a couple of pair of gloves!Let’s put ’em on!”As the gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office was widened to itsutmost extent, I now began to have my strong suspicions. They were strengthenedinto certainty when I beheld the Aged enter at a side door, escorting a lady.“Halloa!” said Wemmick. “Here’s Miss Skiffins!Let’s have a wedding.”That discreet damsel was attired as usual, except that she was now engaged insubstituting for her green kid gloves a pair of white. The Aged was likewiseoccupied in preparing a similar sacrifice for the altar of Hymen. The oldgentleman, however, experienced so much difficulty in getting his gloves on,that Wemmick found it necessary to put him with his back against a pillar, andthen to get behind the pillar himself and pull away at them, while I for mypart held the old gentleman round the waist, that he might present an equal andsafe resistance. By dint of this ingenious scheme, his gloves were got on toperfection.The clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order at those fatalrails. True to his notion of seeming to do it all without preparation, I heardWemmick say to himself, as he took something out of his waistcoat-pocket beforethe service began, “Halloa! Here’s a ring!”I acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom; while alittle limp pew-opener in a soft bonnet like a baby’s, made a feint ofbeing the bosom friend of Miss Skiffins. The responsibility of giving the ladyaway devolved upon the Aged, which led to the clergyman’s beingunintentionally scandalised, and it happened thus. When he said, “Whogiveth this woman to be married to this man?” the old gentleman, not inthe least knowing what point of the ceremony we had arrived at, stood mostamiably beaming at the ten commandments. Upon which, the clergyman said again,“WHO giveth this woman to be married to this man?”The old gentleman being still in a state of most estimable unconsciousness, thebridegroom cried out in his accustomed voice, “Now Aged P. you know; whogiveth?” To which the Aged replied with great briskness, before sayingthat he gave, “All right, John, all right, my boy!” And theclergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that I had doubts for the momentwhether we should get completely married that day.It was completely done, however, and when we were going out of church Wemmicktook the cover off the font, and put his white gloves in it, and put the coveron again. Mrs. Wemmick, more heedful of the future, put her white gloves in herpocket and assumed her green. “Now, Mr. Pip,” said Wemmick,triumphantly shouldering the fishing-rod as we came out, “let me ask youwhether anybody would suppose this to be a wedding-party!”Breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile or so away uponthe rising ground beyond the green; and there was a bagatelle board in theroom, in case we should desire to unbend our minds after the solemnity. It waspleasant to observe that Mrs. Wemmick no longer unwound Wemmick’s armwhen it adapted itself to her figure, but sat in a high-backed chair againstthe wall, like a violoncello in its case, and submitted to be embraced as thatmelodious instrument might have done.We had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anything on table,Wemmick said, “Provided by contract, you know; don’t be afraid ofit!” I drank to the new couple, drank to the Aged, drank to the Castle,saluted the bride at parting, and made myself as agreeable as I could.Wemmick came down to the door with me, and I again shook hands with him, andwished him joy.“Thankee!” said Wemmick, rubbing his hands. “She’s sucha manager of fowls, you have no idea. You shall have some eggs, and judge foryourself. I say, Mr. Pip!” calling me back, and speaking low. “Thisis altogether a Walworth sentiment, please.”“I understand. Not to be mentioned in Little Britain,” said I.Wemmick nodded. “After what you let out the other day, Mr. Jaggers may aswell not know of it. He might think my brain was softening, or something of thekind.”Chapter LVI.He layin prison very ill, during the whole interval between his committal for trialand the coming round of the Sessions. He had broken two ribs, they had woundedone of his lungs, and he breathed with great pain and difficulty, whichincreased daily. It was a consequence of his hurt that he spoke so low as to bescarcely audible; therefore he spoke very little. But he was ever ready tolisten to me; and it became the first duty of my life to say to him, and readto him, what I knew he ought to hear.Being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, after thefirst day or so, into the infirmary. This gave me opportunities of being withhim that I could not otherwise have had. And but for his illness he would havebeen put in irons, for he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and Iknow not what else.Although I saw him every day, it was for only a short time; hence, theregularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough to record on hisface any slight changes that occurred in his physical state. I do not recollectthat I once saw any change in it for the better; he wasted, and became slowlyweaker and worse, day by day, from the day when the prison door closed uponhim.The kind of submission or resignation that he showed was that of a man who wastired out. I sometimes derived an impression, from his manner or from awhispered word or two which escaped him, that he pondered over the questionwhether he might have been a better man under better circumstances. But henever justified himself by a hint tending that way, or tried to bend the pastout of its eternal shape.It happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that his desperatereputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance on him. Asmile crossed his face then, and he turned his eyes on me with a trustful look,as if he were confident that I had seen some small redeeming touch in him, evenso long ago as when I was a little child. As to all the rest, he was humble andcontrite, and I never knew him complain.When the Sessions came round, Mr. Jaggers caused an application to be made forthe postponement of his trial until the following Sessions. It was obviouslymade with the assurance that he could not live so long, and was refused. Thetrial came on at once, and, when he was put to the bar, he was seated in achair. No objection was made to my getting close to the dock, on the outside ofit, and holding the hand that he stretched forth to me.The trial was very short and very clear. Such things as could be said for himwere said,—how he had taken to industrious habits, and had thrivenlawfully and reputably. But nothing could unsay the fact that he had returned,and was there in presence of the Judge and Jury. It was impossible to try himfor that, and do otherwise than find him guilty.At that time, it was the custom (as I learnt from my terrible experience ofthat Sessions) to devote a concluding day to the passing of Sentences, and tomake a finishing effect with the Sentence of Death. But for the indeliblepicture that my remembrance now holds before me, I could scarcely believe, evenas I write these words, that I saw two-and-thirty men and women put before theJudge to receive that sentence together. Foremost among the two-and-thirty washe; seated, that he might get breath enough to keep life in him.The whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the moment, down tothe drops of April rain on the windows of the court, glittering in the rays ofApril sun. Penned in the dock, as I again stood outside it at the corner withhis hand in mine, were the two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, somestricken with terror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering their faces, somestaring gloomily about. There had been shrieks from among the women convicts;but they had been stilled, and a hush had succeeded. The sheriffs with theirgreat chains and nosegays, other civic gewgaws and monsters, criers, ushers, agreat gallery full of people,—a large theatrical audience,—lookedon, as the two-and-thirty and the Judge were solemnly confronted. Then theJudge addressed them. Among the wretched creatures before him whom he mustsingle out for special address was one who almost from his infancy had been anoffender against the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments and punishments,had been at length sentenced to exile for a term of years; and who, undercircumstances of great violence and daring, had made his escape and beenre-sentenced to exile for life. That miserable man would seem for a time tohave become convinced of his errors, when far removed from the scenes of hisold offences, and to have lived a peaceable and honest life. But in a fatalmoment, yielding to those propensities and passions, the indulgence of whichhad so long rendered him a scourge to society, he had quitted his haven of restand repentance, and had come back to the country where he was proscribed. Beinghere presently denounced, he had for a time succeeded in evading the officersof Justice, but being at length seized while in the act of flight, he hadresisted them, and had—he best knew whether by express design, or in theblindness of his hardihood—caused the death of his denouncer, to whom hiswhole career was known. The appointed punishment for his return to the landthat had cast him out, being Death, and his case being this aggravated case, hemust prepare himself to Die.The sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through theglittering drops of rain upon the glass, and it made a broad shaft of lightbetween the two-and-thirty and the Judge, linking both together, and perhapsreminding some among the audience how both were passing on, with absoluteequality, to the greater Judgment that knoweth all things, and cannot err.Rising for a moment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, theprisoner said, “My Lord, I have received my sentence of Death from theAlmighty, but I bow to yours,” and sat down again. There was somehushing, and the Judge went on with what he had to say to the rest. Then theywere all formally doomed, and some of them were supported out, and some of themsauntered out with a haggard look of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery,and two or three shook hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herbthey had taken from the sweet herbs lying about. He went last of all, becauseof having to be helped from his chair, and to go very slowly; and he held myhand while all the others were removed, and while the audience got up (puttingtheir dresses right, as they might at church or elsewhere), and pointed down atthis criminal or at that, and most of all at him and me.I earnestly hoped and prayed that he might die before the Recorder’sReport was made; but, in the dread of his lingering on, I began that night towrite out a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledgeof him, and how it was that he had come back for my sake. I wrote it asfervently and pathetically as I could; and when I had finished it and sent itin, I wrote out other petitions to such men in authority as I hoped were themost merciful, and drew up one to the Crown itself. For several days and nightsafter he was sentenced I took no rest except when I fell asleep in my chair,but was wholly absorbed in these appeals. And after I had sent them in, I couldnot keep away from the places where they were, but felt as if they were morehopeful and less desperate when I was near them. In this unreasonablerestlessness and pain of mind I would roam the streets of an evening, wanderingby those offices and houses where I had left the petitions. To the presenthour, the weary western streets of London on a cold, dusty spring night, withtheir ranges of stern, shut-up mansions, and their long rows of lamps, aremelancholy to me from this association.The daily visits I could make him were shortened now, and he was more strictlykept. Seeing, or fancying, that I was suspected of an intention of carryingpoison to him, I asked to be searched before I sat down at his bedside, andtold the officer who was always there, that I was willing to do anything thatwould assure him of the singleness of my designs. Nobody was hard with him orwith me. There was duty to be done, and it was done, but not harshly. Theofficer always gave me the assurance that he was worse, and some other sickprisoners in the room, and some other prisoners who attended on them as sicknurses, (malefactors, but not incapable of kindness, God be thanked!) alwaysjoined in the same report.As the days went on, I noticed more and more that he would lie placidly lookingat the white ceiling, with an absence of light in his face until some word ofmine brightened it for an instant, and then it would subside again. Sometimeshe was almost or quite unable to speak, then he would answer me with slightpressures on my hand, and I grew to understand his meaning very well.The number of the days had risen to ten, when I saw a greater change in himthan I had seen yet. His eyes were turned towards the door, and lighted up as Ientered.“Dear boy,” he said, as I sat down by his bed: “I thought youwas late. But I knowed you couldn’t be that.”“It is just the time,” said I. “I waited for it at thegate.”“You always waits at the gate; don’t you, dear boy?”“Yes. Not to lose a moment of the time.”“Thank’ee dear boy, thank’ee. God bless you! You’venever deserted me, dear boy.”I pressed his hand in silence, for I could not forget that I had once meant todesert him.“And what’s the best of all,” he said, “you’vebeen more comfortable alonger me, since I was under a dark cloud, than when thesun shone. That’s best of all.”He lay on his back, breathing with great difficulty. Do what he would, and loveme though he did, the light left his face ever and again, and a film came overthe placid look at the white ceiling.“Are you in much pain to-day?”“I don’t complain of none, dear boy.”“You never do complain.”He had spoken his last words. He smiled, and I understood his touch to meanthat he wished to lift my hand, and lay it on his breast. I laid it there, andhe smiled again, and put both his hands upon it.The allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round, I found thegovernor of the prison standing near me, and he whispered, “Youneedn’t go yet.” I thanked him gratefully, and asked, “MightI speak to him, if he can hear me?”The governor stepped aside, and beckoned the officer away. The change, thoughit was made without noise, drew back the film from the placid look at the whiteceiling, and he looked most affectionately at me.“Dear Magwitch, I must tell you now, at last. You understand what Isay?”A gentle pressure on my hand.“You had a child once, whom you loved and lost.”A stronger pressure on my hand.“She lived, and found powerful friends. She is living now. She is a ladyand very beautiful. And I love her!”With a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but for my yieldingto it and assisting it, he raised my hand to his lips. Then, he gently let itsink upon his breast again, with his own hands lying on it. The placid look atthe white ceiling came back, and passed away, and his head dropped quietly onhis breast.Mindful, then, of what we had read together, I thought of the two men who wentup into the Temple to pray, and I knew there were no better words that I couldsay beside his bed, than “O Lord, be merciful to him a sinner!”Chapter LVII.Nowthat I was left wholly to myself, I gave notice of my intention to quit thechambers in the Temple as soon as my tenancy could legally determine, and inthe meanwhile to underlet them. At once I put bills up in the windows; for, Iwas in debt, and had scarcely any money, and began to be seriously alarmed bythe state of my affairs. I ought rather to write that I should have beenalarmed if I had had energy and concentration enough to help me to the clearperception of any truth beyond the fact that I was falling very ill. The latestress upon me had enabled me to put off illness, but not to put it away; Iknew that it was coming on me now, and I knew very little else, and was evencareless as to that.For a day or two, I lay on the sofa, or on the floor,—anywhere, accordingas I happened to sink down,—with a heavy head and aching limbs, and nopurpose, and no power. Then there came, one night which appeared of greatduration, and which teemed with anxiety and horror; and when in the morning Itried to sit up in my bed and think of it, I found I could not do so.Whether I really had been down in Garden Court in the dead of the night,groping about for the boat that I supposed to be there; whether I had two orthree times come to myself on the staircase with great terror, not knowing howI had got out of bed; whether I had found myself lighting the lamp, possessedby the idea that he was coming up the stairs, and that the lights were blownout; whether I had been inexpressibly harassed by the distracted talking,laughing, and groaning of some one, and had half suspected those sounds to beof my own making; whether there had been a closed iron furnace in a dark cornerof the room, and a voice had called out, over and over again, that MissHavisham was consuming within it,—these were things that I tried tosettle with myself and get into some order, as I lay that morning on my bed.But the vapour of a limekiln would come between me and them, disordering themall, and it was through the vapour at last that I saw two men looking at me.“What do you want?” I asked, starting; “I don’t knowyou.”“Well, sir,” returned one of them, bending down and touching me onthe shoulder, “this is a matter that you’ll soon arrange, I daresay, but you’re arrested.”“What is the debt?”“Hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six. Jeweller’s account,I think.”“What is to be done?”“You had better come to my house,” said the man. “I keep avery nice house.”I made some attempt to get up and dress myself. When I next attended to them,they were standing a little off from the bed, looking at me. I still lay there.“You see my state,” said I. “I would come with you if Icould; but indeed I am quite unable. If you take me from here, I think I shalldie by the way.”Perhaps they replied, or argued the point, or tried to encourage me to believethat I was better than I thought. Forasmuch as they hang in my memory by onlythis one slender thread, I don’t know what they did, except that theyforbore to remove me.That I had a fever and was avoided, that I suffered greatly, that I often lostmy reason, that the time seemed interminable, that I confounded impossibleexistences with my own identity; that I was a brick in the house-wall, and yetentreating to be released from the giddy place where the builders had set me;that I was a steel beam of a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf,and yet that I implored in my own person to have the engine stopped, and mypart in it hammered off; that I passed through these phases of disease, I knowof my own remembrance, and did in some sort know at the time. That I sometimesstruggled with real people, in the belief that they were murderers, and that Iwould all at once comprehend that they meant to do me good, and would then sinkexhausted in their arms, and suffer them to lay me down, I also knew at thetime. But, above all, I knew that there was a constant tendency in all thesepeople,—who, when I was very ill, would present all kinds ofextraordinary transformations of the human face, and would be much dilated insize,—above all, I say, I knew that there was an extraordinary tendencyin all these people, sooner or later, to settle down into the likeness of Joe.After I had turned the worst point of my illness, I began to notice that whileall its other features changed, this one consistent feature did not change.Whoever came about me, still settled down into Joe. I opened my eyes in thenight, and I saw, in the great chair at the bedside, Joe. I opened my eyes inthe day, and, sitting on the window-seat, smoking his pipe in the shaded openwindow, still I saw Joe. I asked for cooling drink, and the dear hand that gaveit me was Joe’s. I sank back on my pillow after drinking, and the facethat looked so hopefully and tenderly upon me was the face of Joe.At last, one day, I took courage, and said, “Is it Joe?”And the dear old home-voice answered, “Which it air, old chap.”“O Joe, you break my heart! Look angry at me, Joe. Strike me, Joe. Tellme of my ingratitude. Don’t be so good to me!”For Joe had actually laid his head down on the pillow at my side, and put hisarm round my neck, in his joy that I knew him.“Which dear old Pip, old chap,” said Joe, “you and me wasever friends. And when you’re well enough to go out for a ride—whatlarks!”After which, Joe withdrew to the window, and stood with his back towards me,wiping his eyes. And as my extreme weakness prevented me from getting up andgoing to him, I lay there, penitently whispering, “O God bless him! O Godbless this gentle Christian man!”Joe’s eyes were red when I next found him beside me; but I was holdinghis hand, and we both felt happy.“How long, dear Joe?”“Which you meantersay, Pip, how long have your illness lasted, dear oldchap?”“Yes, Joe.”“It’s the end of May, Pip. To-morrow is the first of June.”“And have you been here all that time, dear Joe?”“Pretty nigh, old chap. For, as I says to Biddy when the news of yourbeing ill were brought by letter, which it were brought by the post, and beingformerly single he is now married though underpaid for a deal of walking andshoe-leather, but wealth were not a object on his part, and marriage were thegreat wish of his hart—”“It is so delightful to hear you, Joe! But I interrupt you in what yousaid to Biddy.”“Which it were,” said Joe, “that how you might be amongststrangers, and that how you and me having been ever friends, a wisit at such amoment might not prove unacceptabobble. And Biddy, her word were, ‘Go tohim, without loss of time.’ That,” said Joe, summing up with hisjudicial air, “were the word of Biddy. ‘Go to him,’ Biddysay, ‘without loss of time.’ In short, I shouldn’t greatlydeceive you,” Joe added, after a little grave reflection, “if Irepresented to you that the word of that young woman were, ‘without aminute’s loss of time.’”There Joe cut himself short, and informed me that I was to be talked to ingreat moderation, and that I was to take a little nourishment at statedfrequent times, whether I felt inclined for it or not, and that I was to submitmyself to all his orders. So I kissed his hand, and lay quiet, while heproceeded to indite a note to Biddy, with my love in it.Evidently Biddy had taught Joe to write. As I lay in bed looking at him, itmade me, in my weak state, cry again with pleasure to see the pride with whichhe set about his letter. My bedstead, divested of its curtains, had beenremoved, with me upon it, into the sitting-room, as the airiest and largest,and the carpet had been taken away, and the room kept always fresh andwholesome night and day. At my own writing-table, pushed into a corner andcumbered with little bottles, Joe now sat down to his great work, firstchoosing a pen from the pen-tray as if it were a chest of large tools, andtucking up his sleeves as if he were going to wield a crow-bar or sledgehammer.It was necessary for Joe to hold on heavily to the table with his left elbow,and to get his right leg well out behind him, before he could begin; and whenhe did begin he made every downstroke so slowly that it might have been sixfeet long, while at every upstroke I could hear his pen splutteringextensively. He had a curious idea that the inkstand was on the side of himwhere it was not, and constantly dipped his pen into space, and seemed quitesatisfied with the result. Occasionally, he was tripped up by someorthographical stumbling-block; but on the whole he got on very well indeed;and when he had signed his name, and had removed a finishing blot from thepaper to the crown of his head with his two forefingers, he got up and hoveredabout the table, trying the effect of his performance from various points ofview, as it lay there, with unbounded satisfaction.Not to make Joe uneasy by talking too much, even if I had been able to talkmuch, I deferred asking him about Miss Havisham until next day. He shook hishead when I then asked him if she had recovered.“Is she dead, Joe?”“Why you see, old chap,” said Joe, in a tone of remonstrance, andby way of getting at it by degrees, “I wouldn’t go so far as to saythat, for that’s a deal to say; but she ain’t—”“Living, Joe?”“That’s nigher where it is,” said Joe; “she ain’tliving.”“Did she linger long, Joe?”“Arter you was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (if youwas put to it) a week,” said Joe; still determined, on my account, tocome at everything by degrees.“Dear Joe, have you heard what becomes of her property?”“Well, old chap,” said Joe, “it do appear that she hadsettled the most of it, which I meantersay tied it up, on Miss Estella. But shehad wrote out a little coddleshell in her own hand a day or two afore theaccident, leaving a cool four thousand to Mr. Matthew Pocket. And why, do yousuppose, above all things, Pip, she left that cool four thousand unto him?‘Because of Pip’s account of him, the said Matthew.’ I amtold by Biddy, that air the writing,” said Joe, repeating the legal turnas if it did him infinite good, “‘account of him the saidMatthew.’ And a cool four thousand, Pip!”I never discovered from whom Joe derived the conventional temperature of thefour thousand pounds; but it appeared to make the sum of money more to him, andhe had a manifest relish in insisting on its being cool.This account gave me great joy, as it perfected the only good thing I had done.I asked Joe whether he had heard if any of the other relations had anylegacies?“Miss Sarah,” said Joe, “she have twenty-five pound peranniumfur to buy pills, on account of being bilious. Miss Georgiana, she have twentypound down. Mrs.—what’s the name of them wild beasts with humps,old chap?”“Camels?” said I, wondering why he could possibly want to know.Joe nodded. “Mrs. Camels,” by which I presently understood he meantCamilla, “she have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put her in spiritswhen she wake up in the night.”The accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to me, to give me greatconfidence in Joe’s information. “And now,” said Joe,“you ain’t that strong yet, old chap, that you can take in more norone additional shovelful to-day. Old Orlick he’s been a bustin’open a dwelling-ouse.”“Whose?” said I.“Not, I grant you, but what his manners is given to blusterous,”said Joe, apologetically; “still, a Englishman’s ouse is hisCastle, and castles must not be busted ’cept when done in war time. Andwotsume’er the failings on his part, he were a corn and seedsman in hishart.”“Is it Pumblechook’s house that has been broken into, then?”“That’s it, Pip,” said Joe; “and they took his till,and they took his cash-box, and they drinked his wine, and they partook of hiswittles, and they slapped his face, and they pulled his nose, and they tied himup to his bedpust, and they giv’ him a dozen, and they stuffed his mouthfull of flowering annuals to prewent his crying out. But he knowed Orlick, andOrlick’s in the county jail.”By these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation. I was slow to gainstrength, but I did slowly and surely become less weak, and Joe stayed with me,and I fancied I was little Pip again.For the tenderness of Joe was so beautifully proportioned to my need, that Iwas like a child in his hands. He would sit and talk to me in the oldconfidence, and with the old simplicity, and in the old unassertive protectingway, so that I would half believe that all my life since the days of the oldkitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever that was gone. He dideverything for me except the household work, for which he had engaged a verydecent woman, after paying off the laundress on his first arrival. “WhichI do assure you, Pip,” he would often say, in explanation of thatliberty; “I found her a tapping the spare bed, like a cask of beer, anddrawing off the feathers in a bucket, for sale. Which she would have tappedyourn next, and draw’d it off with you a laying on it, and was then acarrying away the coals gradiwally in the soup-tureen and wegetable-dishes, andthe wine and spirits in your Wellington boots.”We looked forward to the day when I should go out for a ride, as we had oncelooked forward to the day of my apprenticeship. And when the day came, and anopen carriage was got into the Lane, Joe wrapped me up, took me in his arms,carried me down to it, and put me in, as if I were still the small helplesscreature to whom he had so abundantly given of the wealth of his great nature.And Joe got in beside me, and we drove away together into the country, wherethe rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass, and sweetsummer scents filled all the air. The day happened to be Sunday, and when Ilooked on the loveliness around me, and thought how it had grown and changed,and how the little wild-flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birdshad been strengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under the stars,while poor I lay burning and tossing on my bed, the mere remembrance of havingburned and tossed there came like a check upon my peace. But when I heard theSunday bells, and looked around a little more upon the outspread beauty, I feltthat I was not nearly thankful enough,—that I was too weak yet to be eventhat,—and I laid my head on Joe’s shoulder, as I had laid it longago when he had taken me to the Fair or where not, and it was too much for myyoung senses.More composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we used to talk,lying on the grass at the old Battery. There was no change whatever in Joe.Exactly what he had been in my eyes then, he was in my eyes still; just assimply faithful, and as simply right.When we got back again, and he lifted me out, and carried me—soeasily!—across the court and up the stairs, I thought of that eventfulChristmas Day when he had carried me over the marshes. We had not yet made anyallusion to my change of fortune, nor did I know how much of my late history hewas acquainted with. I was so doubtful of myself now, and put so much trust inhim, that I could not satisfy myself whether I ought to refer to it when he didnot.“Have you heard, Joe,” I asked him that evening, upon furtherconsideration, as he smoked his pipe at the window, “who my patronwas?”“I heerd,” returned Joe, “as it were not Miss Havisham, oldchap.”“Did you hear who it was, Joe?”“Well! I heerd as it were a person what sent the person what giv’you the bank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, Pip.”“So it was.”“Astonishing!” said Joe, in the placidest way.“Did you hear that he was dead, Joe?” I presently asked, withincreasing diffidence.“Which? Him as sent the bank-notes, Pip?”“Yes.”“I think,” said Joe, after meditating a long time, and lookingrather evasively at the window-seat, “as I did hear tell that howhe were something or another in a general way in that direction.”“Did you hear anything of his circumstances, Joe?”“Not partickler, Pip.”“If you would like to hear, Joe—” I was beginning, when Joegot up and came to my sofa.“Lookee here, old chap,” said Joe, bending over me. “Ever thebest of friends; ain’t us, Pip?”I was ashamed to answer him.“Wery good, then,” said Joe, as if I had answered;“that’s all right; that’s agreed upon. Then why go intosubjects, old chap, which as betwixt two sech must be for ever onnecessary?There’s subjects enough as betwixt two sech, without onnecessary ones.Lord! To think of your poor sister and her Rampages! And don’t youremember Tickler?”“I do indeed, Joe.”“Lookee here, old chap,” said Joe. “I done what I could tokeep you and Tickler in sunders, but my power were not always fully equal to myinclinations. For when your poor sister had a mind to drop into you, it werenot so much,” said Joe, in his favourite argumentative way, “thatshe dropped into me too, if I put myself in opposition to her, but that shedropped into you always heavier for it. I noticed that. It ain’t a grabat a man’s whisker, not yet a shake or two of a man (to which your sisterwas quite welcome), that ’ud put a man off from getting a little childout of punishment. But when that little child is dropped into heavier for thatgrab of whisker or shaking, then that man naterally up and says to himself,‘Where is the good as you are a-doing? I grant you I see the’arm,’ says the man, ‘but I don’t see the good. I callupon you, sir, therefore, to pint out the good.’”“The man says?” I observed, as Joe waited for me to speak.“The man says,” Joe assented. “Is he right, that man?”“Dear Joe, he is always right.”“Well, old chap,” said Joe, “then abide by your words. Ifhe’s always right (which in general he’s more likely wrong),he’s right when he says this: Supposing ever you kep any little matter toyourself, when you was a little child, you kep it mostly because youknow’d as J. Gargery’s power to part you and Tickler in sunderswere not fully equal to his inclinations. Theerfore, think no more of it asbetwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarks upon onnecessary subjects.Biddy giv’ herself a deal o’ trouble with me afore I left (for I amalmost awful dull), as I should view it in this light, and, viewing it in thislight, as I should so put it. Both of which,” said Joe, quite charmedwith his logical arrangement, “being done, now this to you a true friend,say. Namely. You mustn’t go a overdoing on it, but you must have yoursupper and your wine and water, and you must be put betwixt the sheets.”The delicacy with which Joe dismissed this theme, and the sweet tact andkindness with which Biddy—who with her woman’s wit had found me outso soon—had prepared him for it, made a deep impression on my mind. Butwhether Joe knew how poor I was, and how my great expectations had alldissolved, like our own marsh mists before the sun, I could not understand.Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when it first began to developitself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of, was this: AsI became stronger and better, Joe became a little less easy with me. In myweakness and entire dependence on him, the dear fellow had fallen into the oldtone, and called me by the old names, the dear “old Pip, old chap,”that now were music in my ears. I too had fallen into the old ways, only happyand thankful that he let me. But, imperceptibly, though I held by them fast,Joe’s hold upon them began to slacken; and whereas I wondered at this, atfirst, I soon began to understand that the cause of it was in me, and that thefault of it was all mine.Ah! Had I given Joe no reason to doubt my constancy, and to think that inprosperity I should grow cold to him and cast him off? Had I given Joe’sinnocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as I got stronger, his holdupon me would be weaker, and that he had better loosen it in time and let mego, before I plucked myself away?It was on the third or fourth occasion of my going out walking in the TempleGardens leaning on Joe’s arm, that I saw this change in him very plainly.We had been sitting in the bright warm sunlight, looking at the river, and Ichanced to say as we got up,—“See, Joe! I can walk quite strongly. Now, you shall see me walk back bymyself.”“Which do not overdo it, Pip,” said Joe; “but I shall behappy fur to see you able, sir.”The last word grated on me; but how could I remonstrate! I walked no furtherthan the gate of the gardens, and then pretended to be weaker than I was, andasked Joe for his arm. Joe gave it me, but was thoughtful.I, for my part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check this growing changein Joe was a great perplexity to my remorseful thoughts. That I was ashamed totell him exactly how I was placed, and what I had come down to, I do not seekto conceal; but I hope my reluctance was not quite an unworthy one. He wouldwant to help me out of his little savings, I knew, and I knew that he ought notto help me, and that I must not suffer him to do it.It was a thoughtful evening with both of us. But, before we went to bed, I hadresolved that I would wait over to-morrow,—to-morrow beingSunday,—and would begin my new course with the new week. On Mondaymorning I would speak to Joe about this change, I would lay aside this lastvestige of reserve, I would tell him what I had in my thoughts (that Secondly,not yet arrived at), and why I had not decided to go out to Herbert, and thenthe change would be conquered for ever. As I cleared, Joe cleared, and itseemed as though he had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too.We had a quiet day on the Sunday, and we rode out into the country, and thenwalked in the fields.“I feel thankful that I have been ill, Joe,” I said.“Dear old Pip, old chap, you’re a’most come round,sir.”“It has been a memorable time for me, Joe.”“Likeways for myself, sir,” Joe returned.“We have had a time together, Joe, that I can never forget. There weredays once, I know, that I did for a while forget; but I never shall forgetthese.”“Pip,” said Joe, appearing a little hurried and troubled,“there has been larks. And, dear sir, what have been betwixtus—have been.”At night, when I had gone to bed, Joe came into my room, as he had done allthrough my recovery. He asked me if I felt sure that I was as well as in themorning?“Yes, dear Joe, quite.”“And are always a getting stronger, old chap?”“Yes, dear Joe, steadily.”Joe patted the coverlet on my shoulder with his great good hand, and said, inwhat I thought a husky voice, “Good night!”When I got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, I was full of myresolution to tell Joe all, without delay. I would tell him before breakfast. Iwould dress at once and go to his room and surprise him; for, it was the firstday I had been up early. I went to his room, and he was not there. Not only washe not there, but his box was gone.I hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on it found a letter. These were itsbrief contents:—“Not wishful to intrude I have departured fur you are well again dear Pipand will do better withoutJO.“P.S. Ever the best of friends.”Enclosed in the letter was a receipt for the debt and costs on which I had beenarrested. Down to that moment, I had vainly supposed that my creditor hadwithdrawn, or suspended proceedings until I should be quite recovered. I hadnever dreamed of Joe’s having paid the money; but Joe had paid it, andthe receipt was in his name.What remained for me now, but to follow him to the dear old forge, and there tohave out my disclosure to him, and my penitent remonstrance with him, and thereto relieve my mind and heart of that reserved Secondly, which had begun as avague something lingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settledpurpose?The purpose was, that I would go to Biddy, that I would show her how humbledand repentant I came back, that I would tell her how I had lost all I oncehoped for, that I would remind her of our old confidences in my first unhappytime. Then I would say to her, “Biddy, I think you once liked me verywell, when my errant heart, even while it strayed away from you, was quieterand better with you than it ever has been since. If you can like me only halfas well once more, if you can take me with all my faults and disappointments onmy head, if you can receive me like a forgiven child (and indeed I am as sorry,Biddy, and have as much need of a hushing voice and a soothing hand), I hope Iam a little worthier of you that I was,—not much, but a little. And,Biddy, it shall rest with you to say whether I shall work at the forge withJoe, or whether I shall try for any different occupation down in this country,or whether we shall go away to a distant place where an opportunity awaits mewhich I set aside, when it was offered, until I knew your answer. And now, dearBiddy, if you can tell me that you will go through the world with me, you willsurely make it a better world for me, and me a better man for it, and I willtry hard to make it a better world for you.”Such was my purpose. After three days more of recovery, I went down to the oldplace to put it in execution. And how I sped in it is all I have left to tell.Chapter LVIII.Thetidings of my high fortunes having had a heavy fall had got down to my nativeplace and its neighbourhood before I got there. I found the Blue Boar inpossession of the intelligence, and I found that it made a great change in theBoar’s demeanour. Whereas the Boar had cultivated my good opinion withwarm assiduity when I was coming into property, the Boar was exceedingly coolon the subject now that I was going out of property.It was evening when I arrived, much fatigued by the journey I had so often madeso easily. The Boar could not put me into my usual bedroom, which was engaged(probably by some one who had expectations), and could only assign me a veryindifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard. But I hadas sound a sleep in that lodging as in the most superior accommodation the Boarcould have given me, and the quality of my dreams was about the same as in thebest bedroom.Early in the morning, while my breakfast was getting ready, I strolled round bySatis House. There were printed bills on the gate and on bits of carpet hangingout of the windows, announcing a sale by auction of the Household Furniture andEffects, next week. The House itself was to be sold as old building materials,and pulled down. LOT 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-kneeletters on the brew house; LOT 2 on that part of the mainbuilding which had been so long shut up. Other lots were marked off on otherparts of the structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for theinscriptions, and much of it trailed low in the dust and was withered already.Stepping in for a moment at the open gate, and looking around me with theuncomfortable air of a stranger who had no business there, I saw theauctioneer’s clerk walking on the casks and telling them off for theinformation of a catalogue-compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk ofthe wheeled chair I had so often pushed along to the tune of Old Clem.When I got back to my breakfast in the Boar’s coffee-room, I found Mr.Pumblechook conversing with the landlord. Mr. Pumblechook (not improved inappearance by his late nocturnal adventure) was waiting for me, and addressedme in the following terms:—“Young man, I am sorry to see you brought low. But what else could beexpected! what else could be expected!”As he extended his hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and as I was brokenby illness and unfit to quarrel, I took it.“William,” said Mr. Pumblechook to the waiter, “put a muffinon table. And has it come to this! Has it come to this!”I frowningly sat down to my breakfast. Mr. Pumblechook stood over me and pouredout my tea—before I could touch the teapot—with the air of abenefactor who was resolved to be true to the last.“William,” said Mr. Pumblechook, mournfully, “put the salton. In happier times,” addressing me, “I think you took sugar? Anddid you take milk? You did. Sugar and milk. William, bring a watercress.”“Thank you,” said I, shortly, “but I don’t eatwatercresses.”“You don’t eat ’em,” returned Mr. Pumblechook, sighingand nodding his head several times, as if he might have expected that, and asif abstinence from watercresses were consistent with my downfall. “True.The simple fruits of the earth. No. You needn’t bring any,William.”I went on with my breakfast, and Mr. Pumblechook continued to stand over me,staring fishily and breathing noisily, as he always did.“Little more than skin and bone!” mused Mr. Pumblechook, aloud.“And yet when he went from here (I may say with my blessing), and Ispread afore him my humble store, like the Bee, he was as plump as aPeach!”This reminded me of the wonderful difference between the servile manner inwhich he had offered his hand in my new prosperity, saying, “MayI?” and the ostentatious clemency with which he had just now exhibitedthe same fat five fingers.“Hah!” he went on, handing me the bread and butter. “And airyou a-going to Joseph?”“In heaven’s name,” said I, firing in spite of myself,“what does it matter to you where I am going? Leave that teapotalone.”It was the worst course I could have taken, because it gave Pumblechook theopportunity he wanted.“Yes, young man,” said he, releasing the handle of the article inquestion, retiring a step or two from my table, and speaking for the behoof ofthe landlord and waiter at the door, “I will leave that teapotalone. You are right, young man. For once you are right. I forgit myself when Itake such an interest in your breakfast, as to wish your frame, exhausted bythe debilitating effects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the’olesome nourishment of your forefathers. And yet,” saidPumblechook, turning to the landlord and waiter, and pointing me out atarm’s length, “this is him as I ever sported with in his days ofhappy infancy! Tell me not it cannot be; I tell you this is him!”A low murmur from the two replied. The waiter appeared to be particularlyaffected.“This is him,” said Pumblechook, “as I have rode in myshay-cart. This is him as I have seen brought up by hand. This is him untoe thesister of which I was uncle by marriage, as her name was Georgiana M’riafrom her own mother, let him deny it if he can!”The waiter seemed convinced that I could not deny it, and that it gave the casea black look.“Young man,” said Pumblechook, screwing his head at me in the oldfashion, “you air a-going to Joseph. What does it matter to me, you askme, where you air a-going? I say to you, Sir, you air a-going to Joseph.”The waiter coughed, as if he modestly invited me to get over that.“Now,” said Pumblechook, and all this with a most exasperating airof saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and conclusive,“I will tell you what to say to Joseph. Here is Squires of the Boarpresent, known and respected in this town, and here is William, which hisfather’s name was Potkins if I do not deceive myself.”“You do not, sir,” said William.“In their presence,” pursued Pumblechook, “I will tell you,young man, what to say to Joseph. Says you, “Joseph, I have this day seenmy earliest benefactor and the founder of my fortun’s. I will name nonames, Joseph, but so they are pleased to call him up town, and I have seenthat man.”“I swear I don’t see him here,” said I.“Say that likewise,” retorted Pumblechook. “Say you saidthat, and even Joseph will probably betray surprise.”“There you quite mistake him,” said I. “I know better.”“Says you,” Pumblechook went on, “‘Joseph, I have seenthat man, and that man bears you no malice and bears me no malice. He knowsyour character, Joseph, and is well acquainted with your pig-headedness andignorance; and he knows my character, Joseph, and he knows my want ofgratitoode. Yes, Joseph,’ says you,” here Pumblechook shook hishead and hand at me, “‘he knows my total deficiency of common humangratitoode. He knows it, Joseph, as none can. You do not know it,Joseph, having no call to know it, but that man do.’”Windy donkey as he was, it really amazed me that he could have the face to talkthus to mine.“Says you, ‘Joseph, he gave me a little message, which I will nowrepeat. It was that, in my being brought low, he saw the finger of Providence.He knowed that finger when he saw Joseph, and he saw it plain. It pinted outthis writing, Joseph. Reward of ingratitoode to his earliest benefactor, andfounder of fortun’s. But that man said he did not repent of what hehad done, Joseph. Not at all. It was right to do it, it was kind to do it, itwas benevolent to do it, and he would do it again.’”“It’s pity,” said I, scornfully, as I finished my interruptedbreakfast, “that the man did not say what he had done and would doagain.”“Squires of the Boar!” Pumblechook was now addressing the landlord,“and William! I have no objections to your mentioning, either up town ordown town, if such should be your wishes, that it was right to do it, kind todo it, benevolent to do it, and that I would do it again.”With those words the Impostor shook them both by the hand, with an air, andleft the house; leaving me much more astonished than delighted by the virtuesof that same indefinite “it.” I was not long after him in leavingthe house too, and when I went down the High Street I saw him holding forth (nodoubt to the same effect) at his shop door to a select group, who honoured mewith very unfavourable glances as I passed on the opposite side of the way.But, it was only the pleasanter to turn to Biddy and to Joe, whose greatforbearance shone more brightly than before, if that could be, contrasted withthis brazen pretender. I went towards them slowly, for my limbs were weak, butwith a sense of increasing relief as I drew nearer to them, and a sense ofleaving arrogance and untruthfulness further and further behind.The June weather was delicious. The sky was blue, the larks were soaring highover the green corn, I thought all that countryside more beautiful and peacefulby far than I had ever known it to be yet. Many pleasant pictures of the lifethat I would lead there, and of the change for the better that would come overmy character when I had a guiding spirit at my side whose simple faith andclear home wisdom I had proved, beguiled my way. They awakened a tender emotionin me; for my heart was softened by my return, and such a change had come topass, that I felt like one who was toiling home barefoot from distant travel,and whose wanderings had lasted many years.The schoolhouse where Biddy was mistress I had never seen; but, the littleroundabout lane by which I entered the village, for quietness’ sake, tookme past it. I was disappointed to find that the day was a holiday; no childrenwere there, and Biddy’s house was closed. Some hopeful notion of seeingher, busily engaged in her daily duties, before she saw me, had been in my mindand was defeated.But the forge was a very short distance off, and I went towards it under thesweet green limes, listening for the clink of Joe’s hammer. Long after Iought to have heard it, and long after I had fancied I heard it and found itbut a fancy, all was still. The limes were there, and the white thorns werethere, and the chestnut-trees were there, and their leaves rustled harmoniouslywhen I stopped to listen; but, the clink of Joe’s hammer was not in themidsummer wind.Almost fearing, without knowing why, to come in view of the forge, I saw it atlast, and saw that it was closed. No gleam of fire, no glittering shower ofsparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, and still.But the house was not deserted, and the best parlour seemed to be in use, forthere were white curtains fluttering in its window, and the window was open andgay with flowers. I went softly towards it, meaning to peep over the flowers,when Joe and Biddy stood before me, arm in arm.At first Biddy gave a cry, as if she thought it was my apparition, but inanother moment she was in my embrace. I wept to see her, and she wept to seeme; I, because she looked so fresh and pleasant; she, because I looked so wornand white.“But dear Biddy, how smart you are!”“Yes, dear Pip.”“And Joe, how smart you are!”“Yes, dear old Pip, old chap.”I looked at both of them, from one to the other, and then—“It’s my wedding-day!” cried Biddy, in a burst of happiness,“and I am married to Joe!”They had taken me into the kitchen, and I had laid my head down on the old dealtable. Biddy held one of my hands to her lips, and Joe’s restoring touchwas on my shoulder. “Which he warn’t strong enough, my dear, fur tobe surprised,” said Joe. And Biddy said, “I ought to have thoughtof it, dear Joe, but I was too happy.” They were both so overjoyed to seeme, so proud to see me, so touched by my coming to them, so delighted that Ishould have come by accident to make their day complete!My first thought was one of great thankfulness that I had never breathed thislast baffled hope to Joe. How often, while he was with me in my illness, had itrisen to my lips! How irrevocable would have been his knowledge of it, if hehad remained with me but another hour!“Dear Biddy,” said I, “you have the best husband in the wholeworld, and if you could have seen him by my bed you would have—But no,you couldn’t love him better than you do.”“No, I couldn’t indeed,” said Biddy.“And, dear Joe, you have the best wife in the whole world, and she willmake you as happy as even you deserve to be, you dear, good, noble Joe!”Joe looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put his sleeve before hiseyes.“And Joe and Biddy both, as you have been to church to-day, and are incharity and love with all mankind, receive my humble thanks for all you havedone for me, and all I have so ill repaid! And when I say that I am going awaywithin the hour, for I am soon going abroad, and that I shall never rest untilI have worked for the money with which you have kept me out of prison, and havesent it to you, don’t think, dear Joe and Biddy, that if I could repay ita thousand times over, I suppose I could cancel a farthing of the debt I oweyou, or that I would do so if I could!”They were both melted by these words, and both entreated me to say no more.“But I must say more. Dear Joe, I hope you will have children to love,and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney-corner of a winter night,who may remind you of another little fellow gone out of it for ever.Don’t tell him, Joe, that I was thankless; don’t tell him, Biddy,that I was ungenerous and unjust; only tell him that I honoured you both,because you were both so good and true, and that, as your child, I said itwould be natural to him to grow up a much better man than I did.”“I ain’t a-going,” said Joe, from behind his sleeve,“to tell him nothink o’ that natur, Pip. Nor Biddy ain’t. Noryet no one ain’t.”“And now, though I know you have already done it in your own kind hearts,pray tell me, both, that you forgive me! Pray let me hear you say the words,that I may carry the sound of them away with me, and then I shall be able tobelieve that you can trust me, and think better of me, in the time tocome!”“O dear old Pip, old chap,” said Joe. “God knows as I forgiveyou, if I have anythink to forgive!”“Amen! And God knows I do!” echoed Biddy.“Now let me go up and look at my old little room, and rest there a fewminutes by myself. And then, when I have eaten and drunk with you, go with meas far as the finger-post, dear Joe and Biddy, before we say good-bye!”I sold all I had, and put aside as much as I could, for a composition with mycreditors,—who gave me ample time to pay them in full,—and I wentout and joined Herbert. Within a month, I had quitted England, and within twomonths I was clerk to Clarriker and Co., and within four months I assumed myfirst undivided responsibility. For the beam across the parlour ceiling at MillPond Bank had then ceased to tremble under old Bill Barley’s growls andwas at peace, and Herbert had gone away to marry Clara, and I was left in solecharge of the Eastern Branch until he brought her back.Many a year went round before I was a partner in the House; but I lived happilywith Herbert and his wife, and lived frugally, and paid my debts, andmaintained a constant correspondence with Biddy and Joe. It was not until Ibecame third in the Firm, that Clarriker betrayed me to Herbert; but he thendeclared that the secret of Herbert’s partnership had been long enoughupon his conscience, and he must tell it. So he told it, and Herbert was asmuch moved as amazed, and the dear fellow and I were not the worse friends forthe long concealment. I must not leave it to be supposed that we were ever agreat House, or that we made mints of money. We were not in a grand way ofbusiness, but we had a good name, and worked for our profits, and did verywell. We owed so much to Herbert’s ever cheerful industry and readiness,that I often wondered how I had conceived that old idea of his inaptitude,until I was one day enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps the inaptitudehad never been in him at all, but had been in me.Chapter LIX.Foreleven years, I had not seen Joe nor Biddy with my bodily eyes,—thoughthey had both been often before my fancy in the East,—when, upon anevening in December, an hour or two after dark, I laid my hand softly on thelatch of the old kitchen door. I touched it so softly that I was not heard, andlooked in unseen. There, smoking his pipe in the old place by the kitchenfirelight, as hale and as strong as ever, though a little grey, sat Joe; andthere, fenced into the corner with Joe’s leg, and sitting on my ownlittle stool looking at the fire, was—I again!“We giv’ him the name of Pip for your sake, dear old chap,”said Joe, delighted, when I took another stool by the child’s side (but Idid not rumple his hair), “and we hoped he might grow a little bitlike you, and we think he do.”I thought so too, and I took him out for a walk next morning, and we talkedimmensely, understanding one another to perfection. And I took him down to thechurchyard, and set him on a certain tombstone there, and he showed me fromthat elevation which stone was sacred to the memory of Philip Pirrip, late ofthis Parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above.“Biddy,” said I, when I talked with her after dinner, as her littlegirl lay sleeping in her lap, “you must give Pip to me one of these days;or lend him, at all events.”“No, no,” said Biddy, gently. “You must marry.”“So Herbert and Clara say, but I don’t think I shall, Biddy. I haveso settled down in their home, that it’s not at all likely. I am alreadyquite an old bachelor.”Biddy looked down at her child, and put its little hand to her lips, and thenput the good matronly hand with which she had touched it into mine. There wassomething in the action, and in the light pressure of Biddy’swedding-ring, that had a very pretty eloquence in it.“Dear Pip,” said Biddy, “you are sure you don’t fretfor her?”“O no,—I think not, Biddy.”“Tell me as an old, old friend. Have you quite forgotten her?“My dear Biddy, I have forgotten nothing in my life that ever had aforemost place there, and little that ever had any place there. But that poordream, as I once used to call it, has all gone by, Biddy,—all goneby!”Nevertheless, I knew, while I said those words, that I secretly intended torevisit the site of the old house that evening, alone, for her sake. Yes, evenso. For Estella’s sake.I had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as being separated fromher husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and who had become quiterenowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality, and meanness. And I hadheard of the death of her husband, from an accident consequent on hisill-treatment of a horse. This release had befallen her some two years before;for anything I knew, she was married again.The early dinner hour at Joe’s, left me abundance of time, withouthurrying my talk with Biddy, to walk over to the old spot before dark. But,what with loitering on the way to look at old objects and to think of oldtimes, the day had quite declined when I came to the place.There was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, but the wall ofthe old garden. The cleared space had been enclosed with a rough fence, andlooking over it, I saw that some of the old ivy had struck root anew, and wasgrowing green on low quiet mounds of ruin. A gate in the fence standing ajar, Ipushed it open, and went in.A cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was not yet up toscatter it. But, the stars were shining beyond the mist, and the moon wascoming, and the evening was not dark. I could trace out where every part of theold house had been, and where the brewery had been, and where the gates, andwhere the casks. I had done so, and was looking along the desolate garden walk,when I beheld a solitary figure in it.The figure showed itself aware of me, as I advanced. It had been moving towardsme, but it stood still. As I drew nearer, I saw it to be the figure of a woman.As I drew nearer yet, it was about to turn away, when it stopped, and let mecome up with it. Then, it faltered, as if much surprised, and uttered my name,and I cried out,—“Estella!”“I am greatly changed. I wonder you know me.”The freshness of her beauty was indeed gone, but its indescribable majesty andits indescribable charm remained. Those attractions in it, I had seen before;what I had never seen before, was the saddened, softened light of the onceproud eyes; what I had never felt before was the friendly touch of the onceinsensible hand.We sat down on a bench that was near, and I said, “After so many years,it is strange that we should thus meet again, Estella, here where our firstmeeting was! Do you often come back?”“I have never been here since.”“Nor I.”The moon began to rise, and I thought of the placid look at the white ceiling,which had passed away. The moon began to rise, and I thought of the pressure onmy hand when I had spoken the last words he had heard on earth.Estella was the next to break the silence that ensued between us.“I have very often hoped and intended to come back, but have beenprevented by many circumstances. Poor, poor old place!”The silvery mist was touched with the first rays of the moonlight, and the samerays touched the tears that dropped from her eyes. Not knowing that I saw them,and setting herself to get the better of them, she said quietly,—“Were you wondering, as you walked along, how it came to be left in thiscondition?”“Yes, Estella.”“The ground belongs to me. It is the only possession I have notrelinquished. Everything else has gone from me, little by little, but I havekept this. It was the subject of the only determined resistance I made in allthe wretched years.”“Is it to be built on?”“At last, it is. I came here to take leave of it before its change. Andyou,” she said, in a voice of touching interest to awanderer,—“you live abroad still?”“Still.”“And do well, I am sure?”“I work pretty hard for a sufficient living, and therefore—yes, Ido well.”“I have often thought of you,” said Estella.“Have you?”“Of late, very often. There was a long hard time when I kept far from methe remembrance of what I had thrown away when I was quite ignorant of itsworth. But since my duty has not been incompatible with the admission of thatremembrance, I have given it a place in my heart.”“You have always held your place in my heart,” I answered.And we were silent again until she spoke.“I little thought,” said Estella, “that I should take leaveof you in taking leave of this spot. I am very glad to do so.”“Glad to part again, Estella? To me, parting is a painful thing. To me,the remembrance of our last parting has been ever mournful and painful.”“But you said to me,” returned Estella, very earnestly,“‘God bless you, God forgive you!’ And if you could say thatto me then, you will not hesitate to say that to me now,—now, whensuffering has been stronger than all other teaching, and has taught me tounderstand what your heart used to be. I have been bent and broken, but—Ihope—into a better shape. Be as considerate and good to me as you were,and tell me we are friends.”“We are friends,” said I, rising and bending over her, as she rosefrom the bench.“And will continue friends apart,” said Estella.I took her hand in mine, and we went out of the ruined place; and, as themorning mists had risen long ago when I first left the forge, so the eveningmists were rising now, and in all the broad expanse of tranquil light theyshowed to me, I saw no shadow of another parting from her.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT EXPECTATIONS ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.