START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S GET TOGETHER *** LET'S GET TOGETHERBy ISAAC ASIMOVIllustrated by ENGLE[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced fromInfinity, February 1957.Extensive research did not uncover any evidence thatthe U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]A kind of peace had endured for a century and people had forgotten whatanything else was like. They would scarcely have known how to react hadthey discovered that a kind of war had finally come.Certainly, Elias Lynn, Chief of the Bureau of Robotics, wasn't surehow he ought to react when he finally found out. The Bureau ofRobotics was headquartered in Cheyenne, in line with the century-oldtrend toward decentralization, and Lynn stared dubiously at the youngSecurity officer from Washington who had brought the news.Elias Lynn was a large man, almost charmingly homely, with pale blueeyes that bulged a bit. Men weren't usually comfortable under the stareof those eyes, but the Security officer remained calm.Lynn decided that his first reaction ought to be incredulity. Hell, itwas incredulity! He just didn't believe it!He eased himself back in his chair and said, "How certain is theinformation?"The Security officer, who had introduced himself as Ralph G.Breckenridge and had presented credentials to match, had the softnessof youth about him; full lips, plump cheeks that flushed easily,and guileless eyes. His clothing was out of line with Cheyenne butit suited a universally air-conditioned Washington, where Security,despite everything, was still centered.Breckenridge flushed and said, "There's no doubt about it.""You people know all about Them, I suppose," said Lynn and was unableto keep a trace of sarcasm out of his tone. He was not particularlyaware of his use of a slightly-stressed pronoun in his reference to theenemy, the equivalent of capitalization in print. It was a culturalhabit of this generation and the one preceding. No one said the "East,"or the "Reds" or the "Soviets" or the "Russians" any more. That wouldhave been too confusing, since some of Them weren't of the East,weren't Reds, Soviets, and especially not Russians. It was much simplerto say We and They, and much more precise.Travelers had frequently reported that They did the same in reverse.Over there, They were "We" (in the appropriate language) and We were"They."Scarcely anyone gave thought to such things any more. It was all quitecomfortable and casual. There was no hatred, even. At the beginning,it had been called a Cold War. Now it was only a game, almost agood-natured game, with unspoken rules and a kind of decency about it.Lynn said, abruptly, "Why should They want to disturb the situation?"He rose and stood staring at a wall-map of the world, split into tworegions with faint edgings of color. An irregular portion on the leftof the map was edged in a mild green. A smaller, but just as irregular,portion on the right of the map was bordered in a washed-out pink. Weand They.The map hadn't changed much in a century. The loss of Formosa andthe gain of East Germany some eighty years before had been the lastterritorial switch of importance.There had been another change, though, that was significant enough andthat was in the colors. Two generations before, Their territory hadbeen a brooding, bloody red, Ours a pure and undefiled white. Now therewas a neutrality about the colors. Lynn had seen Their maps and it wasthe same on Their side."They wouldn't do it," he said."They are doing it," said Breckenridge, "and you had better accustomyourself to the fact. Of course, sir, I realize that it isn't pleasantto think that they may be that far ahead of us in robotics."His eyes remained as guileless as ever, but the hidden knife-edges ofthe words plunged deep, and Lynn quivered at the impact.Of course, that would account for why the Chief of Robotics learned ofthis so late and through a Security officer at that. He had lost castein the eyes of the Government; if Robotics had really failed in thestruggle, Lynn could expect no political mercy.Lynn said wearily, "Even if what you say is true, they're not far aheadof us. We could build humanoid robots.""Have we, sir?""Yes. As a matter of fact, we have built a few models for experimentalpurposes.""They were doing so ten years ago. They've made ten years' progresssince."Lynn was disturbed. He wondered if his incredulity concerning the wholebusiness were really the result of wounded pride and fear for his joband reputation. He was embarrassed by the possibility that this mightbe so, and yet he was forced into defense.He said, "Look, young man, the stalemate between Them and Us was neverperfect in every detail, you know. They have always been ahead in onefacet or another and We in some other facet or another. If They'reahead of us right now in robotics, it's because They've placed agreater proportion of Their effort into robotics than We have. And thatmeans that some other branch of endeavor has received a greater shareof Our efforts than it has of Theirs. It would mean We're ahead inforce-field research or in hyper-atomics, perhaps."Lynn felt distressed at his own statement that the stalemate wasn'tperfect. It was true enough, but that was the one great dangerthreatening the world. The world depended on the stalemate being asperfect as possible. If the small unevennesses that always existedover-balanced too far in one direction or the other—Almost at the beginning of what had been the Cold War, both sideshad developed thermonuclear weapons, and war became unthinkable.Competition switched from the military to the economic andpsychological and had stayed there ever since.But always there was the driving effort on each side to break thestalemate, to develop a parry for every possible thrust, to developa thrust that could not be parried in time—something that would makewar possible again. And that was not because either side wanted war sodesperately, but because both were afraid that the other side wouldmake the crucial discovery first.For a hundred years each side had kept the struggle even. And in theprocess, peace had been maintained for a hundred years while, asbyproducts of the continuously intensive research, force-fields hadbeen produced and solar energy and insect control and robots. Each sidewas making a beginning in the understanding of mentalics, which was thename given to the biochemistry and biophysics of thought. Each side hadits outposts on the Moon and on Mars. Mankind was advancing in giantstrides under forced draft.It was even necessary for both sides to be as decent and humane aspossible among themselves, lest through cruelty and tyranny, friends bemade for the other side.It couldn't be that the stalemate would now be broken and that therewould be war.Lynn said, "I want to consult one of my men. I want his opinion.""Is he trustworthy?"Lynn looked disgusted. "Good Lord, what man in Robotics has not beeninvestigated and cleared to death by your people? Yes, I vouch forhim. If you can't trust a man like Humphrey Carl Laszlo, then we're inno position to face the kind of attack you say They are launching, nomatter what else we do.""I've heard of Laszlo," said Breckenridge."Good. Does he pass?""Yes.""Then, I'll have him in and we'll find out what he thinks about thepossibility that robots could invade the U. S. A.""Not exactly," said Breckenridge, softly. "You still don't accept thefull truth. Find out what he thinks about the fact that robots havealready invaded the U. S. A."Laszlo was the grandson of a Hungarian who had broken through whathad then been called the Iron Curtain, and he had a comfortableabove-suspicion feeling about himself because of it. He was thick-setand balding with a pugnacious look graven forever on his snub face, buthis accent was clear Harvard and he was almost excessively soft-spoken.To Lynn, who was conscious that after years of administration he was nolonger expert in the various phases of modern robotics, Laszlo was acomforting receptacle for complete knowledge. Lynn felt better becauseof the man's mere presence.Lynn said, "What do you think?"A scowl twisted Laszlo's face ferociously. "That They're that far aheadof us. Completely incredible. It would mean They've produced humanoidsthat could not be told from humans at close quarters. It would mean aconsiderable advance in robo-mentalics.""You're personally involved," said Breckenridge, coldly. "Leavingprofessional pride out of account, exactly why is it impossible thatThey be ahead of Us?"Laszlo shrugged. "I assure you that I'm well acquainted with Theirliterature on robotics. I know approximately where They are.""You know approximately where They want you to think They are, iswhat you really mean," corrected Breckenridge. "Have you ever visitedthe other side?""I haven't," said Laszlo, shortly."Nor you, Dr. Lynn?"Lynn said, "No, I haven't, either."Breckenridge said, "Has any robotics man visited the other side intwenty-five years?" He asked the question with a kind of confidencethat indicated he knew the answer.For a matter of seconds, the atmosphere was heavy with thought.Discomfort crossed Laszlo's broad face. He said, "As a matter of fact,They haven't held any conferences on robotics in a long time.""In twenty-five years," said Breckenridge. "Isn't that significant?""Maybe," said Laszlo, reluctantly. "Something else bothers me, though.None of Them have ever come to Our conferences on robotics. None that Ican remember.""Were They invited?" asked Breckenridge.Lynn, staring and worried, interposed quickly, "Of course."Breckenridge said, "Do They refuse attendance to any other types ofscientific conferences We hold?""I don't know," said Laszlo. He was pacing the floor now. "I haven'theard of any cases. Have you, Chief?""No," said Lynn.Breckenridge said, "Wouldn't you say it was as though They didn't wantto be put in the position of having to return any such invitation? Oras though They were afraid one of Their men might talk too much?"That was exactly how it seemed, and Lynn felt a helpless convictionthat Security's story was true after all steal over him.Why else had there been no contact between sides on robotics? Therehad been a cross-fertilizing trickle of researchers moving in bothdirections on a strictly one-for-one basis for years, dating backto the days of Eisenhower and Khrushchev. There were a great manygood motives for that: an honest appreciation of the supra-nationalcharacter of science; impulses of friendliness that are hard to wipeout completely in the individual human being; the desire to be exposedto a fresh and interesting outlook and to have your own slightly-stalenotions greeted by others as fresh and interesting.The governments themselves were anxious that this continue. There wasalways the obvious thought that by learning all you could and tellingas little as you could, your own side would gain by the exchange.But not in the case of robotics. Not there.Such a little thing to carry conviction. And a thing, moreover, theyhad known all along. Lynn thought, darkly: We've taken the complacentway out.Because the other side had done nothing publicly on robotics, it hadbeen tempting to sit back smugly and be comfortable in the assurance ofsuperiority. Why hadn't it seemed possible, even likely, that They werehiding superior cards, a trump hand, for the proper time?Laszlo said, shakenly, "What do we do?" It was obvious that the sameline of thought had carried the same conviction to him."Do?" parroted Lynn. It was hard to think right now of anything but ofthe complete horror that came with conviction. There were ten humanoidrobots somewhere in the United States, each one carrying a fragment ofa TC bomb.TC! The race for sheer horror in bomb-ery had ended there. TC! TotalConversion! The sun was no longer a synonym one could use. Totalconversion made the sun a penny candle.Ten humanoids, each completely harmless in separation, could, by thesimple act of coming together, exceed critical mass and—Lynn rose to his feet heavily, the dark pouches under his eyes, whichordinarily lent his ugly face a look of savage foreboding, moreprominent than ever. "It's going to be up to us to figure out waysand means of telling a humanoid from a human and then finding thehumanoids.""How quickly?" muttered Laszlo."Not later than five minutes before they get together," barked Lynn,"and I don't know when that will be."Breckenridge nodded. "I'm glad you're with us now, sir. I'm to bringyou back to Washington for conference, you know."Lynn raised his eyebrows. "All right."He wondered if, had he delayed longer in being convinced, he mightnot have been replaced forthwith—if some other Chief of the Bureauof Robotics might not be conferring in Washington. He suddenly wishedearnestly that exactly that had come to pass.The First Presidential Assistant was there, the Secretary of Science,the Secretary of Security, Lynn himself, and Breckenridge. Five of themsitting about a table in the dungeons of an underground fortress nearWashington.Presidential Assistant Jeffreys was an impressive man, handsome in awhite-haired and just-a-trifle-jowly fashion, solid, thoughtful and asunobtrusive, politically, as a Presidential Assistant ought to be.He spoke incisively. "There are three questions that face us as I seeit. First, when are the humanoids going to get together? Second, whereare they going to get together? Third, how do we stop them before theyget together?"Secretary of Science Amberley nodded convulsively at that. He had beenDean of Northwestern Engineering before his appointment. He was thin,sharp-featured and noticeably edgy. His forefinger traced slow circleson the table."As far as when they'll get together," he said. "I suppose it'sdefinite that it won't be for some time.""Why do you say that?" asked Lynn, sharply."They've been in the U. S. at least a month already. So Security says."Lynn turned automatically to look at Breckenridge, and Secretary ofSecurity Macalaster intercepted the glance. Macalaster said, "Theinformation is reliable. Don't let Breckenridge's apparent youth foolyou, Dr. Lynn. That's part of his value to us. Actually, he's 34 andhas been with the department for ten years. He has been in Moscow fornearly a year and without him, none of this terrible danger would beknown to us. As it is, we have most of the details.""Not the crucial ones," said Lynn.Macalaster of Security smiled frostily. His heavy chin and close-seteyes were well-known to the public but almost nothing else about himwas. He said, "We are all finitely human, Dr. Lynn. Agent Breckenridgehas done a great deal."Presidential Assistant Jeffreys cut in. "Let us say we have a certainamount of time. If action at the instant were necessary, it wouldhave happened before this. It seems likely that they are waiting fora specific time. If we knew the place, perhaps the time would becomeself-evident."If they are going to TC a target, they will want to cripple us as muchas possible, so it would seem that a major city would have to be it.In any case, a major metropolis is the only target worth a TC bomb. Ithink there are four possibilities: Washington, as the administrativecenter; New York, as the financial center; and Detroit and Pittsburghas the two chief industrial centers."Macalaster of Security said, "I vote for New York. Administrationand industry have both been decentralized to the point where thedestruction of any one particular city won't prevent instantretaliation.""Then why New York?" asked Amberly of Science, perhaps more sharplythan he intended. "Finance has been decentralized as well.""A question of morale. It may be they intend to destroy our will toresist, to induce surrender by the sheer horror of the first blow.The greatest destruction of human life would be in the New YorkMetropolitan area—""Pretty cold-blooded," muttered Lynn."I know," said Macalaster of Security, "but they're capable of it, ifthey thought it would mean final victory at a stroke. Wouldn't we—"Presidential Assistant Jeffreys brushed back his white hair. "Let'sassume the worst. Let's assume that New York will be destroyed sometime during the winter, preferably immediately after a serious blizzardwhen communications are at their worst and the disruption of utilitiesand food supplies in fringe areas will be most serious in their effect.Now, how do we stop them?"Amberley of Science could only say, "Finding ten men in two hundred andtwenty million is an awfully small needle in an awfully large haystack."Jeffreys shook his head. "You have it wrong. Ten humanoids among twohundred twenty million humans.""No difference," said Amberley of Science. "We don't know that ahumanoid can be differentiated from a human at sight. Probably not." Helooked at Lynn. They all did.Lynn said heavily, "We in Cheyenne couldn't make one that would pass ashuman in the daylight.""But They can," said Macalaster of Security, "and not only physically.We're sure of that. They've advanced mentalic procedures to the pointwhere they can reel off the micro-electronic pattern of the brain andfocus it on the positronic pathways of the robot."Lynn stared. "Are you implying that they can create the replica of ahuman being complete with personality and memory?""I do.""Of specific human beings?""That's right.""Is this also based on Agent Breckenridge's findings?""Yes. The evidence can't be disputed."Lynn bent his head in thought for a moment. Then he said, "Then ten menin the United States are not men but humanoids. But the originals wouldhave had to be available to them. They couldn't be Orientals, who wouldbe too easy to spot, so they would have to be East Europeans. How wouldthey be introduced into this country, then? With the radar network overthe entire world border as tight as a drum, how could They introduceany individual, human or humanoid, without our knowing it?"Macalaster of Security said, "It can be done. There are certainlegitimate seepages across the border. Businessmen, pilots, eventourists. They're watched, of course, on both sides. Still ten ofthem might have been kidnapped and used as models for humanoids. Thehumanoids would then be sent back in their place. Since we wouldn'texpect such a substitution, it would pass us by. If they were Americansto begin with, there would be no difficulty in their getting into thiscountry. It's as simple as that.""And even their friends and family could not tell the difference?""We must assume so. Believe me, we've been waiting for any reportthat might imply sudden attacks of amnesia or troublesome changes inpersonality. We've checked on thousands."Amberley of Science stared at his finger-tips. "I think ordinarymeasures won't work. The attack must come from the Bureau of Roboticsand I depend on the chief of that bureau."Again eyes turned sharply, expectantly, on Lynn.Lynn felt bitterness rise. It seemed to him that this was what theconference came to and was intended for. Nothing that had been said hadnot been said before. He was sure of that. There was no solution tothe problem, no pregnant suggestion. It was a device for the record, adevice on the part of men who gravely feared defeat and who wished theresponsibility for it placed clearly and unequivocally on someone else.And yet there was justice in it. It was in robotics that We had fallenshort. And Lynn was not Lynn merely. He was Lynn of Robotics and theresponsibility had to be his.He said, "I will do what I can."He spent a wakeful night and there was a haggardness about bothbody and soul when he sought and attained another interview withPresidential Assistant Jeffreys the next morning. Breckenridge wasthere, and though Lynn would have preferred a private conference,he could see the justice in the situation. It was obvious thatBreckenridge had attained enormous influence with the government as aresult of his successful Intelligence work. Well, why not?Lynn said, "Sir, I am considering the possibility that we are hoppinguselessly to enemy piping.""In what way?""I'm sure that however impatient the public may grow at times, andhowever legislators sometimes find it expedient to talk, the governmentat least recognizes the world stalemate to be beneficial. They mustrecognize it also. Ten humanoids with one TC bomb is a trivial way ofbreaking the stalemate.""The destruction of fifteen million human beings is scarcely trivial.""It is from the world power standpoint. It would not so demoralize usas to make us surrender or so cripple us as to convince us we could notwin. There would just be the same old planetary death-war that bothsides have avoided so long and so successfully. And all They would haveaccomplished is to force us to fight minus one city. It's not enough.""What do you suggest?" said Jeffreys, coldly. "That They do not haveten humanoids in our country? That there is not a TC bomb waiting toget together?""I'll agree that those things are here, but perhaps for some reasongreater than just mid-winter bomb-madness.""Such as?""It may be that the physical destruction resulting from the humanoidsgetting together is not the worst thing that can happen to us. Whatabout the moral and intellectual destruction that comes of their beinghere at all? With all due respect to Agent Breckenridge, what ifThey intended for us to find out about the humanoids; what if thehumanoids are never supposed to get together, but merely to remainseparate in order to give us something to worry about.""Why?""Tell me this. What measures have already been taken against thehumanoids? I suppose that Security is going through the files of allcitizens who have ever been across the border or close enough to itto make kidnapping possible. I know, since Macalaster mentioned ityesterday, that they are following up suspicious psychiatric cases.What else?"Jeffreys said, "Small X-ray devices are being installed in key placesin the large cities. In the mass arenas, for instance—""Where ten humanoids might slip in among a hundred thousand spectatorsof a football game or an air-polo match?""Exactly.""And concert halls and churches?""We must start somewhere. We can't do it all at once.""Particularly when panic must be avoided?" said Lynn. "Isn't that so?It wouldn't do to have the public realize that at any unpredictablemoment, some unpredictable city and its human contents would suddenlycease to exist.""I suppose that's obvious. What are you driving at?"Lynn said strenuously, "That a growing fraction of our national effortwill be diverted entirely into the nasty problem of what Amberleycalled finding a very small needle in a very large haystack. We'llbe chasing our tails madly, while They increase their researchlead to the point where we find we can no longer catch up; when wemust surrender without the chance even of snapping our fingers inretaliation."Consider further that this news will leak out as more and more peoplebecome involved in our counter-measures and more and more people beginto guess what we're doing. Then what? The panic might do us more harmthan any one TC bomb."The Presidential Assistant said, irritably, "In Heaven's name, man,what do you suggest we do, then?""Nothing," said Lynn. "Call their bluff. Live as we have lived andgamble that They won't dare break the stalemate for the sake of aone-bomb headstart.""Impossible!" said Jeffreys. "Completely impossible. The welfare of allof Us is very largely in my hands, and doing nothing is the one thingI cannot do. I agree with you, perhaps, that X-ray machines at sportsarenas are a kind of skin-deep measure that won't be effective, but ithas to be done so that people, in the aftermath, do not come to thebitter conclusion that we tossed our country away for the sake of asubtle line of reasoning that encouraged do-nothingism. In fact, ourcounter-gambit will be active indeed.""In what way?"Presidential Assistant Jeffreys looked at Breckenridge. The youngSecurity officer, hitherto calmly silent, said, "It's no use talkingabout a possible future break in the stalemate when the stalemate isbroken now. It doesn't matter whether these humanoids explode or donot. Maybe they are only a bait to divert us, as you say. But thefact remains that we are a quarter of a century behind in robotics, andthat may be fatal. What other advances in robotics will there be tosurprise us if war does start? The only answer is to divert our entireforce immediately, now, into a crash program of robotics research,and the first problem is to find the humanoids. Call it an exercisein robotics, if you will, or call it the prevention of the death offifteen million men, women and children."Lynn shook his head, helplessly, "You can't. You'd be playing intotheir hands. They want us lured into the one blind alley while they'refree to advance in all other directions."Jeffreys said, impatiently, "That's your guess. Breckenridge has madehis suggestion through channels and the government has approved, and wewill begin with an all-Science conference.""All-Science?"Breckenridge said, "We have listed every important scientist of everybranch of natural science. They'll all be at Cheyenne. There willbe only one point on the agenda: How to advance robotics. The majorspecific sub-heading under that will be: How to develop a receivingdevice for the electromagnetic fields of the cerebral cortex that willbe sufficiently delicate to distinguish between a protoplasmic humanbrain and a positronic humanoid brain."Jeffreys said, "We had hoped you would be willing to be in charge ofthe conference.""I was not consulted in this.""Obviously time was short, sir. Do you agree to be in charge?"Lynn smiled briefly. It was a matter of responsibility again. Theresponsibility must be clearly that of Lynn of Robotics. He had thefeeling it would be Breckenridge who would really be in charge. Butwhat could he do?He said, "I agree."Breckenridge and Lynn returned together to Cheyenne, where that eveningLaszlo listened with a sullen mistrust to Lynn's description of comingevents.Laszlo said, "While you were gone, Chief, I've started puttingfive experimental models of humanoid structure through the testingprocedures. Our men are on a twelve-hour day, with three shiftsoverlapping. If we've got to arrange a conference, we're going to becrowded and red-taped out of everything. Work will come to a halt."Breckenridge said, "That will be only temporary. You will gain morethan you lose."Laszlo scowled. "A bunch of astrophysicists and geochemists aroundwon't help a damn toward robotics.""Views from specialists of other fields may be helpful.""Are you sure? How do we know that there is any way of detectingbrain waves or that, even if we can, there is a way of differentiatinghuman and humanoid by wave pattern. Who set up the project, anyway?""I did," said Breckenridge."You did? Are you a robotics man?"The young Security agent said, calmly, "I have studied robotics.""That's not the same thing.""I've had access to text-material dealing with Russian robotics—inRussian. Top-secret material well in advance of anything you have here."Lynn said, ruefully, "He has us there, Laszlo.""It was on the basis of that material," Breckenridge went on, "thatI suggested this particular line of investigation. It is reasonablycertain that in copying off the electromagnetic pattern of aspecific human mind into a specific positronic brain, a perfectlyexact duplicate cannot be made. For one thing, the most complicatedpositronic brain small enough to fit into a human-sized skull ishundreds of times less complex than the human brain. It can't pickup all the overtones, therefore, and there must be some way to takeadvantage of that fact."Laszlo looked impressed despite himself and Lynn smiled grimly. It waseasy to resent Breckenridge and the coming intrusion of several hundredscientists of non-robotics specialties, but the problem itself was anintriguing one. There was that consolation, at least.It came to him quietly.Lynn found he had nothing to do but sit in his office alone, with anexecutive position that had grown merely titular. Perhaps that helped.It gave him time to think, to picture the creative scientists of halfthe world converging on Cheyenne.It was Breckenridge who, with cool efficiency, was handling the detailsof preparation. There had been a kind of confidence in the way he said,"Let's get together and we'll lick Them."Let's get together.It came to Lynn so quietly that anyone watching Lynn at that momentmight have seen his eyes blink slowly twice—but surely nothing more.He did what he had to do with a whirling detachment that kept him calmwhen he felt that, by all rights, he ought to be going mad.He sought out Breckenridge in the other's improvised quarters.Breckenridge was alone and frowning. "Is anything wrong, sir?"Lynn said, wearily, "Everything's right, I think. I've invoked martiallaw.""What!""As chief of a division I can do so if I am of the opinion thesituation warrants it. Over my division, I can then be dictator. Chalkup one for the beauties of decentralization.""You will rescind that order immediately." Breckenridge took a stepforward. "When Washington hears this, you will be ruined.""I'm ruined anyway. Do you think I don't realize that I've been set upfor the role of the greatest villain in American history: the man wholet Them break the stalemate. I have nothing to lose—and perhaps agreat deal to gain."He laughed a little wildly, "What a target the Division of Roboticswill be, eh, Breckenridge? Only a few thousand men to be killed bya TC bomb capable of wiping out three hundred square miles in onemicro-second. But five hundred of those men would be our greatestscientists. We would be in the peculiar position of having to fight awar with our brains shot out, or surrendering. I think we'd surrender.""But this is impossible. Lynn, do you hear me? Do you understand? Howcould the humanoids pass our security provisions? How could they gettogether?""But they are getting together! We're helping them to do so.We're ordering them to do so. Our scientists visit the other side,Breckenridge. They visit Them regularly. You made a point of howstrange it was that no one in robotics did. Well, ten of thosescientists are still there and in their place, ten humanoids areconverging on Cheyenne.""That's a ridiculous guess.""I think it's a good one, Breckenridge. But it wouldn't work unless weknew humanoids were in America so that we would call the conference inthe first place. Quite a coincidence that you brought the news of thehumanoids and suggested the conference and suggested the agendaand are running the show and know exactly which scientists wereinvited. Did you make sure the right ten were included?""Dr. Lynn!" cried Breckenridge in outrage. He poised to rush forward.Lynn said, "Don't move. I've got a blaster here. We'll just wait forthe scientists to get here one by one. One by one we'll X-ray them. Oneby one, we'll monitor them for radioactivity. No two will get togetherwithout being checked, and if all five hundred are clear, I'll giveyou my blaster and surrender to you. Only I think we'll find the tenhumanoids. Sit down, Breckenridge."They both sat.Lynn said, "We wait. When I'm tired, Laszlo will spell me. We wait."Professor Manuelo Jiminez of the Institute of Higher Studies of BuenosAires exploded while the stratospheric jet on which he traveled wasthree miles above the Amazon Valley. It was a simple chemical explosionbut it was enough to destroy the plane.Dr. Herman Liebowitz of M. I. T. exploded in a monorail, killing twentypeople and injuring a hundred others.In similar manner, Dr. Auguste Marin of L'Institut Nucléonique ofMontreal and seven others died at various stages of their journey toCheyenne.Laszlo hurtled in, pale-faced and stammering, with the first newsof it. It had only been two hours that Lynn had sat there, facingBreckenridge, blaster in hand.Laszlo said, "I thought you were nuts, Chief, but you were right.They were humanoids. They had to be." He turned to stare withhate-filled eyes at Breckenridge. "Only they were warned. He warnedthem, and now there won't be one left intact. Not one to study.""God!" cried Lynn and in a frenzy of haste thrust his blaster outtoward Breckenridge and fired. The Security man's neck vanished; thetorso fell; the head dropped, thudded against the floor and rolledcrookedly.Lynn moaned, "I didn't understand, I thought he was a traitor. Nothingmore."And Laszlo stood immobile, mouth open, for the moment incapable ofspeech.Lynn said, wildly. "Sure, he warned them. But how could he do so whilesitting in that chair unless he were equipped with built-in radiotransmission? Don't you see it? Breckenridge had been in Moscow. Thereal Breckenridge is still there. Oh my God, there were eleven ofthem."Laszlo managed a hoarse squeak. "Why didn't he explode?""He was hanging on, I suppose, to make sure the others had received hismessage and were safely destroyed. Lord, Lord, when you brought thenews and I realized the truth, I couldn't shoot fast enough. God knowsby how few seconds I may have beaten him to it."Laszlo said, shakily, "At least, we'll have one to study." He bentand put his fingers on the sticky fluid trickling out of the mangledremains at the neck end of the headless body.Not blood, but high-grade machine oil.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LET'S GET TOGETHER ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.