START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE WOMEN ***Little Womenby Louisa May AlcottContents PART 1 CHAPTER ONE PLAYING PILGRIMS CHAPTER TWO A MERRY CHRISTMAS CHAPTER THREE THE LAURENCE BOY CHAPTER FOUR BURDENS CHAPTER FIVE BEING NEIGHBORLY CHAPTER SIX BETH FINDS THE PALACE BEAUTIFUL CHAPTER SEVEN AMY’S VALLEY OF HUMILIATION CHAPTER EIGHT JO MEETS APOLLYON CHAPTER NINE MEG GOES TO VANITY FAIR CHAPTER TEN THE P.C. AND P.O. CHAPTER ELEVEN EXPERIMENTS CHAPTER TWELVE CAMP LAURENCE CHAPTER THIRTEEN CASTLES IN THE AIR CHAPTER FOURTEEN SECRETS CHAPTER FIFTEEN A TELEGRAM CHAPTER SIXTEEN LETTERS CHAPTER SEVENTEEN LITTLE FAITHFUL CHAPTER EIGHTEEN DARK DAYS CHAPTER NINETEEN AMY’S WILL CHAPTER TWENTY CONFIDENTIAL CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE LAURIE MAKES MISCHIEF, AND JO MAKES PEACE CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO PLEASANT MEADOWS CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE AUNT MARCH SETTLES THE QUESTION PART 2 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR GOSSIP CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE THE FIRST WEDDING CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX ARTISTIC ATTEMPTS CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN LITERARY LESSONS CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT DOMESTIC EXPERIENCES CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE CALLS CHAPTER THIRTY CONSEQUENCES CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE OUR FOREIGN CORRESPONDENT CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO TENDER TROUBLES CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE JO’S JOURNAL CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR FRIEND CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE HEARTACHE CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX BETH’S SECRET CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN NEW IMPRESSIONS CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT ON THE SHELF CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE LAZY LAURENCE CHAPTER FORTY THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW CHAPTER FORTY-ONE LEARNING TO FORGET CHAPTER FORTY-TWO ALL ALONE CHAPTER FORTY-THREE SURPRISES CHAPTER FORTY-FOUR MY LORD AND LADY CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE DAISY AND DEMI CHAPTER FORTY-SIX UNDER THE UMBRELLA CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN HARVEST TIMEPART 1CHAPTER ONEPLAYING PILGRIMS“Christmas won’t be Christmas without any presents,” grumbledJo, lying on the rug.“It’s so dreadful to be poor!” sighed Meg, looking down ather old dress.“I don’t think it’s fair for some girls to have plenty ofpretty things, and other girls nothing at all,” added little Amy, with aninjured sniff.“We’ve got Father and Mother, and each other,” said Bethcontentedly from her corner.The four young faces on which the firelight shone brightened at the cheerfulwords, but darkened again as Jo said sadly, “We haven’t got Father,and shall not have him for a long time.” She didn’t say“perhaps never,” but each silently added it, thinking of Father faraway, where the fighting was.Nobody spoke for a minute; then Meg said in an altered tone, “You knowthe reason Mother proposed not having any presents this Christmas was becauseit is going to be a hard winter for everyone; and she thinks we ought not tospend money for pleasure, when our men are suffering so in the army. Wecan’t do much, but we can make our little sacrifices, and ought to do itgladly. But I am afraid I don’t,” and Meg shook her head, as shethought regretfully of all the pretty things she wanted.“But I don’t think the little we should spend would do any good.We’ve each got a dollar, and the army wouldn’t be much helped byour giving that. I agree not to expect anything from Mother or you, but I dowant to buy Undine and Sintran for myself. I’ve wanted it solong,” said Jo, who was a bookworm.“I planned to spend mine in new music,” said Beth, with a littlesigh, which no one heard but the hearth brush and kettle-holder.“I shall get a nice box of Faber’s drawing pencils; I really needthem,” said Amy decidedly.“Mother didn’t say anything about our money, and she won’twish us to give up everything. Let’s each buy what we want, and have alittle fun; I’m sure we work hard enough to earn it,” cried Jo,examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner.“I know I do—teaching those tiresome children nearly all day, whenI’m longing to enjoy myself at home,” began Meg, in the complainingtone again.“You don’t have half such a hard time as I do,” said Jo.“How would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous, fussy oldlady, who keeps you trotting, is never satisfied, and worries you tillyou’re ready to fly out the window or cry?”“It’s naughty to fret, but I do think washing dishes and keepingthings tidy is the worst work in the world. It makes me cross, and my hands getso stiff, I can’t practice well at all.” And Beth looked at herrough hands with a sigh that any one could hear that time.“I don’t believe any of you suffer as I do,” cried Amy,“for you don’t have to go to school with impertinent girls, whoplague you if you don’t know your lessons, and laugh at your dresses, andlabel your father if he isn’t rich, and insult you when your noseisn’t nice.”“If you mean libel, I’d say so, and not talk about labels, as ifPapa was a pickle bottle,” advised Jo, laughing.“I know what I mean, and you needn’t be statirical about it.It’s proper to use good words, and improve your vocabilary,”returned Amy, with dignity.“Don’t peck at one another, children. Don’t you wish we hadthe money Papa lost when we were little, Jo? Dear me! How happy and goodwe’d be, if we had no worries!” said Meg, who could remember bettertimes.“You said the other day you thought we were a deal happier than the Kingchildren, for they were fighting and fretting all the time, in spite of theirmoney.”“So I did, Beth. Well, I think we are. For though we do have to work, wemake fun of ourselves, and are a pretty jolly set, as Jo would say.”“Jo does use such slang words!” observed Amy, with a reproving lookat the long figure stretched on the rug.Jo immediately sat up, put her hands in her pockets, and began to whistle.“Don’t, Jo. It’s so boyish!”“That’s why I do it.”“I detest rude, unladylike girls!”“I hate affected, niminy-piminy chits!”“Birds in their little nests agree,” sang Beth, the peacemaker,with such a funny face that both sharp voices softened to a laugh, and the“pecking” ended for that time.“Really, girls, you are both to be blamed,” said Meg, beginning tolecture in her elder-sisterly fashion. “You are old enough to leave offboyish tricks, and to behave better, Josephine. It didn’t matter so muchwhen you were a little girl, but now you are so tall, and turn up your hair,you should remember that you are a young lady.”“I’m not! And if turning up my hair makes me one, I’ll wearit in two tails till I’m twenty,” cried Jo, pulling off her net,and shaking down a chestnut mane. “I hate to think I’ve got to growup, and be Miss March, and wear long gowns, and look as prim as a China Aster!It’s bad enough to be a girl, anyway, when I like boy’s games andwork and manners! I can’t get over my disappointment in not being a boy.And it’s worse than ever now, for I’m dying to go and fight withPapa. And I can only stay home and knit, like a poky old woman!”And Jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled like castanets, andher ball bounded across the room.“Poor Jo! It’s too bad, but it can’t be helped. So you musttry to be contented with making your name boyish, and playing brother to usgirls,” said Beth, stroking the rough head with a hand that all the dishwashing and dusting in the world could not make ungentle in its touch.“As for you, Amy,” continued Meg, “you are altogether tooparticular and prim. Your airs are funny now, but you’ll grow up anaffected little goose, if you don’t take care. I like your nice mannersand refined ways of speaking, when you don’t try to be elegant. But yourabsurd words are as bad as Jo’s slang.”“If Jo is a tomboy and Amy a goose, what am I, please?” asked Beth,ready to share the lecture.“You’re a dear, and nothing else,” answered Meg warmly, andno one contradicted her, for the ‘Mouse’ was the pet of the family.As young readers like to know ‘how people look’, we will take thismoment to give them a little sketch of the four sisters, who sat knitting awayin the twilight, while the December snow fell quietly without, and the firecrackled cheerfully within. It was a comfortable room, though the carpet wasfaded and the furniture very plain, for a good picture or two hung on thewalls, books filled the recesses, chrysanthemums and Christmas roses bloomed inthe windows, and a pleasant atmosphere of home peace pervaded it.Margaret, the eldest of the four, was sixteen, and very pretty, being plump andfair, with large eyes, plenty of soft brown hair, a sweet mouth, and whitehands, of which she was rather vain. Fifteen-year-old Jo was very tall, thin,and brown, and reminded one of a colt, for she never seemed to know what to dowith her long limbs, which were very much in her way. She had a decided mouth,a comical nose, and sharp, gray eyes, which appeared to see everything, andwere by turns fierce, funny, or thoughtful. Her long, thick hair was her onebeauty, but it was usually bundled into a net, to be out of her way. Roundshoulders had Jo, big hands and feet, a flyaway look to her clothes, and theuncomfortable appearance of a girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman anddidn’t like it. Elizabeth, or Beth, as everyone called her, was a rosy,smooth-haired, bright-eyed girl of thirteen, with a shy manner, a timid voice,and a peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed. Her father called her‘Little Miss Tranquility’, and the name suited her excellently, forshe seemed to live in a happy world of her own, only venturing out to meet thefew whom she trusted and loved. Amy, though the youngest, was a most importantperson, in her own opinion at least. A regular snow maiden, with blue eyes, andyellow hair curling on her shoulders, pale and slender, and always carryingherself like a young lady mindful of her manners. What the characters of thefour sisters were we will leave to be found out.The clock struck six and, having swept up the hearth, Beth put a pair ofslippers down to warm. Somehow the sight of the old shoes had a good effectupon the girls, for Mother was coming, and everyone brightened to welcome her.Meg stopped lecturing, and lighted the lamp, Amy got out of the easy chairwithout being asked, and Jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold theslippers nearer to the blaze.“They are quite worn out. Marmee must have a new pair.”“I thought I’d get her some with my dollar,” said Beth.“No, I shall!” cried Amy.“I’m the oldest,” began Meg, but Jo cut in with a decided,“I’m the man of the family now Papa is away, and I shall providethe slippers, for he told me to take special care of Mother while he wasgone.”“I’ll tell you what we’ll do,” said Beth,“let’s each get her something for Christmas, and not get anythingfor ourselves.”“That’s like you, dear! What will we get?” exclaimed Jo.Everyone thought soberly for a minute, then Meg announced, as if the idea wassuggested by the sight of her own pretty hands, “I shall give her a nicepair of gloves.”“Army shoes, best to be had,” cried Jo.“Some handkerchiefs, all hemmed,” said Beth.“I’ll get a little bottle of cologne. She likes it, and itwon’t cost much, so I’ll have some left to buy my pencils,”added Amy.“How will we give the things?” asked Meg.“Put them on the table, and bring her in and see her open the bundles.Don’t you remember how we used to do on our birthdays?” answeredJo.“I used to be so frightened when it was my turn to sit in the chair withthe crown on, and see you all come marching round to give the presents, with akiss. I liked the things and the kisses, but it was dreadful to have you sitlooking at me while I opened the bundles,” said Beth, who was toastingher face and the bread for tea at the same time.“Let Marmee think we are getting things for ourselves, and then surpriseher. We must go shopping tomorrow afternoon, Meg. There is so much to do aboutthe play for Christmas night,” said Jo, marching up and down, with herhands behind her back, and her nose in the air.“I don’t mean to act any more after this time. I’m gettingtoo old for such things,” observed Meg, who was as much a child as everabout ‘dressing-up’ frolics.“You won’t stop, I know, as long as you can trail round in a whitegown with your hair down, and wear gold-paper jewelry. You are the best actresswe’ve got, and there’ll be an end of everything if you quit theboards,” said Jo. “We ought to rehearse tonight. Come here, Amy,and do the fainting scene, for you are as stiff as a poker in that.”“I can’t help it. I never saw anyone faint, and I don’tchoose to make myself all black and blue, tumbling flat as you do. If I can godown easily, I’ll drop. If I can’t, I shall fall into a chair andbe graceful. I don’t care if Hugo does come at me with a pistol,”returned Amy, who was not gifted with dramatic power, but was chosen becauseshe was small enough to be borne out shrieking by the villain of the piece.“Do it this way. Clasp your hands so, and stagger across the room, cryingfrantically, ‘Roderigo! Save me! Save me!’” and away went Jo,with a melodramatic scream which was truly thrilling.Amy followed, but she poked her hands out stiffly before her, and jerkedherself along as if she went by machinery, and her “Ow!” was moresuggestive of pins being run into her than of fear and anguish. Jo gave adespairing groan, and Meg laughed outright, while Beth let her bread burn asshe watched the fun with interest. “It’s no use! Do the best youcan when the time comes, and if the audience laughs, don’t blame me. Comeon, Meg.”Then things went smoothly, for Don Pedro defied the world in a speech of twopages without a single break. Hagar, the witch, chanted an awful incantationover her kettleful of simmering toads, with weird effect. Roderigo rent hischains asunder manfully, and Hugo died in agonies of remorse and arsenic, witha wild, “Ha! Ha!”“It’s the best we’ve had yet,” said Meg, as the deadvillain sat up and rubbed his elbows.“I don’t see how you can write and act such splendid things, Jo.You’re a regular Shakespeare!” exclaimed Beth, who firmly believedthat her sisters were gifted with wonderful genius in all things.“Not quite,” replied Jo modestly. “I do think The WitchesCurse, an Operatic Tragedy is rather a nice thing, but I’d like totry Macbeth, if we only had a trapdoor for Banquo. I always wanted to dothe killing part. ‘Is that a dagger that I see before me?” mutteredJo, rolling her eyes and clutching at the air, as she had seen a famoustragedian do.“No, it’s the toasting fork, with Mother’s shoe on it insteadof the bread. Beth’s stage-struck!” cried Meg, and the rehearsalended in a general burst of laughter.“Glad to find you so merry, my girls,” said a cheery voice at thedoor, and actors and audience turned to welcome a tall, motherly lady with a‘can I help you’ look about her which was truly delightful. She wasnot elegantly dressed, but a noble-looking woman, and the girls thought thegray cloak and unfashionable bonnet covered the most splendid mother in theworld.“Well, dearies, how have you got on today? There was so much to do,getting the boxes ready to go tomorrow, that I didn’t come home todinner. Has anyone called, Beth? How is your cold, Meg? Jo, you look tired todeath. Come and kiss me, baby.”While making these maternal inquiries Mrs. March got her wet things off, herwarm slippers on, and sitting down in the easy chair, drew Amy to her lap,preparing to enjoy the happiest hour of her busy day. The girls flew about,trying to make things comfortable, each in her own way. Meg arranged the teatable, Jo brought wood and set chairs, dropping, over-turning, and clatteringeverything she touched. Beth trotted to and fro between parlor kitchen, quietand busy, while Amy gave directions to everyone, as she sat with her handsfolded.As they gathered about the table, Mrs. March said, with a particularly happyface, “I’ve got a treat for you after supper.”A quick, bright smile went round like a streak of sunshine. Beth clapped herhands, regardless of the biscuit she held, and Jo tossed up her napkin, crying,“A letter! A letter! Three cheers for Father!”“Yes, a nice long letter. He is well, and thinks he shall get through thecold season better than we feared. He sends all sorts of loving wishes forChristmas, and an especial message to you girls,” said Mrs. March,patting her pocket as if she had got a treasure there.“Hurry and get done! Don’t stop to quirk your little finger andsimper over your plate, Amy,” cried Jo, choking on her tea and droppingher bread, butter side down, on the carpet in her haste to get at the treat.Beth ate no more, but crept away to sit in her shadowy corner and brood overthe delight to come, till the others were ready.“I think it was so splendid in Father to go as chaplain when he was tooold to be drafted, and not strong enough for a soldier,” said Meg warmly.“Don’t I wish I could go as a drummer, a vivan—what’sits name? Or a nurse, so I could be near him and help him,” exclaimed Jo,with a groan.“It must be very disagreeable to sleep in a tent, and eat all sorts ofbad-tasting things, and drink out of a tin mug,” sighed Amy.“When will he come home, Marmee?” asked Beth, with a little quiverin her voice.“Not for many months, dear, unless he is sick. He will stay and do hiswork faithfully as long as he can, and we won’t ask for him back a minutesooner than he can be spared. Now come and hear the letter.”They all drew to the fire, Mother in the big chair with Beth at her feet, Megand Amy perched on either arm of the chair, and Jo leaning on the back, whereno one would see any sign of emotion if the letter should happen to betouching. Very few letters were written in those hard times that were nottouching, especially those which fathers sent home. In this one little was saidof the hardships endured, the dangers faced, or the homesickness conquered. Itwas a cheerful, hopeful letter, full of lively descriptions of camp life,marches, and military news, and only at the end did the writer’s heartover-flow with fatherly love and longing for the little girls at home.“Give them all of my dear love and a kiss. Tell them I think of them byday, pray for them by night, and find my best comfort in their affection at alltimes. A year seems very long to wait before I see them, but remind them thatwhile we wait we may all work, so that these hard days need not be wasted. Iknow they will remember all I said to them, that they will be loving childrento you, will do their duty faithfully, fight their bosom enemies bravely, andconquer themselves so beautifully that when I come back to them I may be fonderand prouder than ever of my little women.” Everybody sniffed when theycame to that part. Jo wasn’t ashamed of the great tear that dropped offthe end of her nose, and Amy never minded the rumpling of her curls as she hidher face on her mother’s shoulder and sobbed out, “I am a selfishgirl! But I’ll truly try to be better, so he mayn’t be disappointedin me by-and-by.”“We all will,” cried Meg. “I think too much of my looks andhate to work, but won’t any more, if I can help it.”“I’ll try and be what he loves to call me, ‘a littlewoman’ and not be rough and wild, but do my duty here instead of wantingto be somewhere else,” said Jo, thinking that keeping her temper at homewas a much harder task than facing a rebel or two down South.Beth said nothing, but wiped away her tears with the blue army sock and beganto knit with all her might, losing no time in doing the duty that lay nearesther, while she resolved in her quiet little soul to be all that Father hoped tofind her when the year brought round the happy coming home.Mrs. March broke the silence that followed Jo’s words, by saying in hercheery voice, “Do you remember how you used to play Pilgrims Progresswhen you were little things? Nothing delighted you more than to have me tie mypiece bags on your backs for burdens, give you hats and sticks and rolls ofpaper, and let you travel through the house from the cellar, which was the Cityof Destruction, up, up, to the housetop, where you had all the lovely thingsyou could collect to make a Celestial City.”“What fun it was, especially going by the lions, fighting Apollyon, andpassing through the valley where the hob-goblins were,” said Jo.“I liked the place where the bundles fell off and tumbleddownstairs,” said Meg.“I don’t remember much about it, except that I was afraid of thecellar and the dark entry, and always liked the cake and milk we had up at thetop. If I wasn’t too old for such things, I’d rather like to playit over again,” said Amy, who began to talk of renouncing childish thingsat the mature age of twelve.“We never are too old for this, my dear, because it is a play we areplaying all the time in one way or another. Our burdens are here, our road isbefore us, and the longing for goodness and happiness is the guide that leadsus through many troubles and mistakes to the peace which is a true CelestialCity. Now, my little pilgrims, suppose you begin again, not in play, but inearnest, and see how far on you can get before Father comes home.”“Really, Mother? Where are our bundles?” asked Amy, who was a veryliteral young lady.“Each of you told what your burden was just now, except Beth. I ratherthink she hasn’t got any,” said her mother.“Yes, I have. Mine is dishes and dusters, and envying girls with nicepianos, and being afraid of people.”Beth’s bundle was such a funny one that everybody wanted to laugh, butnobody did, for it would have hurt her feelings very much.“Let us do it,” said Meg thoughtfully. “It is only anothername for trying to be good, and the story may help us, for though we do want tobe good, it’s hard work and we forget, and don’t do ourbest.”“We were in the Slough of Despond tonight, and Mother came and pulled usout as Help did in the book. We ought to have our roll of directions, likeChristian. What shall we do about that?” asked Jo, delighted with thefancy which lent a little romance to the very dull task of doing her duty.“Look under your pillows Christmas morning, and you will find yourguidebook,” replied Mrs. March.They talked over the new plan while old Hannah cleared the table, then out camethe four little work baskets, and the needles flew as the girls made sheets forAunt March. It was uninteresting sewing, but tonight no one grumbled. Theyadopted Jo’s plan of dividing the long seams into four parts, and callingthe quarters Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and in that way got oncapitally, especially when they talked about the different countries as theystitched their way through them.At nine they stopped work, and sang, as usual, before they went to bed. No onebut Beth could get much music out of the old piano, but she had a way of softlytouching the yellow keys and making a pleasant accompaniment to the simplesongs they sang. Meg had a voice like a flute, and she and her mother led thelittle choir. Amy chirped like a cricket, and Jo wandered through the airs ather own sweet will, always coming out at the wrong place with a croak or aquaver that spoiled the most pensive tune. They had always done this from thetime they could lisp...Crinkle, crinkle, ’ittle ’tar,and it had become a household custom, for the mother was a born singer. Thefirst sound in the morning was her voice as she went about the house singinglike a lark, and the last sound at night was the same cheery sound, for thegirls never grew too old for that familiar lullaby.CHAPTER TWOA MERRY CHRISTMASJo was the first to wake in the gray dawn of Christmas morning. No stockingshung at the fireplace, and for a moment she felt as much disappointed as shedid long ago, when her little sock fell down because it was crammed so full ofgoodies. Then she remembered her mother’s promise and, slipping her handunder her pillow, drew out a little crimson-covered book. She knew it verywell, for it was that beautiful old story of the best life ever lived, and Jofelt that it was a true guidebook for any pilgrim going on a long journey. Shewoke Meg with a “Merry Christmas,” and bade her see what was underher pillow. A green-covered book appeared, with the same picture inside, and afew words written by their mother, which made their one present very preciousin their eyes. Presently Beth and Amy woke to rummage and find their littlebooks also, one dove-colored, the other blue, and all sat looking at andtalking about them, while the east grew rosy with the coming day.In spite of her small vanities, Margaret had a sweet and pious nature, whichunconsciously influenced her sisters, especially Jo, who loved her verytenderly, and obeyed her because her advice was so gently given.“Girls,” said Meg seriously, looking from the tumbled head besideher to the two little night-capped ones in the room beyond, “Mother wantsus to read and love and mind these books, and we must begin at once. We used tobe faithful about it, but since Father went away and all this war troubleunsettled us, we have neglected many things. You can do as you please, but Ishall keep my book on the table here and read a little every morning as soon asI wake, for I know it will do me good and help me through the day.”Then she opened her new book and began to read. Jo put her arm round her and,leaning cheek to cheek, read also, with the quiet expression so seldom seen onher restless face.“How good Meg is! Come, Amy, let’s do as they do. I’ll helpyou with the hard words, and they’ll explain things if we don’tunderstand,” whispered Beth, very much impressed by the pretty books andher sisters’ example.“I’m glad mine is blue,” said Amy. and then the rooms werevery still while the pages were softly turned, and the winter sunshine crept into touch the bright heads and serious faces with a Christmas greeting.“Where is Mother?” asked Meg, as she and Jo ran down to thank herfor their gifts, half an hour later.“Goodness only knows. Some poor creeter came a-beggin’, and your mawent straight off to see what was needed. There never was such a woman forgivin’ away vittles and drink, clothes and firin’,” repliedHannah, who had lived with the family since Meg was born, and was considered bythem all more as a friend than a servant.“She will be back soon, I think, so fry your cakes, and have everythingready,” said Meg, looking over the presents which were collected in abasket and kept under the sofa, ready to be produced at the proper time.“Why, where is Amy’s bottle of cologne?” she added, as thelittle flask did not appear.“She took it out a minute ago, and went off with it to put a ribbon onit, or some such notion,” replied Jo, dancing about the room to take thefirst stiffness off the new army slippers.“How nice my handkerchiefs look, don’t they? Hannah washed andironed them for me, and I marked them all myself,” said Beth, lookingproudly at the somewhat uneven letters which had cost her such labor.“Bless the child! She’s gone and put ‘Mother’ on theminstead of ‘M. March’. How funny!” cried Jo, taking one up.“Isn’t that right? I thought it was better to do it so, becauseMeg’s initials are M.M., and I don’t want anyone to use these butMarmee,” said Beth, looking troubled.“It’s all right, dear, and a very pretty idea, quite sensible too,for no one can ever mistake now. It will please her very much, I know,”said Meg, with a frown for Jo and a smile for Beth.“There’s Mother. Hide the basket, quick!” cried Jo, as a doorslammed and steps sounded in the hall.Amy came in hastily, and looked rather abashed when she saw her sisters allwaiting for her.“Where have you been, and what are you hiding behind you?” askedMeg, surprised to see, by her hood and cloak, that lazy Amy had been out soearly.“Don’t laugh at me, Jo! I didn’t mean anyone should know tillthe time came. I only meant to change the little bottle for a big one, and Igave all my money to get it, and I’m truly trying not to be selfish anymore.”As she spoke, Amy showed the handsome flask which replaced the cheap one, andlooked so earnest and humble in her little effort to forget herself that Meghugged her on the spot, and Jo pronounced her ‘a trump’, while Bethran to the window, and picked her finest rose to ornament the stately bottle.“You see I felt ashamed of my present, after reading and talking aboutbeing good this morning, so I ran round the corner and changed it the minute Iwas up, and I’m so glad, for mine is the handsomest now.”Another bang of the street door sent the basket under the sofa, and the girlsto the table, eager for breakfast.“Merry Christmas, Marmee! Many of them! Thank you for our books. We readsome, and mean to every day,” they all cried in chorus.“Merry Christmas, little daughters! I’m glad you began at once, andhope you will keep on. But I want to say one word before we sit down. Not faraway from here lies a poor woman with a little newborn baby. Six children arehuddled into one bed to keep from freezing, for they have no fire. There isnothing to eat over there, and the oldest boy came to tell me they weresuffering hunger and cold. My girls, will you give them your breakfast as aChristmas present?”They were all unusually hungry, having waited nearly an hour, and for a minuteno one spoke, only a minute, for Jo exclaimed impetuously, “I’m soglad you came before we began!”“May I go and help carry the things to the poor little children?”asked Beth eagerly.“I shall take the cream and the muffings,” added Amy, heroicallygiving up the article she most liked.Meg was already covering the buckwheats, and piling the bread into one bigplate.“I thought you’d do it,” said Mrs. March, smiling as ifsatisfied. “You shall all go and help me, and when we come back we willhave bread and milk for breakfast, and make it up at dinnertime.”They were soon ready, and the procession set out. Fortunately it was early, andthey went through back streets, so few people saw them, and no one laughed atthe queer party.A poor, bare, miserable room it was, with broken windows, no fire, raggedbedclothes, a sick mother, wailing baby, and a group of pale, hungry childrencuddled under one old quilt, trying to keep warm.How the big eyes stared and the blue lips smiled as the girls went in.“Ach, mein Gott! It is good angels come to us!” said the poorwoman, crying for joy.“Funny angels in hoods and mittens,” said Jo, and set them tolaughing.In a few minutes it really did seem as if kind spirits had been at work there.Hannah, who had carried wood, made a fire, and stopped up the broken panes withold hats and her own cloak. Mrs. March gave the mother tea and gruel, andcomforted her with promises of help, while she dressed the little baby astenderly as if it had been her own. The girls meantime spread the table, setthe children round the fire, and fed them like so many hungry birds, laughing,talking, and trying to understand the funny broken English.“Das ist gut!” “Die Engel-kinder!” cried the poorthings as they ate and warmed their purple hands at the comfortable blaze. Thegirls had never been called angel children before, and thought it veryagreeable, especially Jo, who had been considered a ‘Sancho’ eversince she was born. That was a very happy breakfast, though they didn’tget any of it. And when they went away, leaving comfort behind, I think therewere not in all the city four merrier people than the hungry little girls whogave away their breakfasts and contented themselves with bread and milk onChristmas morning.“That’s loving our neighbor better than ourselves, and I likeit,” said Meg, as they set out their presents while their mother wasupstairs collecting clothes for the poor Hummels.Not a very splendid show, but there was a great deal of love done up in the fewlittle bundles, and the tall vase of red roses, white chrysanthemums, andtrailing vines, which stood in the middle, gave quite an elegant air to thetable.“She’s coming! Strike up, Beth! Open the door, Amy! Three cheersfor Marmee!” cried Jo, prancing about while Meg went to conduct Mother tothe seat of honor.Beth played her gayest march, Amy threw open the door, and Meg enacted escortwith great dignity. Mrs. March was both surprised and touched, and smiled withher eyes full as she examined her presents and read the little notes whichaccompanied them. The slippers went on at once, a new handkerchief was slippedinto her pocket, well scented with Amy’s cologne, the rose was fastenedin her bosom, and the nice gloves were pronounced a perfect fit.There was a good deal of laughing and kissing and explaining, in the simple,loving fashion which makes these home festivals so pleasant at the time, sosweet to remember long afterward, and then all fell to work.The morning charities and ceremonies took so much time that the rest of the daywas devoted to preparations for the evening festivities. Being still too youngto go often to the theater, and not rich enough to afford any great outlay forprivate performances, the girls put their wits to work, and necessity being themother of invention, made whatever they needed. Very clever were some of theirproductions, pasteboard guitars, antique lamps made of old-fashioned butterboats covered with silver paper, gorgeous robes of old cotton, glittering withtin spangles from a pickle factory, and armor covered with the same usefuldiamond shaped bits left in sheets when the lids of preserve pots were cut out.The big chamber was the scene of many innocent revels.No gentleman were admitted, so Jo played male parts to her heart’scontent and took immense satisfaction in a pair of russet leather boots givenher by a friend, who knew a lady who knew an actor. These boots, an old foil,and a slashed doublet once used by an artist for some picture, were Jo’schief treasures and appeared on all occasions. The smallness of the companymade it necessary for the two principal actors to take several parts apiece,and they certainly deserved some credit for the hard work they did in learningthree or four different parts, whisking in and out of various costumes, andmanaging the stage besides. It was excellent drill for their memories, aharmless amusement, and employed many hours which otherwise would have beenidle, lonely, or spent in less profitable society.On Christmas night, a dozen girls piled onto the bed which was the dresscircle, and sat before the blue and yellow chintz curtains in a most flatteringstate of expectancy. There was a good deal of rustling and whispering behindthe curtain, a trifle of lamp smoke, and an occasional giggle from Amy, who wasapt to get hysterical in the excitement of the moment. Presently a bellsounded, the curtains flew apart, and the operatic tragedy began.“A gloomy wood,” according to the one playbill, was represented bya few shrubs in pots, green baize on the floor, and a cave in the distance.This cave was made with a clothes horse for a roof, bureaus for walls, and init was a small furnace in full blast, with a black pot on it and an old witchbending over it. The stage was dark and the glow of the furnace had a fineeffect, especially as real steam issued from the kettle when the witch took offthe cover. A moment was allowed for the first thrill to subside, then Hugo, thevillain, stalked in with a clanking sword at his side, a slouching hat, blackbeard, mysterious cloak, and the boots. After pacing to and fro in muchagitation, he struck his forehead, and burst out in a wild strain, singing ofhis hatred for Roderigo, his love for Zara, and his pleasing resolution to killthe one and win the other. The gruff tones of Hugo’s voice, with anoccasional shout when his feelings overcame him, were very impressive, and theaudience applauded the moment he paused for breath. Bowing with the air of oneaccustomed to public praise, he stole to the cavern and ordered Hagar to comeforth with a commanding, “What ho, minion! I need thee!”Out came Meg, with gray horsehair hanging about her face, a red and black robe,a staff, and cabalistic signs upon her cloak. Hugo demanded a potion to makeZara adore him, and one to destroy Roderigo. Hagar, in a fine dramatic melody,promised both, and proceeded to call up the spirit who would bring the lovephilter.Hither, hither, from thy home,Airy sprite, I bid thee come!Born of roses, fed on dew,Charms and potions canst thou brew?Bring me here, with elfin speed,The fragrant philter which I need.Make it sweet and swift and strong,Spirit, answer now my song!A soft strain of music sounded, and then at the back of the cave appeared alittle figure in cloudy white, with glittering wings, golden hair, and agarland of roses on its head. Waving a wand, it sang...Hither I come,From my airy home,Afar in the silver moon.Take the magic spell,And use it well,Or its power will vanish soon!And dropping a small, gilded bottle at the witch’s feet, the spiritvanished. Another chant from Hagar produced another apparition, not a lovelyone, for with a bang an ugly black imp appeared and, having croaked a reply,tossed a dark bottle at Hugo and disappeared with a mocking laugh. Havingwarbled his thanks and put the potions in his boots, Hugo departed, and Hagarinformed the audience that as he had killed a few of her friends in times past,she had cursed him, and intends to thwart his plans, and be revenged on him.Then the curtain fell, and the audience reposed and ate candy while discussingthe merits of the play.A good deal of hammering went on before the curtain rose again, but when itbecame evident what a masterpiece of stage carpentery had been got up, no onemurmured at the delay. It was truly superb. A tower rose to the ceiling,halfway up appeared a window with a lamp burning in it, and behind the whitecurtain appeared Zara in a lovely blue and silver dress, waiting for Roderigo.He came in gorgeous array, with plumed cap, red cloak, chestnut lovelocks, aguitar, and the boots, of course. Kneeling at the foot of the tower, he sang aserenade in melting tones. Zara replied and, after a musical dialogue,consented to fly. Then came the grand effect of the play. Roderigo produced arope ladder, with five steps to it, threw up one end, and invited Zara todescend. Timidly she crept from her lattice, put her hand on Roderigo’sshoulder, and was about to leap gracefully down when “Alas! Alas forZara!” she forgot her train. It caught in the window, the tower tottered,leaned forward, fell with a crash, and buried the unhappy lovers in the ruins.A universal shriek arose as the russet boots waved wildly from the wreck and agolden head emerged, exclaiming, “I told you so! I told you so!”With wonderful presence of mind, Don Pedro, the cruel sire, rushed in, draggedout his daughter, with a hasty aside...“Don’t laugh! Act as if it was all right!” and, orderingRoderigo up, banished him from the kingdom with wrath and scorn. Thoughdecidedly shaken by the fall from the tower upon him, Roderigo defied the oldgentleman and refused to stir. This dauntless example fired Zara. She alsodefied her sire, and he ordered them both to the deepest dungeons of thecastle. A stout little retainer came in with chains and led them away, lookingvery much frightened and evidently forgetting the speech he ought to have made.Act third was the castle hall, and here Hagar appeared, having come to free thelovers and finish Hugo. She hears him coming and hides, sees him put thepotions into two cups of wine and bid the timid little servant, “Bearthem to the captives in their cells, and tell them I shall come anon.”The servant takes Hugo aside to tell him something, and Hagar changes the cupsfor two others which are harmless. Ferdinando, the ‘minion’,carries them away, and Hagar puts back the cup which holds the poison meant forRoderigo. Hugo, getting thirsty after a long warble, drinks it, loses his wits,and after a good deal of clutching and stamping, falls flat and dies, whileHagar informs him what she has done in a song of exquisite power and melody.This was a truly thrilling scene, though some persons might have thought thatthe sudden tumbling down of a quantity of long red hair rather marred theeffect of the villain’s death. He was called before the curtain, and withgreat propriety appeared, leading Hagar, whose singing was considered morewonderful than all the rest of the performance put together.Act fourth displayed the despairing Roderigo on the point of stabbing himselfbecause he has been told that Zara has deserted him. Just as the dagger is athis heart, a lovely song is sung under his window, informing him that Zara istrue but in danger, and he can save her if he will. A key is thrown in, whichunlocks the door, and in a spasm of rapture he tears off his chains and rushesaway to find and rescue his lady love.Act fifth opened with a stormy scene between Zara and Don Pedro. He wishes herto go into a convent, but she won’t hear of it, and after a touchingappeal, is about to faint when Roderigo dashes in and demands her hand. DonPedro refuses, because he is not rich. They shout and gesticulate tremendouslybut cannot agree, and Rodrigo is about to bear away the exhausted Zara, whenthe timid servant enters with a letter and a bag from Hagar, who hasmysteriously disappeared. The latter informs the party that she bequeathsuntold wealth to the young pair and an awful doom to Don Pedro, if hedoesn’t make them happy. The bag is opened, and several quarts of tinmoney shower down upon the stage till it is quite glorified with the glitter.This entirely softens the stern sire. He consents without a murmur, all join ina joyful chorus, and the curtain falls upon the lovers kneeling to receive DonPedro’s blessing in attitudes of the most romantic grace.Tumultuous applause followed but received an unexpected check, for the cot bed,on which the dress circle was built, suddenly shut up and extinguished theenthusiastic audience. Roderigo and Don Pedro flew to the rescue, and all weretaken out unhurt, though many were speechless with laughter. The excitement hadhardly subsided when Hannah appeared, with “Mrs. March’scompliments, and would the ladies walk down to supper.”This was a surprise even to the actors, and when they saw the table, theylooked at one another in rapturous amazement. It was like Marmee to get up alittle treat for them, but anything so fine as this was unheard of since thedeparted days of plenty. There was ice cream, actually two dishes of it, pinkand white, and cake and fruit and distracting French bonbons and, in the middleof the table, four great bouquets of hot house flowers.It quite took their breath away, and they stared first at the table and then attheir mother, who looked as if she enjoyed it immensely.“Is it fairies?” asked Amy.“Santa Claus,” said Beth.“Mother did it.” And Meg smiled her sweetest, in spite of her graybeard and white eyebrows.“Aunt March had a good fit and sent the supper,” cried Jo, with asudden inspiration.“All wrong. Old Mr. Laurence sent it,” replied Mrs. March.“The Laurence boy’s grandfather! What in the world put such a thinginto his head? We don’t know him!” exclaimed Meg.“Hannah told one of his servants about your breakfast party. He is an oddold gentleman, but that pleased him. He knew my father years ago, and he sentme a polite note this afternoon, saying he hoped I would allow him to expresshis friendly feeling toward my children by sending them a few trifles in honorof the day. I could not refuse, and so you have a little feast at night to makeup for the bread-and-milk breakfast.”“That boy put it into his head, I know he did! He’s a capitalfellow, and I wish we could get acquainted. He looks as if he’d like toknow us but he’s bashful, and Meg is so prim she won’t let me speakto him when we pass,” said Jo, as the plates went round, and the icebegan to melt out of sight, with ohs and ahs of satisfaction.“You mean the people who live in the big house next door, don’tyou?” asked one of the girls. “My mother knows old Mr. Laurence,but says he’s very proud and doesn’t like to mix with hisneighbors. He keeps his grandson shut up, when he isn’t riding or walkingwith his tutor, and makes him study very hard. We invited him to our party, buthe didn’t come. Mother says he’s very nice, though he never speaksto us girls.”“Our cat ran away once, and he brought her back, and we talked over thefence, and were getting on capitally, all about cricket, and so on, when he sawMeg coming, and walked off. I mean to know him some day, for he needs fun,I’m sure he does,” said Jo decidedly.“I like his manners, and he looks like a little gentleman, so I’veno objection to your knowing him, if a proper opportunity comes. He brought theflowers himself, and I should have asked him in, if I had been sure what wasgoing on upstairs. He looked so wistful as he went away, hearing the frolic andevidently having none of his own.”“It’s a mercy you didn’t, Mother!” laughed Jo, lookingat her boots. “But we’ll have another play sometime that he cansee. Perhaps he’ll help act. Wouldn’t that be jolly?”“I never had such a fine bouquet before! How pretty it is!” And Megexamined her flowers with great interest.“They are lovely. But Beth’s roses are sweeter to me,” saidMrs. March, smelling the half-dead posy in her belt.Beth nestled up to her, and whispered softly, “I wish I could send mybunch to Father. I’m afraid he isn’t having such a merry Christmasas we are.”CHAPTER THREETHE LAURENCE BOY“Jo! Jo! Where are you?” cried Meg at the foot of the garretstairs.“Here!” answered a husky voice from above, and, running up, Megfound her sister eating apples and crying over the Heir of Redclyffe, wrappedup in a comforter on an old three-legged sofa by the sunny window. This wasJo’s favorite refuge, and here she loved to retire with half a dozenrussets and a nice book, to enjoy the quiet and the society of a pet rat wholived near by and didn’t mind her a particle. As Meg appeared, Scrabblewhisked into his hole. Jo shook the tears off her cheeks and waited to hear thenews.“Such fun! Only see! A regular note of invitation from Mrs. Gardiner fortomorrow night!” cried Meg, waving the precious paper and then proceedingto read it with girlish delight.“‘Mrs. Gardiner would be happy to see Miss March and Miss Josephineat a little dance on New Year’s Eve.’ Marmee is willing we shouldgo, now what shall we wear?”“What’s the use of asking that, when you know we shall wear ourpoplins, because we haven’t got anything else?” answered Jo withher mouth full.“If I only had a silk!” sighed Meg. “Mother says I may whenI’m eighteen perhaps, but two years is an everlasting time towait.”“I’m sure our pops look like silk, and they are nice enough for us.Yours is as good as new, but I forgot the burn and the tear in mine. Whatevershall I do? The burn shows badly, and I can’t take any out.”“You must sit still all you can and keep your back out of sight. Thefront is all right. I shall have a new ribbon for my hair, and Marmee will lendme her little pearl pin, and my new slippers are lovely, and my gloves will do,though they aren’t as nice as I’d like.”“Mine are spoiled with lemonade, and I can’t get any new ones, so Ishall have to go without,” said Jo, who never troubled herself much aboutdress.“You must have gloves, or I won’t go,” cried Meg decidedly.“Gloves are more important than anything else. You can’t dancewithout them, and if you don’t I should be so mortified.”“Then I’ll stay still. I don’t care much for company dancing.It’s no fun to go sailing round. I like to fly about and cutcapers.”“You can’t ask Mother for new ones, they are so expensive, and youare so careless. She said when you spoiled the others that she shouldn’tget you any more this winter. Can’t you make them do?”“I can hold them crumpled up in my hand, so no one will know how stainedthey are. That’s all I can do. No! I’ll tell you how we can manage,each wear one good one and carry a bad one. Don’t you see?”“Your hands are bigger than mine, and you will stretch my glovedreadfully,” began Meg, whose gloves were a tender point with her.“Then I’ll go without. I don’t care what people say!”cried Jo, taking up her book.“You may have it, you may! Only don’t stain it, and do behavenicely. Don’t put your hands behind you, or stare, or say‘Christopher Columbus!’ will you?”“Don’t worry about me. I’ll be as prim as I can and not getinto any scrapes, if I can help it. Now go and answer your note, and let mefinish this splendid story.”So Meg went away to ‘accept with thanks’, look over her dress, andsing blithely as she did up her one real lace frill, while Jo finished herstory, her four apples, and had a game of romps with Scrabble.On New Year’s Eve the parlor was deserted, for the two younger girlsplayed dressing maids and the two elder were absorbed in the all-importantbusiness of ‘getting ready for the party’. Simple as the toiletswere, there was a great deal of running up and down, laughing and talking, andat one time a strong smell of burned hair pervaded the house. Meg wanted a fewcurls about her face, and Jo undertook to pinch the papered locks with a pairof hot tongs.“Ought they to smoke like that?” asked Beth from her perch on thebed.“It’s the dampness drying,” replied Jo.“What a queer smell! It’s like burned feathers,” observedAmy, smoothing her own pretty curls with a superior air.“There, now I’ll take off the papers and you’ll see a cloudof little ringlets,” said Jo, putting down the tongs.She did take off the papers, but no cloud of ringlets appeared, for the haircame with the papers, and the horrified hairdresser laid a row of littlescorched bundles on the bureau before her victim.“Oh, oh, oh! What have you done? I’m spoiled! I can’t go! Myhair, oh, my hair!” wailed Meg, looking with despair at the unevenfrizzle on her forehead.“Just my luck! You shouldn’t have asked me to do it. I always spoileverything. I’m so sorry, but the tongs were too hot, and so I’vemade a mess,” groaned poor Jo, regarding the little black pancakes withtears of regret.“It isn’t spoiled. Just frizzle it, and tie your ribbon so the endscome on your forehead a bit, and it will look like the last fashion. I’veseen many girls do it so,” said Amy consolingly.“Serves me right for trying to be fine. I wish I’d let my hairalone,” cried Meg petulantly.“So do I, it was so smooth and pretty. But it will soon grow outagain,” said Beth, coming to kiss and comfort the shorn sheep.After various lesser mishaps, Meg was finished at last, and by the unitedexertions of the entire family Jo’s hair was got up and her dress on.They looked very well in their simple suits, Meg’s in silvery drab, witha blue velvet snood, lace frills, and the pearl pin. Jo in maroon, with astiff, gentlemanly linen collar, and a white chrysanthemum or two for her onlyornament. Each put on one nice light glove, and carried one soiled one, and allpronounced the effect “quite easy and fine”. Meg’shigh-heeled slippers were very tight and hurt her, though she would not own it,and Jo’s nineteen hairpins all seemed stuck straight into her head, whichwas not exactly comfortable, but, dear me, let us be elegant or die.“Have a good time, dearies!” said Mrs. March, as the sisters wentdaintily down the walk. “Don’t eat much supper, and come away ateleven when I send Hannah for you.” As the gate clashed behind them, avoice cried from a window...“Girls, girls! Have you you both got nice pocket handkerchiefs?”“Yes, yes, spandy nice, and Meg has cologne on hers,” cried Jo,adding with a laugh as they went on, “I do believe Marmee would ask thatif we were all running away from an earthquake.”“It is one of her aristocratic tastes, and quite proper, for a real ladyis always known by neat boots, gloves, and handkerchief,” replied Meg,who had a good many little ‘aristocratic tastes’ of her own.“Now don’t forget to keep the bad breadth out of sight, Jo. Is mysash right? And does my hair look very bad?” said Meg, as she turned fromthe glass in Mrs. Gardiner’s dressing room after a prolonged prink.“I know I shall forget. If you see me doing anything wrong, just remindme by a wink, will you?” returned Jo, giving her collar a twitch and herhead a hasty brush.“No, winking isn’t ladylike. I’ll lift my eyebrows if anything is wrong, and nod if you are all right. Now hold your shoulder straight,and take short steps, and don’t shake hands if you are introduced toanyone. It isn’t the thing.”“How do you learn all the proper ways? I never can. Isn’t thatmusic gay?”Down they went, feeling a trifle timid, for they seldom went to parties, andinformal as this little gathering was, it was an event to them. Mrs. Gardiner,a stately old lady, greeted them kindly and handed them over to the eldest ofher six daughters. Meg knew Sallie and was at her ease very soon, but Jo, whodidn’t care much for girls or girlish gossip, stood about, with her backcarefully against the wall, and felt as much out of place as a colt in a flowergarden. Half a dozen jovial lads were talking about skates in another part ofthe room, and she longed to go and join them, for skating was one of the joysof her life. She telegraphed her wish to Meg, but the eyebrows went up soalarmingly that she dared not stir. No one came to talk to her, and one by onethe group dwindled away till she was left alone. She could not roam about andamuse herself, for the burned breadth would show, so she stared at peoplerather forlornly till the dancing began. Meg was asked at once, and the tightslippers tripped about so briskly that none would have guessed the pain theirwearer suffered smilingly. Jo saw a big red headed youth approaching hercorner, and fearing he meant to engage her, she slipped into a curtainedrecess, intending to peep and enjoy herself in peace. Unfortunately, anotherbashful person had chosen the same refuge, for, as the curtain fell behind her,she found herself face to face with the ‘Laurence boy’.“Dear me, I didn’t know anyone was here!” stammered Jo,preparing to back out as speedily as she had bounced in.But the boy laughed and said pleasantly, though he looked a little startled,“Don’t mind me, stay if you like.”“Shan’t I disturb you?”“Not a bit. I only came here because I don’t know many people andfelt rather strange at first, you know.”“So did I. Don’t go away, please, unless you’d rather.”The boy sat down again and looked at his pumps, till Jo said, trying to bepolite and easy, “I think I’ve had the pleasure of seeing youbefore. You live near us, don’t you?”“Next door.” And he looked up and laughed outright, for Jo’sprim manner was rather funny when he remembered how they had chatted aboutcricket when he brought the cat home.That put Jo at her ease and she laughed too, as she said, in her heartiest way,“We did have such a good time over your nice Christmas present.”“Grandpa sent it.”“But you put it into his head, didn’t you, now?”“How is your cat, Miss March?” asked the boy, trying to look soberwhile his black eyes shone with fun.“Nicely, thank you, Mr. Laurence. But I am not Miss March, I’m onlyJo,” returned the young lady.“I’m not Mr. Laurence, I’m only Laurie.”“Laurie Laurence, what an odd name.”“My first name is Theodore, but I don’t like it, for the fellowscalled me Dora, so I made them say Laurie instead.”“I hate my name, too, so sentimental! I wish every one would say Joinstead of Josephine. How did you make the boys stop calling you Dora?”“I thrashed ’em.”“I can’t thrash Aunt March, so I suppose I shall have to bearit.” And Jo resigned herself with a sigh.“Don’t you like to dance, Miss Jo?” asked Laurie, looking asif he thought the name suited her.“I like it well enough if there is plenty of room, and everyone islively. In a place like this I’m sure to upset something, tread onpeople’s toes, or do something dreadful, so I keep out of mischief andlet Meg sail about. Don’t you dance?”“Sometimes. You see I’ve been abroad a good many years, andhaven’t been into company enough yet to know how you do thingshere.”“Abroad!” cried Jo. “Oh, tell me about it! I love dearly tohear people describe their travels.”Laurie didn’t seem to know where to begin, but Jo’s eager questionssoon set him going, and he told her how he had been at school in Vevay, wherethe boys never wore hats and had a fleet of boats on the lake, and for holidayfun went on walking trips about Switzerland with their teachers.“Don’t I wish I’d been there!” cried Jo. “Did yougo to Paris?”“We spent last winter there.”“Can you talk French?”“We were not allowed to speak anything else at Vevay.”“Do say some! I can read it, but can’t pronounce.”“Quel nom a cette jeune demoiselle en les pantoufles jolis?”“How nicely you do it! Let me see ... you said, ‘Who is the younglady in the pretty slippers’, didn’t you?”“Oui, mademoiselle.”“It’s my sister Margaret, and you knew it was! Do you think she ispretty?”“Yes, she makes me think of the German girls, she looks so fresh andquiet, and dances like a lady.”Jo quite glowed with pleasure at this boyish praise of her sister, and storedit up to repeat to Meg. Both peeped and criticized and chatted till they feltlike old acquaintances. Laurie’s bashfulness soon wore off, forJo’s gentlemanly demeanor amused and set him at his ease, and Jo was hermerry self again, because her dress was forgotten and nobody lifted theireyebrows at her. She liked the ‘Laurence boy’ better than ever andtook several good looks at him, so that she might describe him to the girls,for they had no brothers, very few male cousins, and boys were almost unknowncreatures to them.“Curly black hair, brown skin, big black eyes, handsome nose, fine teeth,small hands and feet, taller than I am, very polite, for a boy, and altogetherjolly. Wonder how old he is?”It was on the tip of Jo’s tongue to ask, but she checked herself in timeand, with unusual tact, tried to find out in a round-about way.“I suppose you are going to college soon? I see you pegging away at yourbooks, no, I mean studying hard.” And Jo blushed at the dreadful‘pegging’ which had escaped her.Laurie smiled but didn’t seem shocked, and answered with a shrug.“Not for a year or two. I won’t go before seventeen, anyway.”“Aren’t you but fifteen?” asked Jo, looking at the tall lad,whom she had imagined seventeen already.“Sixteen, next month.”“How I wish I was going to college! You don’t look as if you likedit.”“I hate it! Nothing but grinding or skylarking. And I don’t likethe way fellows do either, in this country.”“What do you like?”“To live in Italy, and to enjoy myself in my own way.”Jo wanted very much to ask what his own way was, but his black brows lookedrather threatening as he knit them, so she changed the subject by saying, asher foot kept time, “That’s a splendid polka! Why don’t yougo and try it?”“If you will come too,” he answered, with a gallant little bow.“I can’t, for I told Meg I wouldn’t, because...” ThereJo stopped, and looked undecided whether to tell or to laugh.“Because, what?”“You won’t tell?”“Never!”“Well, I have a bad trick of standing before the fire, and so I burn myfrocks, and I scorched this one, and though it’s nicely mended, it shows,and Meg told me to keep still so no one would see it. You may laugh, if youwant to. It is funny, I know.”But Laurie didn’t laugh. He only looked down a minute, and the expressionof his face puzzled Jo when he said very gently, “Never mind that.I’ll tell you how we can manage. There’s a long hall out there, andwe can dance grandly, and no one will see us. Please come.”Jo thanked him and gladly went, wishing she had two neat gloves when she sawthe nice, pearl-colored ones her partner wore. The hall was empty, and they hada grand polka, for Laurie danced well, and taught her the German step, whichdelighted Jo, being full of swing and spring. When the music stopped, they satdown on the stairs to get their breath, and Laurie was in the midst of anaccount of a students’ festival at Heidelberg when Meg appeared in searchof her sister. She beckoned, and Jo reluctantly followed her into a side room,where she found her on a sofa, holding her foot, and looking pale.“I’ve sprained my ankle. That stupid high heel turned and gave me asad wrench. It aches so, I can hardly stand, and I don’t know howI’m ever going to get home,” she said, rocking to and fro in pain.“I knew you’d hurt your feet with those silly shoes. I’msorry. But I don’t see what you can do, except get a carriage, or stayhere all night,” answered Jo, softly rubbing the poor ankle as she spoke.“I can’t have a carriage without its costing ever so much. I daresay I can’t get one at all, for most people come in their own, andit’s a long way to the stable, and no one to send.”“I’ll go.”“No, indeed! It’s past nine, and dark as Egypt. I can’t stophere, for the house is full. Sallie has some girls staying with her. I’llrest till Hannah comes, and then do the best I can.”“I’ll ask Laurie. He will go,” said Jo, looking relieved asthe idea occurred to her.“Mercy, no! Don’t ask or tell anyone. Get me my rubbers, and putthese slippers with our things. I can’t dance anymore, but as soon assupper is over, watch for Hannah and tell me the minute she comes.”“They are going out to supper now. I’ll stay with you. I’drather.”“No, dear, run along, and bring me some coffee. I’m so tired Ican’t stir.”So Meg reclined, with rubbers well hidden, and Jo went blundering away to thedining room, which she found after going into a china closet, and opening thedoor of a room where old Mr. Gardiner was taking a little private refreshment.Making a dart at the table, she secured the coffee, which she immediatelyspilled, thereby making the front of her dress as bad as the back.“Oh, dear, what a blunderbuss I am!” exclaimed Jo, finishingMeg’s glove by scrubbing her gown with it.“Can I help you?” said a friendly voice. And there was Laurie, witha full cup in one hand and a plate of ice in the other.“I was trying to get something for Meg, who is very tired, and someoneshook me, and here I am in a nice state,” answered Jo, glancing dismallyfrom the stained skirt to the coffee-colored glove.“Too bad! I was looking for someone to give this to. May I take it toyour sister?”“Oh, thank you! I’ll show you where she is. I don’t offer totake it myself, for I should only get into another scrape if I did.”Jo led the way, and as if used to waiting on ladies, Laurie drew up a littletable, brought a second installment of coffee and ice for Jo, and was soobliging that even particular Meg pronounced him a ‘nice boy’. Theyhad a merry time over the bonbons and mottoes, and were in the midst of a quietgame of Buzz, with two or three other young people who had strayed in,when Hannah appeared. Meg forgot her foot and rose so quickly that she wasforced to catch hold of Jo, with an exclamation of pain.“Hush! Don’t say anything,” she whispered, adding aloud,“It’s nothing. I turned my foot a little, that’s all,”and limped upstairs to put her things on.Hannah scolded, Meg cried, and Jo was at her wits’ end, till she decidedto take things into her own hands. Slipping out, she ran down and, finding aservant, asked if he could get her a carriage. It happened to be a hired waiterwho knew nothing about the neighborhood and Jo was looking round for help whenLaurie, who had heard what she said, came up and offered hisgrandfather’s carriage, which had just come for him, he said.“It’s so early! You can’t mean to go yet?” began Jo,looking relieved but hesitating to accept the offer.“I always go early, I do, truly! Please let me take you home. It’sall on my way, you know, and it rains, they say.”That settled it, and telling him of Meg’s mishap, Jo gratefully acceptedand rushed up to bring down the rest of the party. Hannah hated rain as much asa cat does so she made no trouble, and they rolled away in the luxurious closecarriage, feeling very festive and elegant. Laurie went on the box so Meg couldkeep her foot up, and the girls talked over their party in freedom.“I had a capital time. Did you?” asked Jo, rumpling up her hair,and making herself comfortable.“Yes, till I hurt myself. Sallie’s friend, Annie Moffat, took afancy to me, and asked me to come and spend a week with her when Sallie does.She is going in the spring when the opera comes, and it will be perfectlysplendid, if Mother only lets me go,” answered Meg, cheering up at thethought.“I saw you dancing with the red headed man I ran away from. Was henice?”“Oh, very! His hair is auburn, not red, and he was very polite, and I hada delicious redowa with him.”“He looked like a grasshopper in a fit when he did the new step. Laurieand I couldn’t help laughing. Did you hear us?”“No, but it was very rude. What were you about all that time, hidden awaythere?”Jo told her adventures, and by the time she had finished they were at home.With many thanks, they said good night and crept in, hoping to disturb no one,but the instant their door creaked, two little nightcaps bobbed up, and twosleepy but eager voices cried out...“Tell about the party! Tell about the party!”With what Meg called ‘a great want of manners’ Jo had saved somebonbons for the little girls, and they soon subsided, after hearing the mostthrilling events of the evening.“I declare, it really seems like being a fine young lady, to come homefrom the party in a carriage and sit in my dressing gown with a maid to wait onme,” said Meg, as Jo bound up her foot with arnica and brushed her hair.“I don’t believe fine young ladies enjoy themselves a bit more thanwe do, in spite of our burned hair, old gowns, one glove apiece and tightslippers that sprain our ankles when we are silly enough to wear them.”And I think Jo was quite right.CHAPTER FOURBURDENS“Oh, dear, how hard it does seem to take up our packs and go on,”sighed Meg the morning after the party, for now the holidays were over, theweek of merrymaking did not fit her for going on easily with the task she neverliked.“I wish it was Christmas or New Year’s all the time. Wouldn’tit be fun?” answered Jo, yawning dismally.“We shouldn’t enjoy ourselves half so much as we do now. But itdoes seem so nice to have little suppers and bouquets, and go to parties, anddrive home, and read and rest, and not work. It’s like other people, youknow, and I always envy girls who do such things, I’m so fond ofluxury,” said Meg, trying to decide which of two shabby gowns was theleast shabby.“Well, we can’t have it, so don’t let us grumble but shoulderour bundles and trudge along as cheerfully as Marmee does. I’m sure AuntMarch is a regular Old Man of the Sea to me, but I suppose when I’velearned to carry her without complaining, she will tumble off, or get so lightthat I shan’t mind her.”This idea tickled Jo’s fancy and put her in good spirits, but Megdidn’t brighten, for her burden, consisting of four spoiled children,seemed heavier than ever. She had not heart enough even to make herself prettyas usual by putting on a blue neck ribbon and dressing her hair in the mostbecoming way.“Where’s the use of looking nice, when no one sees me but thosecross midgets, and no one cares whether I’m pretty or not?” shemuttered, shutting her drawer with a jerk. “I shall have to toil and moilall my days, with only little bits of fun now and then, and get old and uglyand sour, because I’m poor and can’t enjoy my life as other girlsdo. It’s a shame!”So Meg went down, wearing an injured look, and wasn’t at all agreeable atbreakfast time. Everyone seemed rather out of sorts and inclined to croak.Beth had a headache and lay on the sofa, trying to comfort herself with the catand three kittens. Amy was fretting because her lessons were not learned, andshe couldn’t find her rubbers. Jo would whistle and make a great racketgetting ready.Mrs. March was very busy trying to finish a letter, which must go at once, andHannah had the grumps, for being up late didn’t suit her.“There never was such a cross family!” cried Jo, losing her temperwhen she had upset an inkstand, broken both boot lacings, and sat down upon herhat.“You’re the crossest person in it!” returned Amy, washing outthe sum that was all wrong with the tears that had fallen on her slate.“Beth, if you don’t keep these horrid cats down cellar I’llhave them drowned,” exclaimed Meg angrily as she tried to get rid of thekitten which had scrambled up her back and stuck like a burr just out of reach.Jo laughed, Meg scolded, Beth implored, and Amy wailed because shecouldn’t remember how much nine times twelve was.“Girls, girls, do be quiet one minute! I must get this off by the earlymail, and you drive me distracted with your worry,” cried Mrs. March,crossing out the third spoiled sentence in her letter.There was a momentary lull, broken by Hannah, who stalked in, laid two hotturnovers on the table, and stalked out again. These turnovers were aninstitution, and the girls called them ‘muffs’, for they had noothers and found the hot pies very comforting to their hands on cold mornings.Hannah never forgot to make them, no matter how busy or grumpy she might be,for the walk was long and bleak. The poor things got no other lunch and wereseldom home before two.“Cuddle your cats and get over your headache, Bethy. Goodbye, Marmee. Weare a set of rascals this morning, but we’ll come home regular angels.Now then, Meg!” And Jo tramped away, feeling that the pilgrims were notsetting out as they ought to do.They always looked back before turning the corner, for their mother was alwaysat the window to nod and smile, and wave her hand to them. Somehow it seemed asif they couldn’t have got through the day without that, for whatevertheir mood might be, the last glimpse of that motherly face was sure to affectthem like sunshine.“If Marmee shook her fist instead of kissing her hand to us, it wouldserve us right, for more ungrateful wretches than we are were neverseen,” cried Jo, taking a remorseful satisfaction in the snowy walk andbitter wind.“Don’t use such dreadful expressions,” replied Meg from thedepths of the veil in which she had shrouded herself like a nun sick of theworld.“I like good strong words that mean something,” replied Jo,catching her hat as it took a leap off her head preparatory to flying awayaltogether.“Call yourself any names you like, but I am neither a rascal nor a wretchand I don’t choose to be called so.”“You’re a blighted being, and decidedly cross today because youcan’t sit in the lap of luxury all the time. Poor dear, just wait till Imake my fortune, and you shall revel in carriages and ice cream and high-heeledslippers, and posies, and red-headed boys to dance with.”“How ridiculous you are, Jo!” But Meg laughed at the nonsense andfelt better in spite of herself.“Lucky for you I am, for if I put on crushed airs and tried to be dismal,as you do, we should be in a nice state. Thank goodness, I can always findsomething funny to keep me up. Don’t croak any more, but come home jolly,there’s a dear.”Jo gave her sister an encouraging pat on the shoulder as they parted for theday, each going a different way, each hugging her little warm turnover, andeach trying to be cheerful in spite of wintry weather, hard work, and theunsatisfied desires of pleasure-loving youth.When Mr. March lost his property in trying to help an unfortunate friend, thetwo oldest girls begged to be allowed to do something toward their own support,at least. Believing that they could not begin too early to cultivate energy,industry, and independence, their parents consented, and both fell to work withthe hearty good will which in spite of all obstacles is sure to succeed atlast.Margaret found a place as nursery governess and felt rich with her smallsalary. As she said, she was ‘fond of luxury’, and her chieftrouble was poverty. She found it harder to bear than the others because shecould remember a time when home was beautiful, life full of ease and pleasure,and want of any kind unknown. She tried not to be envious or discontented, butit was very natural that the young girl should long for pretty things, gayfriends, accomplishments, and a happy life. At the Kings’ she daily sawall she wanted, for the children’s older sisters were just out, and Megcaught frequent glimpses of dainty ball dresses and bouquets, heard livelygossip about theaters, concerts, sleighing parties, and merrymakings of allkinds, and saw money lavished on trifles which would have been so precious toher. Poor Meg seldom complained, but a sense of injustice made her feel bittertoward everyone sometimes, for she had not yet learned to know how rich she wasin the blessings which alone can make life happy.Jo happened to suit Aunt March, who was lame and needed an active person towait upon her. The childless old lady had offered to adopt one of the girlswhen the troubles came, and was much offended because her offer was declined.Other friends told the Marches that they had lost all chance of beingremembered in the rich old lady’s will, but the unworldly Marches onlysaid...“We can’t give up our girls for a dozen fortunes. Rich or poor, wewill keep together and be happy in one another.”The old lady wouldn’t speak to them for a time, but happening to meet Joat a friend’s, something in her comical face and blunt manners struck theold lady’s fancy, and she proposed to take her for a companion. This didnot suit Jo at all, but she accepted the place since nothing better appearedand, to every one’s surprise, got on remarkably well with her irasciblerelative. There was an occasional tempest, and once Jo marched home, declaringshe couldn’t bear it longer, but Aunt March always cleared up quickly,and sent for her to come back again with such urgency that she could notrefuse, for in her heart she rather liked the peppery old lady.I suspect that the real attraction was a large library of fine books, which wasleft to dust and spiders since Uncle March died. Jo remembered the kind oldgentleman, who used to let her build railroads and bridges with his bigdictionaries, tell her stories about queer pictures in his Latin books, and buyher cards of gingerbread whenever he met her in the street. The dim, dustyroom, with the busts staring down from the tall bookcases, the cozy chairs, theglobes, and best of all, the wilderness of books in which she could wanderwhere she liked, made the library a region of bliss to her.The moment Aunt March took her nap, or was busy with company, Jo hurried tothis quiet place, and curling herself up in the easy chair, devoured poetry,romance, history, travels, and pictures like a regular bookworm. But, like allhappiness, it did not last long, for as sure as she had just reached the heartof the story, the sweetest verse of a song, or the most perilous adventure ofher traveler, a shrill voice called, “Josy-phine! Josy-phine!” andshe had to leave her paradise to wind yarn, wash the poodle, or readBelsham’s Essays by the hour together.Jo’s ambition was to do something very splendid. What it was, she had noidea as yet, but left it for time to tell her, and meanwhile, found hergreatest affliction in the fact that she couldn’t read, run, and ride asmuch as she liked. A quick temper, sharp tongue, and restless spirit werealways getting her into scrapes, and her life was a series of ups and downs,which were both comic and pathetic. But the training she received at AuntMarch’s was just what she needed, and the thought that she was doingsomething to support herself made her happy in spite of the perpetual“Josy-phine!”Beth was too bashful to go to school. It had been tried, but she suffered somuch that it was given up, and she did her lessons at home with her father.Even when he went away, and her mother was called to devote her skill andenergy to Soldiers’ Aid Societies, Beth went faithfully on by herself anddid the best she could. She was a housewifely little creature, and helpedHannah keep home neat and comfortable for the workers, never thinking of anyreward but to be loved. Long, quiet days she spent, not lonely nor idle, forher little world was peopled with imaginary friends, and she was by nature abusy bee. There were six dolls to be taken up and dressed every morning, forBeth was a child still and loved her pets as well as ever. Not one whole orhandsome one among them, all were outcasts till Beth took them in, for when hersisters outgrew these idols, they passed to her because Amy would have nothingold or ugly. Beth cherished them all the more tenderly for that very reason,and set up a hospital for infirm dolls. No pins were ever stuck into theircotton vitals, no harsh words or blows were ever given them, no neglect eversaddened the heart of the most repulsive, but all were fed and clothed, nursedand caressed with an affection which never failed. One forlorn fragment ofdollanity had belonged to Jo and, having led a tempestuous life, was left awreck in the rag bag, from which dreary poorhouse it was rescued by Beth andtaken to her refuge. Having no top to its head, she tied on a neat little cap,and as both arms and legs were gone, she hid these deficiencies by folding itin a blanket and devoting her best bed to this chronic invalid. If anyone hadknown the care lavished on that dolly, I think it would have touched theirhearts, even while they laughed. She brought it bits of bouquets, she read toit, took it out to breathe fresh air, hidden under her coat, she sang itlullabies and never went to bed without kissing its dirty face and whisperingtenderly, “I hope you’ll have a good night, my poor dear.”Beth had her troubles as well as the others, and not being an angel but a veryhuman little girl, she often ‘wept a little weep’ as Jo said,because she couldn’t take music lessons and have a fine piano. She lovedmusic so dearly, tried so hard to learn, and practiced away so patiently at thejingling old instrument, that it did seem as if someone (not to hint AuntMarch) ought to help her. Nobody did, however, and nobody saw Beth wipe thetears off the yellow keys, that wouldn’t keep in tune, when she was allalone. She sang like a little lark about her work, never was too tired forMarmee and the girls, and day after day said hopefully to herself, “Iknow I’ll get my music some time, if I’m good.”There are many Beths in the world, shy and quiet, sitting in corners tillneeded, and living for others so cheerfully that no one sees the sacrificestill the little cricket on the hearth stops chirping, and the sweet, sunshinypresence vanishes, leaving silence and shadow behind.If anybody had asked Amy what the greatest trial of her life was, she wouldhave answered at once, “My nose.” When she was a baby, Jo hadaccidently dropped her into the coal hod, and Amy insisted that the fall hadruined her nose forever. It was not big nor red, like poor‘Petrea’s’, it was only rather flat, and all the pinching inthe world could not give it an aristocratic point. No one minded it butherself, and it was doing its best to grow, but Amy felt deeply the want of aGrecian nose, and drew whole sheets of handsome ones to console herself.“Little Raphael,” as her sisters called her, had a decided talentfor drawing, and was never so happy as when copying flowers, designing fairies,or illustrating stories with queer specimens of art. Her teachers complainedthat instead of doing her sums she covered her slate with animals, the blankpages of her atlas were used to copy maps on, and caricatures of the mostludicrous description came fluttering out of all her books at unlucky moments.She got through her lessons as well as she could, and managed to escapereprimands by being a model of deportment. She was a great favorite with hermates, being good-tempered and possessing the happy art of pleasing withouteffort. Her little airs and graces were much admired, so were heraccomplishments, for besides her drawing, she could play twelve tunes, crochet,and read French without mispronouncing more than two-thirds of the words. Shehad a plaintive way of saying, “When Papa was rich we didso-and-so,” which was very touching, and her long words were considered‘perfectly elegant’ by the girls.Amy was in a fair way to be spoiled, for everyone petted her, and her smallvanities and selfishnesses were growing nicely. One thing, however, ratherquenched the vanities. She had to wear her cousin’s clothes. NowFlorence’s mama hadn’t a particle of taste, and Amy suffered deeplyat having to wear a red instead of a blue bonnet, unbecoming gowns, and fussyaprons that did not fit. Everything was good, well made, and little worn, butAmy’s artistic eyes were much afflicted, especially this winter, when herschool dress was a dull purple with yellow dots and no trimming.“My only comfort,” she said to Meg, with tears in her eyes,“is that Mother doesn’t take tucks in my dresses whenever I’mnaughty, as Maria Parks’s mother does. My dear, it’s reallydreadful, for sometimes she is so bad her frock is up to her knees, and shecan’t come to school. When I think of this deggerredation, I feelthat I can bear even my flat nose and purple gown with yellow sky-rockets onit.”Meg was Amy’s confidant and monitor, and by some strange attraction ofopposites Jo was gentle Beth’s. To Jo alone did the shy child tell herthoughts, and over her big harum-scarum sister Beth unconsciously exercisedmore influence than anyone in the family. The two older girls were a great dealto one another, but each took one of the younger sisters into her keeping andwatched over her in her own way, ‘playing mother’ they called it,and put their sisters in the places of discarded dolls with the maternalinstinct of little women.“Has anybody got anything to tell? It’s been such a dismal dayI’m really dying for some amusement,” said Meg, as they sat sewingtogether that evening.“I had a queer time with Aunt today, and, as I got the best of it,I’ll tell you about it,” began Jo, who dearly loved to tellstories. “I was reading that everlasting Belsham, and droning away as Ialways do, for Aunt soon drops off, and then I take out some nice book, andread like fury till she wakes up. I actually made myself sleepy, and before shebegan to nod, I gave such a gape that she asked me what I meant by opening mymouth wide enough to take the whole book in at once.”“I wish I could, and be done with it,” said I, trying not to besaucy.“Then she gave me a long lecture on my sins, and told me to sit and thinkthem over while she just ‘lost’ herself for a moment. She neverfinds herself very soon, so the minute her cap began to bob like a top-heavydahlia, I whipped the Vicar of Wakefield out of my pocket, and readaway, with one eye on him and one on Aunt. I’d just got to where they alltumbled into the water when I forgot and laughed out loud. Aunt woke up and,being more good-natured after her nap, told me to read a bit and show whatfrivolous work I preferred to the worthy and instructive Belsham. I did my verybest, and she liked it, though she only said...“‘I don’t understand what it’s all about. Go back andbegin it, child.’”“Back I went, and made the Primroses as interesting as ever I could. OnceI was wicked enough to stop in a thrilling place, and say meekly,‘I’m afraid it tires you, ma’am. Shan’t I stopnow?’”“She caught up her knitting, which had dropped out of her hands, gave mea sharp look through her specs, and said, in her short way, ‘Finish thechapter, and don’t be impertinent, miss’.”“Did she own she liked it?” asked Meg.“Oh, bless you, no! But she let old Belsham rest, and when I ran backafter my gloves this afternoon, there she was, so hard at the Vicar that shedidn’t hear me laugh as I danced a jig in the hall because of the goodtime coming. What a pleasant life she might have if only she chose! Idon’t envy her much, in spite of her money, for after all rich peoplehave about as many worries as poor ones, I think,” added Jo.“That reminds me,” said Meg, “that I’ve got somethingto tell. It isn’t funny, like Jo’s story, but I thought about it agood deal as I came home. At the Kings’ today I found everybody in aflurry, and one of the children said that her oldest brother had done somethingdreadful, and Papa had sent him away. I heard Mrs. King crying and Mr. Kingtalking very loud, and Grace and Ellen turned away their faces when they passedme, so I shouldn’t see how red and swollen their eyes were. Ididn’t ask any questions, of course, but I felt so sorry for them and wasrather glad I hadn’t any wild brothers to do wicked things and disgracethe family.”“I think being disgraced in school is a great deal tryinger thananything bad boys can do,” said Amy, shaking her head, as if herexperience of life had been a deep one. “Susie Perkins came to schooltoday with a lovely red carnelian ring. I wanted it dreadfully, and wished Iwas her with all my might. Well, she drew a picture of Mr. Davis, with amonstrous nose and a hump, and the words, ‘Young ladies, my eye is uponyou!’ coming out of his mouth in a balloon thing. We were laughing overit when all of a sudden his eye was on us, and he ordered Susie to bringup her slate. She was parrylized with fright, but she went, and oh, whatdo you think he did? He took her by the ear—the ear! Just fancyhow horrid!—and led her to the recitation platform, and made her standthere half an hour, holding the slate so everyone could see.”“Didn’t the girls laugh at the picture?” asked Jo, whorelished the scrape.“Laugh? Not one! They sat still as mice, and Susie cried quarts, I knowshe did. I didn’t envy her then, for I felt that millions of carnelianrings wouldn’t have made me happy after that. I never, never should havegot over such a agonizing mortification.” And Amy went on with her work,in the proud consciousness of virtue and the successful utterance of two longwords in a breath.“I saw something I liked this morning, and I meant to tell it at dinner,but I forgot,” said Beth, putting Jo’s topsy-turvy basket in orderas she talked. “When I went to get some oysters for Hannah, Mr. Laurencewas in the fish shop, but he didn’t see me, for I kept behind the fishbarrel, and he was busy with Mr. Cutter the fish-man. A poor woman came in witha pail and a mop, and asked Mr. Cutter if he would let her do some scrubbingfor a bit of fish, because she hadn’t any dinner for her children, andhad been disappointed of a day’s work. Mr. Cutter was in a hurry and said‘No’, rather crossly, so she was going away, looking hungry andsorry, when Mr. Laurence hooked up a big fish with the crooked end of his caneand held it out to her. She was so glad and surprised she took it right intoher arms, and thanked him over and over. He told her to ‘go along andcook it’, and she hurried off, so happy! Wasn’t it good of him? Oh,she did look so funny, hugging the big, slippery fish, and hoping Mr.Laurence’s bed in heaven would be ‘aisy’.”When they had laughed at Beth’s story, they asked their mother for one,and after a moments thought, she said soberly, “As I sat cutting out blueflannel jackets today at the rooms, I felt very anxious about Father, andthought how lonely and helpless we should be, if anything happened to him. Itwas not a wise thing to do, but I kept on worrying till an old man came in withan order for some clothes. He sat down near me, and I began to talk to him, forhe looked poor and tired and anxious.“‘Have you sons in the army?’ I asked, for the note hebrought was not to me.”“Yes, ma’am. I had four, but two were killed, one is a prisoner,and I’m going to the other, who is very sick in a Washingtonhospital.’ he answered quietly.”“‘You have done a great deal for your country, sir,’ I said,feeling respect now, instead of pity.”“‘Not a mite more than I ought, ma’am. I’d go myself,if I was any use. As I ain’t, I give my boys, and give ’emfree.’”“He spoke so cheerfully, looked so sincere, and seemed so glad to givehis all, that I was ashamed of myself. I’d given one man and thought ittoo much, while he gave four without grudging them. I had all my girls tocomfort me at home, and his last son was waiting, miles away, to say good-by tohim, perhaps! I felt so rich, so happy thinking of my blessings, that I madehim a nice bundle, gave him some money, and thanked him heartily for the lessonhe had taught me.”“Tell another story, Mother, one with a moral to it, like this. I like tothink about them afterward, if they are real and not too preachy,” saidJo, after a minute’s silence.Mrs. March smiled and began at once, for she had told stories to this littleaudience for many years, and knew how to please them.“Once upon a time, there were four girls, who had enough to eat and drinkand wear, a good many comforts and pleasures, kind friends and parents wholoved them dearly, and yet they were not contented.” (Here the listenersstole sly looks at one another, and began to sew diligently.) “Thesegirls were anxious to be good and made many excellent resolutions, but they didnot keep them very well, and were constantly saying, ‘If only we hadthis,’ or ‘If we could only do that,’ quite forgetting howmuch they already had, and how many things they actually could do. So theyasked an old woman what spell they could use to make them happy, and she said,‘When you feel discontented, think over your blessings, and begrateful.’” (Here Jo looked up quickly, as if about to speak, butchanged her mind, seeing that the story was not done yet.)“Being sensible girls, they decided to try her advice, and soon weresurprised to see how well off they were. One discovered that moneycouldn’t keep shame and sorrow out of rich people’s houses, anotherthat, though she was poor, she was a great deal happier, with her youth,health, and good spirits, than a certain fretful, feeble old lady whocouldn’t enjoy her comforts, a third that, disagreeable as it was to helpget dinner, it was harder still to go begging for it and the fourth, that evencarnelian rings were not so valuable as good behavior. So they agreed to stopcomplaining, to enjoy the blessings already possessed, and try to deserve them,lest they should be taken away entirely, instead of increased, and I believethey were never disappointed or sorry that they took the old woman’sadvice.”“Now, Marmee, that is very cunning of you to turn our own stories againstus, and give us a sermon instead of a romance!” cried Meg.“I like that kind of sermon. It’s the sort Father used to tellus,” said Beth thoughtfully, putting the needles straight on Jo’scushion.“I don’t complain near as much as the others do, and I shall bemore careful than ever now, for I’ve had warning from Susie’sdownfall,” said Amy morally.“We needed that lesson, and we won’t forget it. If we do so, youjust say to us, as old Chloe did in Uncle Tom, ‘Tink ob yermarcies, chillen!’ ‘Tink ob yer marcies!’” added Jo,who could not, for the life of her, help getting a morsel of fun out of thelittle sermon, though she took it to heart as much as any of them.CHAPTER FIVEBEING NEIGHBORLY“What in the world are you going to do now, Jo?” asked Meg onesnowy afternoon, as her sister came tramping through the hall, in rubber boots,old sack, and hood, with a broom in one hand and a shovel in the other.“Going out for exercise,” answered Jo with a mischievous twinkle inher eyes.“I should think two long walks this morning would have been enough!It’s cold and dull out, and I advise you to stay warm and dry by thefire, as I do,” said Meg with a shiver.“Never take advice! Can’t keep still all day, and not being apussycat, I don’t like to doze by the fire. I like adventures, andI’m going to find some.”Meg went back to toast her feet and read Ivanhoe, and Jo began to digpaths with great energy. The snow was light, and with her broom she soon swepta path all round the garden, for Beth to walk in when the sun came out and theinvalid dolls needed air. Now, the garden separated the Marches’ housefrom that of Mr. Laurence. Both stood in a suburb of the city, which was stillcountry-like, with groves and lawns, large gardens, and quiet streets. A lowhedge parted the two estates. On one side was an old, brown house, lookingrather bare and shabby, robbed of the vines that in summer covered its wallsand the flowers, which then surrounded it. On the other side was a statelystone mansion, plainly betokening every sort of comfort and luxury, from thebig coach house and well-kept grounds to the conservatory and the glimpses oflovely things one caught between the rich curtains.Yet it seemed a lonely, lifeless sort of house, for no children frolicked onthe lawn, no motherly face ever smiled at the windows, and few people went inand out, except the old gentleman and his grandson.To Jo’s lively fancy, this fine house seemed a kind of enchanted palace,full of splendors and delights which no one enjoyed. She had long wanted tobehold these hidden glories, and to know the Laurence boy, who looked as if hewould like to be known, if he only knew how to begin. Since the party, she hadbeen more eager than ever, and had planned many ways of making friends withhim, but he had not been seen lately, and Jo began to think he had gone away,when she one day spied a brown face at an upper window, looking wistfully downinto their garden, where Beth and Amy were snow-balling one another.“That boy is suffering for society and fun,” she said to herself.“His grandpa does not know what’s good for him, and keeps him shutup all alone. He needs a party of jolly boys to play with, or somebody youngand lively. I’ve a great mind to go over and tell the old gentlemanso!”The idea amused Jo, who liked to do daring things and was always scandalizingMeg by her queer performances. The plan of ‘going over’ was notforgotten. And when the snowy afternoon came, Jo resolved to try what could bedone. She saw Mr. Lawrence drive off, and then sallied out to dig her way downto the hedge, where she paused and took a survey. All quiet, curtains down atthe lower windows, servants out of sight, and nothing human visible but a curlyblack head leaning on a thin hand at the upper window.“There he is,” thought Jo, “Poor boy! All alone and sick thisdismal day. It’s a shame! I’ll toss up a snowball and make him lookout, and then say a kind word to him.”Up went a handful of soft snow, and the head turned at once, showing a facewhich lost its listless look in a minute, as the big eyes brightened and themouth began to smile. Jo nodded and laughed, and flourished her broom as shecalled out...“How do you do? Are you sick?”Laurie opened the window, and croaked out as hoarsely as a raven...“Better, thank you. I’ve had a bad cold, and been shut up aweek.”“I’m sorry. What do you amuse yourself with?”“Nothing. It’s dull as tombs up here.”“Don’t you read?”“Not much. They won’t let me.”“Can’t somebody read to you?”“Grandpa does sometimes, but my books don’t interest him, and Ihate to ask Brooke all the time.”“Have someone come and see you then.”“There isn’t anyone I’d like to see. Boys make such a row,and my head is weak.”“Isn’t there some nice girl who’d read and amuse you? Girlsare quiet and like to play nurse.”“Don’t know any.”“You know us,” began Jo, then laughed and stopped.“So I do! Will you come, please?” cried Laurie.“I’m not quiet and nice, but I’ll come, if Mother will letme. I’ll go ask her. Shut the window, like a good boy, and wait till Icome.”With that, Jo shouldered her broom and marched into the house, wondering whatthey would all say to her. Laurie was in a flutter of excitement at the idea ofhaving company, and flew about to get ready, for as Mrs. March said, he was‘a little gentleman’, and did honor to the coming guest by brushinghis curly pate, putting on a fresh color, and trying to tidy up the room, whichin spite of half a dozen servants, was anything but neat. Presently there camea loud ring, then a decided voice, asking for ‘Mr. Laurie’, and asurprised-looking servant came running up to announce a young lady.“All right, show her up, it’s Miss Jo,” said Laurie, going tothe door of his little parlor to meet Jo, who appeared, looking rosy and quiteat her ease, with a covered dish in one hand and Beth’s three kittens inthe other.“Here I am, bag and baggage,” she said briskly. “Mother senther love, and was glad if I could do anything for you. Meg wanted me to bringsome of her blanc mange, she makes it very nicely, and Beth thought her catswould be comforting. I knew you’d laugh at them, but I couldn’trefuse, she was so anxious to do something.”It so happened that Beth’s funny loan was just the thing, for in laughingover the kits, Laurie forgot his bashfulness, and grew sociable at once.“That looks too pretty to eat,” he said, smiling with pleasure, asJo uncovered the dish, and showed the blanc mange, surrounded by a garland ofgreen leaves, and the scarlet flowers of Amy’s pet geranium.“It isn’t anything, only they all felt kindly and wanted to showit. Tell the girl to put it away for your tea. It’s so simple you can eatit, and being soft, it will slip down without hurting your sore throat. What acozy room this is!”“It might be if it was kept nice, but the maids are lazy, and Idon’t know how to make them mind. It worries me though.”“I’ll right it up in two minutes, for it only needs to have thehearth brushed, so—and the things made straight on the mantelpiece,so—and the books put here, and the bottles there, and your sofa turnedfrom the light, and the pillows plumped up a bit. Now then, you’refixed.”And so he was, for, as she laughed and talked, Jo had whisked things into placeand given quite a different air to the room. Laurie watched her in respectfulsilence, and when she beckoned him to his sofa, he sat down with a sigh ofsatisfaction, saying gratefully...“How kind you are! Yes, that’s what it wanted. Now please take thebig chair and let me do something to amuse my company.”“No, I came to amuse you. Shall I read aloud?” and Jo lookedaffectionately toward some inviting books near by.“Thank you! I’ve read all those, and if you don’t mind,I’d rather talk,” answered Laurie.“Not a bit. I’ll talk all day if you’ll only set me going.Beth says I never know when to stop.”“Is Beth the rosy one, who stays at home good deal and sometimes goes outwith a little basket?” asked Laurie with interest.“Yes, that’s Beth. She’s my girl, and a regular good one sheis, too.”“The pretty one is Meg, and the curly-haired one is Amy, Ibelieve?”“How did you find that out?”Laurie colored up, but answered frankly, “Why, you see I often hear youcalling to one another, and when I’m alone up here, I can’t helplooking over at your house, you always seem to be having such good times. I begyour pardon for being so rude, but sometimes you forget to put down the curtainat the window where the flowers are. And when the lamps are lighted, it’slike looking at a picture to see the fire, and you all around the table withyour mother. Her face is right opposite, and it looks so sweet behind theflowers, I can’t help watching it. I haven’t got any mother, youknow.” And Laurie poked the fire to hide a little twitching of the lipsthat he could not control.The solitary, hungry look in his eyes went straight to Jo’s warm heart.She had been so simply taught that there was no nonsense in her head, and atfifteen she was as innocent and frank as any child. Laurie was sick and lonely,and feeling how rich she was in home and happiness, she gladly tried to shareit with him. Her face was very friendly and her sharp voice unusually gentle asshe said...“We’ll never draw that curtain any more, and I give you leave tolook as much as you like. I just wish, though, instead of peeping, you’dcome over and see us. Mother is so splendid, she’d do you heaps of good,and Beth would sing to you if I begged her to, and Amy would dance. Meg and Iwould make you laugh over our funny stage properties, and we’d have jollytimes. Wouldn’t your grandpa let you?”“I think he would, if your mother asked him. He’s very kind, thoughhe does not look so, and he lets me do what I like, pretty much, onlyhe’s afraid I might be a bother to strangers,” began Laurie,brightening more and more.“We are not strangers, we are neighbors, and you needn’t thinkyou’d be a bother. We want to know you, and I’ve been trying to doit this ever so long. We haven’t been here a great while, you know, butwe have got acquainted with all our neighbors but you.”“You see, Grandpa lives among his books, and doesn’t mind much whathappens outside. Mr. Brooke, my tutor, doesn’t stay here, you know, and Ihave no one to go about with me, so I just stop at home and get on as Ican.”“That’s bad. You ought to make an effort and go visiting everywhereyou are asked, then you’ll have plenty of friends, and pleasant places togo to. Never mind being bashful. It won’t last long if you keepgoing.”Laurie turned red again, but wasn’t offended at being accused ofbashfulness, for there was so much good will in Jo it was impossible not totake her blunt speeches as kindly as they were meant.“Do you like your school?” asked the boy, changing the subject,after a little pause, during which he stared at the fire and Jo looked abouther, well pleased.“Don’t go to school, I’m a businessman—girl, I mean. Igo to wait on my great-aunt, and a dear, cross old soul she is, too,”answered Jo.Laurie opened his mouth to ask another question, but remembering just in timethat it wasn’t manners to make too many inquiries into people’saffairs, he shut it again, and looked uncomfortable.Jo liked his good breeding, and didn’t mind having a laugh at Aunt March,so she gave him a lively description of the fidgety old lady, her fat poodle,the parrot that talked Spanish, and the library where she reveled.Laurie enjoyed that immensely, and when she told about the prim old gentlemanwho came once to woo Aunt March, and in the middle of a fine speech, how Pollhad tweaked his wig off to his great dismay, the boy lay back and laughed tillthe tears ran down his cheeks, and a maid popped her head in to see what wasthe matter.“Oh! That does me no end of good. Tell on, please,” he said, takinghis face out of the sofa cushion, red and shining with merriment.Much elated with her success, Jo did ‘tell on’, all about theirplays and plans, their hopes and fears for Father, and the most interestingevents of the little world in which the sisters lived. Then they got to talkingabout books, and to Jo’s delight, she found that Laurie loved them aswell as she did, and had read even more than herself.“If you like them so much, come down and see ours. Grandfather is out, soyou needn’t be afraid,” said Laurie, getting up.“I’m not afraid of anything,” returned Jo, with a toss of thehead.“I don’t believe you are!” exclaimed the boy, looking at herwith much admiration, though he privately thought she would have good reason tobe a trifle afraid of the old gentleman, if she met him in some of his moods.The atmosphere of the whole house being summerlike, Laurie led the way fromroom to room, letting Jo stop to examine whatever struck her fancy. And so, atlast they came to the library, where she clapped her hands and pranced, as shealways did when especially delighted. It was lined with books, and there werepictures and statues, and distracting little cabinets full of coins andcuriosities, and Sleepy Hollow chairs, and queer tables, and bronzes, and bestof all, a great open fireplace with quaint tiles all round it.“What richness!” sighed Jo, sinking into the depth of a velourchair and gazing about her with an air of intense satisfaction. “TheodoreLaurence, you ought to be the happiest boy in the world,” she addedimpressively.“A fellow can’t live on books,” said Laurie, shaking his headas he perched on a table opposite.Before he could say more, a bell rang, and Jo flew up, exclaiming with alarm,“Mercy me! It’s your grandpa!”“Well, what if it is? You are not afraid of anything, you know,”returned the boy, looking wicked.“I think I am a little bit afraid of him, but I don’t know why Ishould be. Marmee said I might come, and I don’t think you’re anythe worse for it,” said Jo, composing herself, though she kept her eyeson the door.“I’m a great deal better for it, and ever so much obliged.I’m only afraid you are very tired of talking to me. It was so pleasant,I couldn’t bear to stop,” said Laurie gratefully.“The doctor to see you, sir,” and the maid beckoned as she spoke.“Would you mind if I left you for a minute? I suppose I must seehim,” said Laurie.“Don’t mind me. I’m happy as a cricket here,” answeredJo.Laurie went away, and his guest amused herself in her own way. She was standingbefore a fine portrait of the old gentleman when the door opened again, andwithout turning, she said decidedly, “I’m sure now that Ishouldn’t be afraid of him, for he’s got kind eyes, though hismouth is grim, and he looks as if he had a tremendous will of his own. Heisn’t as handsome as my grandfather, but I like him.”“Thank you, ma’am,” said a gruff voice behind her, and there,to her great dismay, stood old Mr. Laurence.Poor Jo blushed till she couldn’t blush any redder, and her heart beganto beat uncomfortably fast as she thought what she had said. For a minute awild desire to run away possessed her, but that was cowardly, and the girlswould laugh at her, so she resolved to stay and get out of the scrape as shecould. A second look showed her that the living eyes, under the bushy eyebrows,were kinder even than the painted ones, and there was a sly twinkle in them,which lessened her fear a good deal. The gruff voice was gruffer than ever, asthe old gentleman said abruptly, after the dreadful pause, “Soyou’re not afraid of me, hey?”“Not much, sir.”“And you don’t think me as handsome as your grandfather?”“Not quite, sir.”“And I’ve got a tremendous will, have I?”“I only said I thought so.”“But you like me in spite of it?”“Yes, I do, sir.”That answer pleased the old gentleman. He gave a short laugh, shook hands withher, and, putting his finger under her chin, turned up her face, examined itgravely, and let it go, saying with a nod, “You’ve got yourgrandfather’s spirit, if you haven’t his face. He was a fine man,my dear, but what is better, he was a brave and an honest one, and I was proudto be his friend.”“Thank you, sir,” And Jo was quite comfortable after that, for itsuited her exactly.“What have you been doing to this boy of mine, hey?” was the nextquestion, sharply put.“Only trying to be neighborly, sir.” And Jo told how her visit cameabout.“You think he needs cheering up a bit, do you?”“Yes, sir, he seems a little lonely, and young folks would do him goodperhaps. We are only girls, but we should be glad to help if we could, for wedon’t forget the splendid Christmas present you sent us,” said Joeagerly.“Tut, tut, tut! That was the boy’s affair. How is the poorwoman?”“Doing nicely, sir.” And off went Jo, talking very fast, as shetold all about the Hummels, in whom her mother had interested richer friendsthan they were.“Just her father’s way of doing good. I shall come and see yourmother some fine day. Tell her so. There’s the tea bell, we have it earlyon the boy’s account. Come down and go on being neighborly.”“If you’d like to have me, sir.”“Shouldn’t ask you, if I didn’t.” And Mr. Laurenceoffered her his arm with old-fashioned courtesy.“What would Meg say to this?” thought Jo, as she was marched away,while her eyes danced with fun as she imagined herself telling the story athome.“Hey! Why, what the dickens has come to the fellow?” said the oldgentleman, as Laurie came running downstairs and brought up with a start ofsurprise at the astounding sight of Jo arm in arm with his redoubtablegrandfather.“I didn’t know you’d come, sir,” he began, as Jo gavehim a triumphant little glance.“That’s evident, by the way you racket downstairs. Come to yourtea, sir, and behave like a gentleman.” And having pulled the boy’shair by way of a caress, Mr. Laurence walked on, while Laurie went through aseries of comic evolutions behind their backs, which nearly produced anexplosion of laughter from Jo.The old gentleman did not say much as he drank his four cups of tea, but hewatched the young people, who soon chatted away like old friends, and thechange in his grandson did not escape him. There was color, light, and life inthe boy’s face now, vivacity in his manner, and genuine merriment in hislaugh.“She’s right, the lad is lonely. I’ll see what these littlegirls can do for him,” thought Mr. Laurence, as he looked and listened.He liked Jo, for her odd, blunt ways suited him, and she seemed to understandthe boy almost as well as if she had been one herself.If the Laurences had been what Jo called ‘prim and poky’, she wouldnot have got on at all, for such people always made her shy and awkward. Butfinding them free and easy, she was so herself, and made a good impression.When they rose she proposed to go, but Laurie said he had something more toshow her, and took her away to the conservatory, which had been lighted for herbenefit. It seemed quite fairylike to Jo, as she went up and down the walks,enjoying the blooming walls on either side, the soft light, the damp sweet air,and the wonderful vines and trees that hung about her, while her new friend cutthe finest flowers till his hands were full. Then he tied them up, saying, withthe happy look Jo liked to see, “Please give these to your mother, andtell her I like the medicine she sent me very much.”They found Mr. Laurence standing before the fire in the great drawing room, butJo’s attention was entirely absorbed by a grand piano, which stood open.“Do you play?” she asked, turning to Laurie with a respectfulexpression.“Sometimes,” he answered modestly.“Please do now. I want to hear it, so I can tell Beth.”“Won’t you first?”“Don’t know how. Too stupid to learn, but I love musicdearly.”So Laurie played and Jo listened, with her nose luxuriously buried inheliotrope and tea roses. Her respect and regard for the ‘Laurence’boy increased very much, for he played remarkably well and didn’t put onany airs. She wished Beth could hear him, but she did not say so, only praisedhim till he was quite abashed, and his grandfather came to his rescue.“That will do, that will do, young lady. Too many sugarplums are not goodfor him. His music isn’t bad, but I hope he will do as well in moreimportant things. Going? well, I’m much obliged to you, and I hopeyou’ll come again. My respects to your mother. Good night, DoctorJo.”He shook hands kindly, but looked as if something did not please him. When theygot into the hall, Jo asked Laurie if she had said something amiss. He shookhis head.“No, it was me. He doesn’t like to hear me play.”“Why not?”“I’ll tell you some day. John is going home with you, as Ican’t.”“No need of that. I am not a young lady, and it’s only a step. Takecare of yourself, won’t you?”“Yes, but you will come again, I hope?”“If you promise to come and see us after you are well.”“I will.”“Good night, Laurie!”“Good night, Jo, good night!”When all the afternoon’s adventures had been told, the family feltinclined to go visiting in a body, for each found something very attractive inthe big house on the other side of the hedge. Mrs. March wanted to talk of herfather with the old man who had not forgotten him, Meg longed to walk in theconservatory, Beth sighed for the grand piano, and Amy was eager to see thefine pictures and statues.“Mother, why didn’t Mr. Laurence like to have Laurie play?”asked Jo, who was of an inquiring disposition.“I am not sure, but I think it was because his son, Laurie’sfather, married an Italian lady, a musician, which displeased the old man, whois very proud. The lady was good and lovely and accomplished, but he did notlike her, and never saw his son after he married. They both died when Lauriewas a little child, and then his grandfather took him home. I fancy the boy,who was born in Italy, is not very strong, and the old man is afraid of losinghim, which makes him so careful. Laurie comes naturally by his love of music,for he is like his mother, and I dare say his grandfather fears that he maywant to be a musician. At any rate, his skill reminds him of the woman he didnot like, and so he ‘glowered’ as Jo said.”“Dear me, how romantic!” exclaimed Meg.“How silly!” said Jo. “Let him be a musician if he wants to,and not plague his life out sending him to college, when he hates to go.”“That’s why he has such handsome black eyes and pretty manners, Isuppose. Italians are always nice,” said Meg, who was a littlesentimental.“What do you know about his eyes and his manners? You never spoke to him,hardly,” cried Jo, who was not sentimental.“I saw him at the party, and what you tell shows that he knows how tobehave. That was a nice little speech about the medicine Mother senthim.”“He meant the blanc mange, I suppose.”“How stupid you are, child! He meant you, of course.”“Did he?” And Jo opened her eyes as if it had never occurred to herbefore.“I never saw such a girl! You don’t know a compliment when you getit,” said Meg, with the air of a young lady who knew all about thematter.“I think they are great nonsense, and I’ll thank you not to besilly and spoil my fun. Laurie’s a nice boy and I like him, and Iwon’t have any sentimental stuff about compliments and such rubbish.We’ll all be good to him because he hasn’t got any mother, and hemay come over and see us, mayn’t he, Marmee?”“Yes, Jo, your little friend is very welcome, and I hope Meg willremember that children should be children as long as they can.”“I don’t call myself a child, and I’m not in my teensyet,” observed Amy. “What do you say, Beth?”“I was thinking about our ‘Pilgrim’sProgress’,” answered Beth, who had not heard a word. “Howwe got out of the Slough and through the Wicket Gate by resolving to be good,and up the steep hill by trying, and that maybe the house over there, full ofsplendid things, is going to be our Palace Beautiful.”“We have got to get by the lions first,” said Jo, as if she ratherliked the prospect.CHAPTER SIXBETH FINDS THE PALACE BEAUTIFULThe big house did prove a Palace Beautiful, though it took some time for all toget in, and Beth found it very hard to pass the lions. Old Mr. Laurence was thebiggest one, but after he had called, said something funny or kind to each oneof the girls, and talked over old times with their mother, nobody felt muchafraid of him, except timid Beth. The other lion was the fact that they werepoor and Laurie rich, for this made them shy of accepting favors which theycould not return. But, after a while, they found that he considered them thebenefactors, and could not do enough to show how grateful he was for Mrs.March’s motherly welcome, their cheerful society, and the comfort he tookin that humble home of theirs. So they soon forgot their pride and interchangedkindnesses without stopping to think which was the greater.All sorts of pleasant things happened about that time, for the new friendshipflourished like grass in spring. Every one liked Laurie, and he privatelyinformed his tutor that “the Marches were regularly splendidgirls.” With the delightful enthusiasm of youth, they took the solitaryboy into their midst and made much of him, and he found something very charmingin the innocent companionship of these simple-hearted girls. Never having knownmother or sisters, he was quick to feel the influences they brought about him,and their busy, lively ways made him ashamed of the indolent life he led. Hewas tired of books, and found people so interesting now that Mr. Brooke wasobliged to make very unsatisfactory reports, for Laurie was always playingtruant and running over to the Marches’.“Never mind, let him take a holiday, and make it up afterward,”said the old gentleman. “The good lady next door says he is studying toohard and needs young society, amusement, and exercise. I suspect she is right,and that I’ve been coddling the fellow as if I’d been hisgrandmother. Let him do what he likes, as long as he is happy. He can’tget into mischief in that little nunnery over there, and Mrs. March is doingmore for him than we can.”What good times they had, to be sure. Such plays and tableaux, such sleighrides and skating frolics, such pleasant evenings in the old parlor, and nowand then such gay little parties at the great house. Meg could walk in theconservatory whenever she liked and revel in bouquets, Jo browsed over the newlibrary voraciously, and convulsed the old gentleman with her criticisms, Amycopied pictures and enjoyed beauty to her heart’s content, and Laurieplayed ‘lord of the manor’ in the most delightful style.But Beth, though yearning for the grand piano, could not pluck up courage to goto the ‘Mansion of Bliss’, as Meg called it. She went once with Jo,but the old gentleman, not being aware of her infirmity, stared at her so hardfrom under his heavy eyebrows, and said “Hey!” so loud, that hefrightened her so much her ‘feet chattered on the floor’, she nevertold her mother, and she ran away, declaring she would never go there any more,not even for the dear piano. No persuasions or enticements could overcome herfear, till, the fact coming to Mr. Laurence’s ear in some mysterious way,he set about mending matters. During one of the brief calls he made, heartfully led the conversation to music, and talked away about great singerswhom he had seen, fine organs he had heard, and told such charming anecdotesthat Beth found it impossible to stay in her distant corner, but crept nearerand nearer, as if fascinated. At the back of his chair she stopped and stoodlistening, with her great eyes wide open and her cheeks red with excitement ofthis unusual performance. Taking no more notice of her than if she had been afly, Mr. Laurence talked on about Laurie’s lessons and teachers. Andpresently, as if the idea had just occurred to him, he said to Mrs. March...“The boy neglects his music now, and I’m glad of it, for he wasgetting too fond of it. But the piano suffers for want of use. Wouldn’tsome of your girls like to run over, and practice on it now and then, just tokeep it in tune, you know, ma’am?”Beth took a step forward, and pressed her hands tightly together to keep fromclapping them, for this was an irresistible temptation, and the thought ofpracticing on that splendid instrument quite took her breath away. Before Mrs.March could reply, Mr. Laurence went on with an odd little nod and smile...“They needn’t see or speak to anyone, but run in at any time. ForI’m shut up in my study at the other end of the house, Laurie is out agreat deal, and the servants are never near the drawing room after nineo’clock.”Here he rose, as if going, and Beth made up her mind to speak, for that lastarrangement left nothing to be desired. “Please, tell the young ladieswhat I say, and if they don’t care to come, why, never mind.” Herea little hand slipped into his, and Beth looked up at him with a face full ofgratitude, as she said, in her earnest yet timid way...“Oh sir, they do care, very very much!”“Are you the musical girl?” he asked, without any startling“Hey!” as he looked down at her very kindly.“I’m Beth. I love it dearly, and I’ll come, if you are quitesure nobody will hear me, and be disturbed,” she added, fearing to berude, and trembling at her own boldness as she spoke.“Not a soul, my dear. The house is empty half the day, so come and drumaway as much as you like, and I shall be obliged to you.”“How kind you are, sir!”Beth blushed like a rose under the friendly look he wore, but she was notfrightened now, and gave the hand a grateful squeeze because she had no wordsto thank him for the precious gift he had given her. The old gentleman softlystroked the hair off her forehead, and, stooping down, he kissed her, saying,in a tone few people ever heard...“I had a little girl once, with eyes like these. God bless you, my dear!Good day, madam.” And away he went, in a great hurry.Beth had a rapture with her mother, and then rushed up to impart the gloriousnews to her family of invalids, as the girls were not home. How blithely shesang that evening, and how they all laughed at her because she woke Amy in thenight by playing the piano on her face in her sleep. Next day, having seen boththe old and young gentleman out of the house, Beth, after two or threeretreats, fairly got in at the side door, and made her way as noiselessly asany mouse to the drawing room where her idol stood. Quite by accident, ofcourse, some pretty, easy music lay on the piano, and with trembling fingersand frequent stops to listen and look about, Beth at last touched the greatinstrument, and straightway forgot her fear, herself, and everything else butthe unspeakable delight which the music gave her, for it was like the voice ofa beloved friend.She stayed till Hannah came to take her home to dinner, but she had noappetite, and could only sit and smile upon everyone in a general state ofbeatitude.After that, the little brown hood slipped through the hedge nearly every day,and the great drawing room was haunted by a tuneful spirit that came and wentunseen. She never knew that Mr. Laurence opened his study door to hear theold-fashioned airs he liked. She never saw Laurie mount guard in the hall towarn the servants away. She never suspected that the exercise books and newsongs which she found in the rack were put there for her especial benefit, andwhen he talked to her about music at home, she only thought how kind he was totell things that helped her so much. So she enjoyed herself heartily, andfound, what isn’t always the case, that her granted wish was all she hadhoped. Perhaps it was because she was so grateful for this blessing that agreater was given her. At any rate she deserved both.“Mother, I’m going to work Mr. Laurence a pair of slippers. He isso kind to me, I must thank him, and I don’t know any other way. Can I doit?” asked Beth, a few weeks after that eventful call of his.“Yes, dear. It will please him very much, and be a nice way of thankinghim. The girls will help you about them, and I will pay for the makingup,” replied Mrs. March, who took peculiar pleasure in grantingBeth’s requests because she so seldom asked anything for herself.After many serious discussions with Meg and Jo, the pattern was chosen, thematerials bought, and the slippers begun. A cluster of grave yet cheerfulpansies on a deeper purple ground was pronounced very appropriate and pretty,and Beth worked away early and late, with occasional lifts over hard parts. Shewas a nimble little needlewoman, and they were finished before anyone got tiredof them. Then she wrote a short, simple note, and with Laurie’s help, gotthem smuggled onto the study table one morning before the old gentleman was up.When this excitement was over, Beth waited to see what would happen. All daypassed and a part of the next before any acknowledgement arrived, and she wasbeginning to fear she had offended her crochety friend. On the afternoon of thesecond day, she went out to do an errand, and give poor Joanna, the invaliddoll, her daily exercise. As she came up the street, on her return, she sawthree, yes, four heads popping in and out of the parlor windows, and the momentthey saw her, several hands were waved, and several joyful voices screamed...“Here’s a letter from the old gentleman! Come quick, and readit!”“Oh, Beth, he’s sent you...” began Amy, gesticulating withunseemly energy, but she got no further, for Jo quenched her by slamming downthe window.Beth hurried on in a flutter of suspense. At the door her sisters seized andbore her to the parlor in a triumphal procession, all pointing and all sayingat once, “Look there! Look there!” Beth did look, and turned palewith delight and surprise, for there stood a little cabinet piano, with aletter lying on the glossy lid, directed like a sign board to “MissElizabeth March.”“For me?” gasped Beth, holding onto Jo and feeling as if she shouldtumble down, it was such an overwhelming thing altogether.“Yes, all for you, my precious! Isn’t it splendid of him?Don’t you think he’s the dearest old man in the world? Here’sthe key in the letter. We didn’t open it, but we are dying to know whathe says,” cried Jo, hugging her sister and offering the note.“You read it! I can’t, I feel so queer! Oh, it is toolovely!” and Beth hid her face in Jo’s apron, quite upset by herpresent.Jo opened the paper and began to laugh, for the first words she saw were...“Miss March: “Dear Madam—”“How nice it sounds! I wish someone would write to me so!” saidAmy, who thought the old-fashioned address very elegant.“‘I have had many pairs of slippers in my life, but I never had anythat suited me so well as yours,’” continues Jo.“‘Heart’s-ease is my favorite flower, and these will alwaysremind me of the gentle giver. I like to pay my debts, so I know you will allow‘the old gentleman’ to send you something which once belonged tothe little grand daughter he lost. With hearty thanks and best wishes, I remain“‘Your grateful friend and humble servant, ‘JAMESLAURENCE’.”“There, Beth, that’s an honor to be proud of, I’m sure!Laurie told me how fond Mr. Laurence used to be of the child who died, and howhe kept all her little things carefully. Just think, he’s given you herpiano. That comes of having big blue eyes and loving music,” said Jo,trying to soothe Beth, who trembled and looked more excited than she had everbeen before.“See the cunning brackets to hold candles, and the nice green silk,puckered up, with a gold rose in the middle, and the pretty rack and stool, allcomplete,” added Meg, opening the instrument and displaying its beauties.“‘Your humble servant, James Laurence’. Only think of hiswriting that to you. I’ll tell the girls. They’ll think it’ssplendid,” said Amy, much impressed by the note.“Try it, honey. Let’s hear the sound of the baby pianny,”said Hannah, who always took a share in the family joys and sorrows.So Beth tried it, and everyone pronounced it the most remarkable piano everheard. It had evidently been newly tuned and put in apple-pie order, but,perfect as it was, I think the real charm lay in the happiest of all happyfaces which leaned over it, as Beth lovingly touched the beautiful black andwhite keys and pressed the bright pedals.“You’ll have to go and thank him,” said Jo, by way of a joke,for the idea of the child’s really going never entered her head.“Yes, I mean to. I guess I’ll go now, before I get frightenedthinking about it.” And, to the utter amazement of the assembled family,Beth walked deliberately down the garden, through the hedge, and in at theLaurences’ door.“Well, I wish I may die if it ain’t the queerest thing I ever see!The pianny has turned her head! She’d never have gone in her rightmind,” cried Hannah, staring after her, while the girls were renderedquite speechless by the miracle.They would have been still more amazed if they had seen what Beth didafterward. If you will believe me, she went and knocked at the study doorbefore she gave herself time to think, and when a gruff voice called out,“come in!” she did go in, right up to Mr. Laurence, who lookedquite taken aback, and held out her hand, saying, with only a small quaver inher voice, “I came to thank you, sir, for...” But she didn’tfinish, for he looked so friendly that she forgot her speech and, onlyremembering that he had lost the little girl he loved, she put both arms roundhis neck and kissed him.If the roof of the house had suddenly flown off, the old gentlemanwouldn’t have been more astonished. But he liked it. Oh, dear, yes, heliked it amazingly! And was so touched and pleased by that confiding littlekiss that all his crustiness vanished, and he just set her on his knee, andlaid his wrinkled cheek against her rosy one, feeling as if he had got his ownlittle granddaughter back again. Beth ceased to fear him from that moment, andsat there talking to him as cozily as if she had known him all her life, forlove casts out fear, and gratitude can conquer pride. When she went home, hewalked with her to her own gate, shook hands cordially, and touched his hat ashe marched back again, looking very stately and erect, like a handsome,soldierly old gentleman, as he was.When the girls saw that performance, Jo began to dance a jig, by way ofexpressing her satisfaction, Amy nearly fell out of the window in her surprise,and Meg exclaimed, with up-lifted hands, “Well, I do believe the world iscoming to an end.”CHAPTER SEVENAMY’S VALLEY OF HUMILIATION“That boy is a perfect cyclops, isn’t he?” said Amy one day,as Laurie clattered by on horseback, with a flourish of his whip as he passed.“How dare you say so, when he’s got both his eyes? And veryhandsome ones they are, too,” cried Jo, who resented any slightingremarks about her friend.“I didn’t say anything about his eyes, and I don’t see whyyou need fire up when I admire his riding.”“Oh, my goodness! That little goose means a centaur, and she called him aCyclops,” exclaimed Jo, with a burst of laughter.“You needn’t be so rude, it’s only a ‘lapse oflingy’, as Mr. Davis says,” retorted Amy, finishing Jo with herLatin. “I just wish I had a little of the money Laurie spends on thathorse,” she added, as if to herself, yet hoping her sisters would hear.“Why?” asked Meg kindly, for Jo had gone off in another laugh atAmy’s second blunder.“I need it so much. I’m dreadfully in debt, and it won’t bemy turn to have the rag money for a month.”“In debt, Amy? What do you mean?” And Meg looked sober.“Why, I owe at least a dozen pickled limes, and I can’t pay them,you know, till I have money, for Marmee forbade my having anything charged atthe shop.”“Tell me all about it. Are limes the fashion now? It used to be prickingbits of rubber to make balls.” And Meg tried to keep her countenance, Amylooked so grave and important.“Why, you see, the girls are always buying them, and unless you want tobe thought mean, you must do it too. It’s nothing but limes now, foreveryone is sucking them in their desks in schooltime, and trading them off forpencils, bead rings, paper dolls, or something else, at recess. If one girllikes another, she gives her a lime. If she’s mad with her, she eats onebefore her face, and doesn’t offer even a suck. They treat by turns, andI’ve had ever so many but haven’t returned them, and I ought forthey are debts of honor, you know.”“How much will pay them off and restore your credit?” asked Meg,taking out her purse.“A quarter would more than do it, and leave a few cents over for a treatfor you. Don’t you like limes?”“Not much. You may have my share. Here’s the money. Make it last aslong as you can, for it isn’t very plenty, you know.”“Oh, thank you! It must be so nice to have pocket money! I’ll havea grand feast, for I haven’t tasted a lime this week. I felt delicateabout taking any, as I couldn’t return them, and I’m actuallysuffering for one.”Next day Amy was rather late at school, but could not resist the temptation ofdisplaying, with pardonable pride, a moist brown-paper parcel, before sheconsigned it to the inmost recesses of her desk. During the next few minutesthe rumor that Amy March had got twenty-four delicious limes (she ate one onthe way) and was going to treat circulated through her ‘set’, andthe attentions of her friends became quite overwhelming. Katy Brown invited herto her next party on the spot. Mary Kingsley insisted on lending her her watchtill recess, and Jenny Snow, a satirical young lady, who had basely twitted Amyupon her limeless state, promptly buried the hatchet and offered to furnishanswers to certain appalling sums. But Amy had not forgotten Miss Snow’scutting remarks about ‘some persons whose noses were not too flat tosmell other people’s limes, and stuck-up people who were not too proud toask for them’, and she instantly crushed ‘that Snowgirl’s’ hopes by the withering telegram, “You needn’tbe so polite all of a sudden, for you won’t get any.”A distinguished personage happened to visit the school that morning, andAmy’s beautifully drawn maps received praise, which honor to her foerankled in the soul of Miss Snow, and caused Miss March to assume the airs of astudious young peacock. But, alas, alas! Pride goes before a fall, and therevengeful Snow turned the tables with disastrous success. No sooner had theguest paid the usual stale compliments and bowed himself out, than Jenny, underpretense of asking an important question, informed Mr. Davis, the teacher, thatAmy March had pickled limes in her desk.Now Mr. Davis had declared limes a contraband article, and solemnly vowed topublicly ferrule the first person who was found breaking the law. Thismuch-enduring man had succeeded in banishing chewing gum after a long andstormy war, had made a bonfire of the confiscated novels and newspapers, hadsuppressed a private post office, had forbidden distortions of the face,nicknames, and caricatures, and done all that one man could do to keep half ahundred rebellious girls in order. Boys are trying enough to human patience,goodness knows, but girls are infinitely more so, especially to nervousgentlemen with tyrannical tempers and no more talent for teaching than Dr.Blimber. Mr. Davis knew any quantity of Greek, Latin, algebra, and ologies ofall sorts so he was called a fine teacher, and manners, morals, feelings, andexamples were not considered of any particular importance. It was a mostunfortunate moment for denouncing Amy, and Jenny knew it. Mr. Davis hadevidently taken his coffee too strong that morning, there was an east wind,which always affected his neuralgia, and his pupils had not done him the creditwhich he felt he deserved. Therefore, to use the expressive, if not elegant,language of a schoolgirl, “He was as nervous as a witch and as cross as abear”. The word ‘limes’ was like fire to powder, his yellowface flushed, and he rapped on his desk with an energy which made Jenny skip toher seat with unusual rapidity.“Young ladies, attention, if you please!”At the stern order the buzz ceased, and fifty pairs of blue, black, gray, andbrown eyes were obediently fixed upon his awful countenance.“Miss March, come to the desk.”Amy rose to comply with outward composure, but a secret fear oppressed her, forthe limes weighed upon her conscience.“Bring with you the limes you have in your desk,” was theunexpected command which arrested her before she got out of her seat.“Don’t take all.” whispered her neighbor, a young lady ofgreat presence of mind.Amy hastily shook out half a dozen and laid the rest down before Mr. Davis,feeling that any man possessing a human heart would relent when that deliciousperfume met his nose. Unfortunately, Mr. Davis particularly detested the odorof the fashionable pickle, and disgust added to his wrath.“Is that all?”“Not quite,” stammered Amy.“Bring the rest immediately.”With a despairing glance at her set, she obeyed.“You are sure there are no more?”“I never lie, sir.”“So I see. Now take these disgusting things two by two, and throw themout of the window.”There was a simultaneous sigh, which created quite a little gust, as the lasthope fled, and the treat was ravished from their longing lips. Scarlet withshame and anger, Amy went to and fro six dreadful times, and as each doomedcouple, looking oh, so plump and juicy, fell from her reluctant hands, a shoutfrom the street completed the anguish of the girls, for it told them that theirfeast was being exulted over by the little Irish children, who were their swornfoes. This—this was too much. All flashed indignant or appealing glancesat the inexorable Davis, and one passionate lime lover burst into tears.As Amy returned from her last trip, Mr. Davis gave a portentous“Hem!” and said, in his most impressive manner...“Young ladies, you remember what I said to you a week ago. I am sorrythis has happened, but I never allow my rules to be infringed, and I neverbreak my word. Miss March, hold out your hand.”Amy started, and put both hands behind her, turning on him an imploring lookwhich pleaded for her better than the words she could not utter. She was rathera favorite with ‘old Davis’, as, of course, he was called, andit’s my private belief that he would have broken his word if theindignation of one irrepressible young lady had not found vent in a hiss. Thathiss, faint as it was, irritated the irascible gentleman, and sealed theculprit’s fate.“Your hand, Miss March!” was the only answer her mute appealreceived, and too proud to cry or beseech, Amy set her teeth, threw back herhead defiantly, and bore without flinching several tingling blows on her littlepalm. They were neither many nor heavy, but that made no difference to her. Forthe first time in her life she had been struck, and the disgrace, in her eyes,was as deep as if he had knocked her down.“You will now stand on the platform till recess,” said Mr. Davis,resolved to do the thing thoroughly, since he had begun.That was dreadful. It would have been bad enough to go to her seat, and see thepitying faces of her friends, or the satisfied ones of her few enemies, but toface the whole school, with that shame fresh upon her, seemed impossible, andfor a second she felt as if she could only drop down where she stood, and breakher heart with crying. A bitter sense of wrong and the thought of Jenny Snowhelped her to bear it, and, taking the ignominious place, she fixed her eyes onthe stove funnel above what now seemed a sea of faces, and stood there, somotionless and white that the girls found it hard to study with that patheticfigure before them.During the fifteen minutes that followed, the proud and sensitive little girlsuffered a shame and pain which she never forgot. To others it might seem aludicrous or trivial affair, but to her it was a hard experience, for duringthe twelve years of her life she had been governed by love alone, and a blow ofthat sort had never touched her before. The smart of her hand and the ache ofher heart were forgotten in the sting of the thought, “I shall have totell at home, and they will be so disappointed in me!”The fifteen minutes seemed an hour, but they came to an end at last, and theword ‘Recess!’ had never seemed so welcome to her before.“You can go, Miss March,” said Mr. Davis, looking, as he felt,uncomfortable.He did not soon forget the reproachful glance Amy gave him, as she went,without a word to anyone, straight into the anteroom, snatched her things, andleft the place “forever,” as she passionately declared to herself.She was in a sad state when she got home, and when the older girls arrived,some time later, an indignation meeting was held at once. Mrs. March did notsay much but looked disturbed, and comforted her afflicted little daughter inher tenderest manner. Meg bathed the insulted hand with glycerine and tears,Beth felt that even her beloved kittens would fail as a balm for griefs likethis, Jo wrathfully proposed that Mr. Davis be arrested without delay, andHannah shook her fist at the ‘villain’ and pounded potatoes fordinner as if she had him under her pestle.No notice was taken of Amy’s flight, except by her mates, but thesharp-eyed demoiselles discovered that Mr. Davis was quite benignant in theafternoon, also unusually nervous. Just before school closed, Jo appeared,wearing a grim expression as she stalked up to the desk, and delivered a letterfrom her mother, then collected Amy’s property, and departed, carefullyscraping the mud from her boots on the door mat, as if she shook the dust ofthe place off her feet.“Yes, you can have a vacation from school, but I want you to study alittle every day with Beth,” said Mrs. March that evening. “Idon’t approve of corporal punishment, especially for girls. I dislike Mr.Davis’s manner of teaching and don’t think the girls you associatewith are doing you any good, so I shall ask your father’s advice before Isend you anywhere else.”“That’s good! I wish all the girls would leave, and spoil his oldschool. It’s perfectly maddening to think of those lovely limes,”sighed Amy, with the air of a martyr.“I am not sorry you lost them, for you broke the rules, and deserved somepunishment for disobedience,” was the severe reply, which ratherdisappointed the young lady, who expected nothing but sympathy.“Do you mean you are glad I was disgraced before the whole school?”cried Amy.“I should not have chosen that way of mending a fault,” replied hermother, “but I’m not sure that it won’t do you more good thana bolder method. You are getting to be rather conceited, my dear, and it isquite time you set about correcting it. You have a good many little gifts andvirtues, but there is no need of parading them, for conceit spoils the finestgenius. There is not much danger that real talent or goodness will beoverlooked long, even if it is, the consciousness of possessing and using itwell should satisfy one, and the great charm of all power is modesty.”“So it is!” cried Laurie, who was playing chess in a corner withJo. “I knew a girl once, who had a really remarkable talent for music,and she didn’t know it, never guessed what sweet little things shecomposed when she was alone, and wouldn’t have believed it if anyone hadtold her.”“I wish I’d known that nice girl. Maybe she would have helped me,I’m so stupid,” said Beth, who stood beside him, listening eagerly.“You do know her, and she helps you better than anyone else could,”answered Laurie, looking at her with such mischievous meaning in his merryblack eyes that Beth suddenly turned very red, and hid her face in the sofacushion, quite overcome by such an unexpected discovery.Jo let Laurie win the game to pay for that praise of her Beth, who could not beprevailed upon to play for them after her compliment. So Laurie did his best,and sang delightfully, being in a particularly lively humor, for to the Marcheshe seldom showed the moody side of his character. When he was gone, Amy, whohad been pensive all evening, said suddenly, as if busy over some new idea,“Is Laurie an accomplished boy?”“Yes, he has had an excellent education, and has much talent. He willmake a fine man, if not spoiled by petting,” replied her mother.“And he isn’t conceited, is he?” asked Amy.“Not in the least. That is why he is so charming and we all like him somuch.”“I see. It’s nice to have accomplishments and be elegant, but notto show off or get perked up,” said Amy thoughtfully.“These things are always seen and felt in a person’s manner andconversations, if modestly used, but it is not necessary to displaythem,” said Mrs. March.“Any more than it’s proper to wear all your bonnets and gowns andribbons at once, that folks may know you’ve got them,” added Jo,and the lecture ended in a laugh.CHAPTER EIGHTJO MEETS APOLLYON“Girls, where are you going?” asked Amy, coming into their room oneSaturday afternoon, and finding them getting ready to go out with an air ofsecrecy which excited her curiosity.“Never mind. Little girls shouldn’t ask questions,” returnedJo sharply.Now if there is anything mortifying to our feelings when we are young, it is tobe told that, and to be bidden to “run away, dear” is still moretrying to us. Amy bridled up at this insult, and determined to find out thesecret, if she teased for an hour. Turning to Meg, who never refused heranything very long, she said coaxingly, “Do tell me! I should think youmight let me go, too, for Beth is fussing over her piano, and I haven’tgot anything to do, and am so lonely.”“I can’t, dear, because you aren’t invited,” began Meg,but Jo broke in impatiently, “Now, Meg, be quiet or you will spoil itall. You can’t go, Amy, so don’t be a baby and whine aboutit.”“You are going somewhere with Laurie, I know you are. You were whisperingand laughing together on the sofa last night, and you stopped when I came in.Aren’t you going with him?”“Yes, we are. Now do be still, and stop bothering.”Amy held her tongue, but used her eyes, and saw Meg slip a fan into her pocket.“I know! I know! You’re going to the theater to see the SevenCastles!” she cried, adding resolutely, “and I shall go, forMother said I might see it, and I’ve got my rag money, and it was meannot to tell me in time.”“Just listen to me a minute, and be a good child,” said Megsoothingly. “Mother doesn’t wish you to go this week, because youreyes are not well enough yet to bear the light of this fairy piece. Next weekyou can go with Beth and Hannah, and have a nice time.”“I don’t like that half as well as going with you and Laurie.Please let me. I’ve been sick with this cold so long, and shut up,I’m dying for some fun. Do, Meg! I’ll be ever so good,”pleaded Amy, looking as pathetic as she could.“Suppose we take her. I don’t believe Mother would mind, if webundle her up well,” began Meg.“If she goes I shan’t, and if I don’t, Laurie won’tlike it, and it will be very rude, after he invited only us, to go and drag inAmy. I should think she’d hate to poke herself where she isn’twanted,” said Jo crossly, for she disliked the trouble of overseeing afidgety child when she wanted to enjoy herself.Her tone and manner angered Amy, who began to put her boots on, saying, in hermost aggravating way, “I shall go. Meg says I may, and if I pay formyself, Laurie hasn’t anything to do with it.”“You can’t sit with us, for our seats are reserved, and youmustn’t sit alone, so Laurie will give you his place, and that will spoilour pleasure. Or he’ll get another seat for you, and that isn’tproper when you weren’t asked. You shan’t stir a step, so you mayjust stay where you are,” scolded Jo, crosser than ever, having justpricked her finger in her hurry.Sitting on the floor with one boot on, Amy began to cry and Meg to reason withher, when Laurie called from below, and the two girls hurried down, leavingtheir sister wailing. For now and then she forgot her grown-up ways and actedlike a spoiled child. Just as the party was setting out, Amy called over thebanisters in a threatening tone, “You’ll be sorry for this, JoMarch, see if you ain’t.”“Fiddlesticks!” returned Jo, slamming the door.They had a charming time, for The Seven Castles Of The Diamond Lake wasas brilliant and wonderful as heart could wish. But in spite of the comical redimps, sparkling elves, and the gorgeous princes and princesses, Jo’spleasure had a drop of bitterness in it. The fairy queen’s yellow curlsreminded her of Amy, and between the acts she amused herself with wonderingwhat her sister would do to make her ‘sorry for it’. She and Amyhad had many lively skirmishes in the course of their lives, for both had quicktempers and were apt to be violent when fairly roused. Amy teased Jo, and Joirritated Amy, and semioccasional explosions occurred, of which both were muchashamed afterward. Although the oldest, Jo had the least self-control, and hadhard times trying to curb the fiery spirit which was continually getting herinto trouble. Her anger never lasted long, and having humbly confessed herfault, she sincerely repented and tried to do better. Her sisters used to saythat they rather liked to get Jo into a fury because she was such an angelafterward. Poor Jo tried desperately to be good, but her bosom enemy was alwaysready to flame up and defeat her, and it took years of patient effort to subdueit.When they got home, they found Amy reading in the parlor. She assumed aninjured air as they came in, never lifted her eyes from her book, or asked asingle question. Perhaps curiosity might have conquered resentment, if Beth hadnot been there to inquire and receive a glowing description of the play. Ongoing up to put away her best hat, Jo’s first look was toward the bureau,for in their last quarrel Amy had soothed her feelings by turning Jo’stop drawer upside down on the floor. Everything was in its place, however, andafter a hasty glance into her various closets, bags, and boxes, Jo decided thatAmy had forgiven and forgotten her wrongs.There Jo was mistaken, for next day she made a discovery which produced atempest. Meg, Beth, and Amy were sitting together, late in the afternoon, whenJo burst into the room, looking excited and demanding breathlessly, “Hasanyone taken my book?”Meg and Beth said, “No.” at once, and looked surprised. Amy pokedthe fire and said nothing. Jo saw her color rise and was down upon her in aminute.“Amy, you’ve got it!”“No, I haven’t.”“You know where it is, then!”“No, I don’t.”“That’s a fib!” cried Jo, taking her by the shoulders, andlooking fierce enough to frighten a much braver child than Amy.“It isn’t. I haven’t got it, don’t know where it isnow, and don’t care.”“You know something about it, and you’d better tell at once, orI’ll make you.” And Jo gave her a slight shake.“Scold as much as you like, you’ll never see your silly old bookagain,” cried Amy, getting excited in her turn.“Why not?”“I burned it up.”“What! My little book I was so fond of, and worked over, and meant tofinish before Father got home? Have you really burned it?” said Jo,turning very pale, while her eyes kindled and her hands clutched Amy nervously.“Yes, I did! I told you I’d make you pay for being so crossyesterday, and I have, so...”Amy got no farther, for Jo’s hot temper mastered her, and she shook Amytill her teeth chattered in her head, crying in a passion of grief and anger...“You wicked, wicked girl! I never can write it again, and I’llnever forgive you as long as I live.”Meg flew to rescue Amy, and Beth to pacify Jo, but Jo was quite beside herself,and with a parting box on her sister’s ear, she rushed out of the room upto the old sofa in the garret, and finished her fight alone.The storm cleared up below, for Mrs. March came home, and, having heard thestory, soon brought Amy to a sense of the wrong she had done her sister.Jo’s book was the pride of her heart, and was regarded by her family as aliterary sprout of great promise. It was only half a dozen little fairy tales,but Jo had worked over them patiently, putting her whole heart into her work,hoping to make something good enough to print. She had just copied them withgreat care, and had destroyed the old manuscript, so that Amy’s bonfirehad consumed the loving work of several years. It seemed a small loss toothers, but to Jo it was a dreadful calamity, and she felt that it never couldbe made up to her. Beth mourned as for a departed kitten, and Meg refused todefend her pet. Mrs. March looked grave and grieved, and Amy felt that no onewould love her till she had asked pardon for the act which she now regrettedmore than any of them.When the tea bell rang, Jo appeared, looking so grim and unapproachable that ittook all Amy’s courage to say meekly...“Please forgive me, Jo. I’m very, very sorry.”“I never shall forgive you,” was Jo’s stern answer, and fromthat moment she ignored Amy entirely.No one spoke of the great trouble, not even Mrs. March, for all had learned byexperience that when Jo was in that mood words were wasted, and the wisestcourse was to wait till some little accident, or her own generous nature,softened Jo’s resentment and healed the breach. It was not a happyevening, for though they sewed as usual, while their mother read aloud fromBremer, Scott, or Edgeworth, something was wanting, and the sweet home peacewas disturbed. They felt this most when singing time came, for Beth could onlyplay, Jo stood dumb as a stone, and Amy broke down, so Meg and Mother sangalone. But in spite of their efforts to be as cheery as larks, the flutelikevoices did not seem to chord as well as usual, and all felt out of tune.As Jo received her good-night kiss, Mrs. March whispered gently, “Mydear, don’t let the sun go down upon your anger. Forgive each other, helpeach other, and begin again tomorrow.”Jo wanted to lay her head down on that motherly bosom, and cry her grief andanger all away, but tears were an unmanly weakness, and she felt so deeplyinjured that she really couldn’t quite forgive yet. So she winked hard,shook her head, and said gruffly because Amy was listening, “It was anabominable thing, and she doesn’t deserve to be forgiven.”With that she marched off to bed, and there was no merry or confidential gossipthat night.Amy was much offended that her overtures of peace had been repulsed, and beganto wish she had not humbled herself, to feel more injured than ever, and toplume herself on her superior virtue in a way which was particularlyexasperating. Jo still looked like a thunder cloud, and nothing went well allday. It was bitter cold in the morning, she dropped her precious turnover inthe gutter, Aunt March had an attack of the fidgets, Meg was sensitive, Bethwould look grieved and wistful when she got home, and Amy kept making remarksabout people who were always talking about being good and yet wouldn’teven try when other people set them a virtuous example.“Everybody is so hateful, I’ll ask Laurie to go skating. He isalways kind and jolly, and will put me to rights, I know,” said Jo toherself, and off she went.Amy heard the clash of skates, and looked out with an impatient exclamation.“There! She promised I should go next time, for this is the last ice weshall have. But it’s no use to ask such a crosspatch to take me.”“Don’t say that. You were very naughty, and it is hard to forgivethe loss of her precious little book, but I think she might do it now, and Iguess she will, if you try her at the right minute,” said Meg. “Goafter them. Don’t say anything till Jo has got good-natured with Laurie,than take a quiet minute and just kiss her, or do some kind thing, andI’m sure she’ll be friends again with all her heart.”“I’ll try,” said Amy, for the advice suited her, and after aflurry to get ready, she ran after the friends, who were just disappearing overthe hill.It was not far to the river, but both were ready before Amy reached them. Josaw her coming, and turned her back. Laurie did not see, for he was carefullyskating along the shore, sounding the ice, for a warm spell had preceded thecold snap.“I’ll go on to the first bend, and see if it’s all rightbefore we begin to race,” Amy heard him say, as he shot away, lookinglike a young Russian in his fur-trimmed coat and cap.Jo heard Amy panting after her run, stamping her feet and blowing on herfingers as she tried to put her skates on, but Jo never turned and went slowlyzigzagging down the river, taking a bitter, unhappy sort of satisfaction in hersister’s troubles. She had cherished her anger till it grew strong andtook possession of her, as evil thoughts and feelings always do unless cast outat once. As Laurie turned the bend, he shouted back...“Keep near the shore. It isn’t safe in the middle.” Jo heard,but Amy was struggling to her feet and did not catch a word. Jo glanced overher shoulder, and the little demon she was harboring said in her ear...“No matter whether she heard or not, let her take care of herself.”Laurie had vanished round the bend, Jo was just at the turn, and Amy, farbehind, striking out toward the smoother ice in the middle of the river. For aminute Jo stood still with a strange feeling in her heart, then she resolved togo on, but something held and turned her round, just in time to see Amy throwup her hands and go down, with a sudden crash of rotten ice, the splash ofwater, and a cry that made Jo’s heart stand still with fear. She tried tocall Laurie, but her voice was gone. She tried to rush forward, but her feetseemed to have no strength in them, and for a second, she could only standmotionless, staring with a terror-stricken face at the little blue hood abovethe black water. Something rushed swiftly by her, and Laurie’s voicecried out...“Bring a rail. Quick, quick!”How she did it, she never knew, but for the next few minutes she worked as ifpossessed, blindly obeying Laurie, who was quite self-possessed, and lyingflat, held Amy up by his arm and hockey stick till Jo dragged a rail from thefence, and together they got the child out, more frightened than hurt.“Now then, we must walk her home as fast as we can. Pile our things onher, while I get off these confounded skates,” cried Laurie, wrapping hiscoat round Amy, and tugging away at the straps which never seemed so intricatebefore.Shivering, dripping, and crying, they got Amy home, and after an exciting timeof it, she fell asleep, rolled in blankets before a hot fire. During the bustleJo had scarcely spoken but flown about, looking pale and wild, with her thingshalf off, her dress torn, and her hands cut and bruised by ice and rails andrefractory buckles. When Amy was comfortably asleep, the house quiet, and Mrs.March sitting by the bed, she called Jo to her and began to bind up the hurthands.“Are you sure she is safe?” whispered Jo, looking remorsefully atthe golden head, which might have been swept away from her sight forever underthe treacherous ice.“Quite safe, dear. She is not hurt, and won’t even take cold, Ithink, you were so sensible in covering and getting her home quickly,”replied her mother cheerfully.“Laurie did it all. I only let her go. Mother, if she should die, itwould be my fault.” And Jo dropped down beside the bed in a passion ofpenitent tears, telling all that had happened, bitterly condemning her hardnessof heart, and sobbing out her gratitude for being spared the heavy punishmentwhich might have come upon her.“It’s my dreadful temper! I try to cure it, I think I have, andthen it breaks out worse than ever. Oh, Mother, what shall I do? What shall Ido?” cried poor Jo, in despair.“Watch and pray, dear, never get tired of trying, and never think it isimpossible to conquer your fault,” said Mrs. March, drawing the blowzyhead to her shoulder and kissing the wet cheek so tenderly that Jo cried evenharder.“You don’t know, you can’t guess how bad it is! It seems asif I could do anything when I’m in a passion. I get so savage, I couldhurt anyone and enjoy it. I’m afraid I shall do something dreadful someday, and spoil my life, and make everybody hate me. Oh, Mother, help me, dohelp me!”“I will, my child, I will. Don’t cry so bitterly, but remember thisday, and resolve with all your soul that you will never know another like it.Jo, dear, we all have our temptations, some far greater than yours, and itoften takes us all our lives to conquer them. You think your temper is theworst in the world, but mine used to be just like it.”“Yours, Mother? Why, you are never angry!” And for the moment Joforgot remorse in surprise.“I’ve been trying to cure it for forty years, and have onlysucceeded in controlling it. I am angry nearly every day of my life, Jo, but Ihave learned not to show it, and I still hope to learn not to feel it, thoughit may take me another forty years to do so.”The patience and the humility of the face she loved so well was a better lessonto Jo than the wisest lecture, the sharpest reproof. She felt comforted at onceby the sympathy and confidence given her. The knowledge that her mother had afault like hers, and tried to mend it, made her own easier to bear andstrengthened her resolution to cure it, though forty years seemed rather a longtime to watch and pray to a girl of fifteen.“Mother, are you angry when you fold your lips tight together and go outof the room sometimes, when Aunt March scolds or people worry you?” askedJo, feeling nearer and dearer to her mother than ever before.“Yes, I’ve learned to check the hasty words that rise to my lips,and when I feel that they mean to break out against my will, I just go away fora minute, and give myself a little shake for being so weak and wicked,”answered Mrs. March with a sigh and a smile, as she smoothed and fastened upJo’s disheveled hair.“How did you learn to keep still? That is what troubles me, for the sharpwords fly out before I know what I’m about, and the more I say the worseI get, till it’s a pleasure to hurt people’s feelings and saydreadful things. Tell me how you do it, Marmee dear.”“My good mother used to help me...”“As you do us...” interrupted Jo, with a grateful kiss.“But I lost her when I was a little older than you are, and for years hadto struggle on alone, for I was too proud to confess my weakness to anyoneelse. I had a hard time, Jo, and shed a good many bitter tears over myfailures, for in spite of my efforts I never seemed to get on. Then your fathercame, and I was so happy that I found it easy to be good. But by-and-by, when Ihad four little daughters round me and we were poor, then the old trouble beganagain, for I am not patient by nature, and it tried me very much to see mychildren wanting anything.”“Poor Mother! What helped you then?”“Your father, Jo. He never loses patience, never doubts or complains, butalways hopes, and works and waits so cheerfully that one is ashamed to dootherwise before him. He helped and comforted me, and showed me that I must tryto practice all the virtues I would have my little girls possess, for I wastheir example. It was easier to try for your sakes than for my own. A startledor surprised look from one of you when I spoke sharply rebuked me more than anywords could have done, and the love, respect, and confidence of my children wasthe sweetest reward I could receive for my efforts to be the woman I would havethem copy.”“Oh, Mother, if I’m ever half as good as you, I shall besatisfied,” cried Jo, much touched.“I hope you will be a great deal better, dear, but you must keep watchover your ‘bosom enemy’, as father calls it, or it may sadden, ifnot spoil your life. You have had a warning. Remember it, and try with heartand soul to master this quick temper, before it brings you greater sorrow andregret than you have known today.”“I will try, Mother, I truly will. But you must help me, remind me, andkeep me from flying out. I used to see Father sometimes put his finger on hislips, and look at you with a very kind but sober face, and you always foldedyour lips tight and went away. Was he reminding you then?” asked Josoftly.“Yes. I asked him to help me so, and he never forgot it, but saved mefrom many a sharp word by that little gesture and kind look.”Jo saw that her mother’s eyes filled and her lips trembled as she spoke,and fearing that she had said too much, she whispered anxiously, “Was itwrong to watch you and to speak of it? I didn’t mean to be rude, butit’s so comfortable to say all I think to you, and feel so safe and happyhere.”“My Jo, you may say anything to your mother, for it is my greatesthappiness and pride to feel that my girls confide in me and know how much Ilove them.”“I thought I’d grieved you.”“No, dear, but speaking of Father reminded me how much I miss him, howmuch I owe him, and how faithfully I should watch and work to keep his littledaughters safe and good for him.”“Yet you told him to go, Mother, and didn’t cry when he went, andnever complain now, or seem as if you needed any help,” said Jo,wondering.“I gave my best to the country I love, and kept my tears till he wasgone. Why should I complain, when we both have merely done our duty and willsurely be the happier for it in the end? If I don’t seem to need help, itis because I have a better friend, even than Father, to comfort and sustain me.My child, the troubles and temptations of your life are beginning and may bemany, but you can overcome and outlive them all if you learn to feel thestrength and tenderness of your Heavenly Father as you do that of your earthlyone. The more you love and trust Him, the nearer you will feel to Him, and theless you will depend on human power and wisdom. His love and care never tire orchange, can never be taken from you, but may become the source of lifelongpeace, happiness, and strength. Believe this heartily, and go to God with allyour little cares, and hopes, and sins, and sorrows, as freely and confidinglyas you come to your mother.”Jo’s only answer was to hold her mother close, and in the silence whichfollowed the sincerest prayer she had ever prayed left her heart without words.For in that sad yet happy hour, she had learned not only the bitterness ofremorse and despair, but the sweetness of self-denial and self-control, and ledby her mother’s hand, she had drawn nearer to the Friend who alwayswelcomes every child with a love stronger than that of any father, tendererthan that of any mother.Amy stirred and sighed in her sleep, and as if eager to begin at once to mendher fault, Jo looked up with an expression on her face which it had never wornbefore.“I let the sun go down on my anger. I wouldn’t forgive her, andtoday, if it hadn’t been for Laurie, it might have been too late! Howcould I be so wicked?” said Jo, half aloud, as she leaned over her sistersoftly stroking the wet hair scattered on the pillow.As if she heard, Amy opened her eyes, and held out her arms, with a smile thatwent straight to Jo’s heart. Neither said a word, but they hugged oneanother close, in spite of the blankets, and everything was forgiven andforgotten in one hearty kiss.CHAPTER NINEMEG GOES TO VANITY FAIR“I do think it was the most fortunate thing in the world that thosechildren should have the measles just now,” said Meg, one April day, asshe stood packing the ‘go abroady’ trunk in her room, surrounded byher sisters.“And so nice of Annie Moffat not to forget her promise. A whole fortnightof fun will be regularly splendid,” replied Jo, looking like a windmillas she folded skirts with her long arms.“And such lovely weather, I’m so glad of that,” added Beth,tidily sorting neck and hair ribbons in her best box, lent for the greatoccasion.“I wish I was going to have a fine time and wear all these nicethings,” said Amy with her mouth full of pins, as she artisticallyreplenished her sister’s cushion.“I wish you were all going, but as you can’t, I shall keep myadventures to tell you when I come back. I’m sure it’s the least Ican do when you have been so kind, lending me things and helping me getready,” said Meg, glancing round the room at the very simple outfit,which seemed nearly perfect in their eyes.“What did Mother give you out of the treasure box?” asked Amy, whohad not been present at the opening of a certain cedar chest in which Mrs.March kept a few relics of past splendor, as gifts for her girls when theproper time came.“A pair of silk stockings, that pretty carved fan, and a lovely bluesash. I wanted the violet silk, but there isn’t time to make it over, soI must be contented with my old tarlaton.”“It will look nice over my new muslin skirt, and the sash will set it offbeautifully. I wish I hadn’t smashed my coral bracelet, for you mighthave had it,” said Jo, who loved to give and lend, but whose possessionswere usually too dilapidated to be of much use.“There is a lovely old-fashioned pearl set in the treasure chest, butMother said real flowers were the prettiest ornament for a young girl, andLaurie promised to send me all I want,” replied Meg. “Now, let mesee, there’s my new gray walking suit, just curl up the feather in myhat, Beth, then my poplin for Sunday and the small party, it looks heavy forspring, doesn’t it? The violet silk would be so nice. Oh, dear!”“Never mind, you’ve got the tarlaton for the big party, and youalways look like an angel in white,” said Amy, brooding over the littlestore of finery in which her soul delighted.“It isn’t low-necked, and it doesn’t sweep enough, but itwill have to do. My blue housedress looks so well, turned and freshly trimmed,that I feel as if I’d got a new one. My silk sacque isn’t a bit thefashion, and my bonnet doesn’t look like Sallie’s. I didn’tlike to say anything, but I was sadly disappointed in my umbrella. I toldMother black with a white handle, but she forgot and bought a green one with ayellowish handle. It’s strong and neat, so I ought not to complain, but Iknow I shall feel ashamed of it beside Annie’s silk one with a goldtop,” sighed Meg, surveying the little umbrella with great disfavor.“Change it,” advised Jo.“I won’t be so silly, or hurt Marmee’s feelings, when shetook so much pains to get my things. It’s a nonsensical notion of mine,and I’m not going to give up to it. My silk stockings and two pairs ofnew gloves are my comfort. You are a dear to lend me yours, Jo. I feel so richand sort of elegant, with two new pairs, and the old ones cleaned up forcommon.” And Meg took a refreshing peep at her glove box.“Annie Moffat has blue and pink bows on her nightcaps. Would you put someon mine?” she asked, as Beth brought up a pile of snowy muslins, freshfrom Hannah’s hands.“No, I wouldn’t, for the smart caps won’t match the plaingowns without any trimming on them. Poor folks shouldn’t rig,” saidJo decidedly.“I wonder if I shall ever be happy enough to have real lace on my clothesand bows on my caps?” said Meg impatiently.“You said the other day that you’d be perfectly happy if you couldonly go to Annie Moffat’s,” observed Beth in her quiet way.“So I did! Well, I am happy, and I won’t fret, but it does seem asif the more one gets the more one wants, doesn’t it? There now, the traysare ready, and everything in but my ball dress, which I shall leave for Motherto pack,” said Meg, cheering up, as she glanced from the half-filledtrunk to the many times pressed and mended white tarlaton, which she called her‘ball dress’ with an important air.The next day was fine, and Meg departed in style for a fortnight of novelty andpleasure. Mrs. March had consented to the visit rather reluctantly, fearingthat Margaret would come back more discontented than she went. But she beggedso hard, and Sallie had promised to take good care of her, and a littlepleasure seemed so delightful after a winter of irksome work that the motheryielded, and the daughter went to take her first taste of fashionable life.The Moffats were very fashionable, and simple Meg was rather daunted, at first,by the splendor of the house and the elegance of its occupants. But they werekindly people, in spite of the frivolous life they led, and soon put theirguest at her ease. Perhaps Meg felt, without understanding why, that they werenot particularly cultivated or intelligent people, and that all their gildingcould not quite conceal the ordinary material of which they were made. Itcertainly was agreeable to fare sumptuously, drive in a fine carriage, wear herbest frock every day, and do nothing but enjoy herself. It suited her exactly,and soon she began to imitate the manners and conversation of those about her,to put on little airs and graces, use French phrases, crimp her hair, take inher dresses, and talk about the fashions as well as she could. The more she sawof Annie Moffat’s pretty things, the more she envied her and sighed to berich. Home now looked bare and dismal as she thought of it, work grew harderthan ever, and she felt that she was a very destitute and much-injured girl, inspite of the new gloves and silk stockings.She had not much time for repining, however, for the three young girls werebusily employed in ‘having a good time’. They shopped, walked,rode, and called all day, went to theaters and operas or frolicked at home inthe evening, for Annie had many friends and knew how to entertain them. Herolder sisters were very fine young ladies, and one was engaged, which wasextremely interesting and romantic, Meg thought. Mr. Moffat was a fat, jollyold gentleman, who knew her father, and Mrs. Moffat, a fat, jolly old lady, whotook as great a fancy to Meg as her daughter had done. Everyone petted her, and‘Daisey’, as they called her, was in a fair way to have her headturned.When the evening for the small party came, she found that the poplinwouldn’t do at all, for the other girls were putting on thin dresses andmaking themselves very fine indeed. So out came the tarlatan, looking older,limper, and shabbier than ever beside Sallie’s crisp new one. Meg saw thegirls glance at it and then at one another, and her cheeks began to burn, forwith all her gentleness she was very proud. No one said a word about it, butSallie offered to dress her hair, and Annie to tie her sash, and Belle, theengaged sister, praised her white arms. But in their kindness Meg saw only pityfor her poverty, and her heart felt very heavy as she stood by herself, whilethe others laughed, chattered, and flew about like gauzy butterflies. The hard,bitter feeling was getting pretty bad, when the maid brought in a box offlowers. Before she could speak, Annie had the cover off, and all wereexclaiming at the lovely roses, heath, and fern within.“It’s for Belle, of course, George always sends her some, but theseare altogether ravishing,” cried Annie, with a great sniff.“They are for Miss March, the man said. And here’s a note,”put in the maid, holding it to Meg.“What fun! Who are they from? Didn’t know you had a lover,”cried the girls, fluttering about Meg in a high state of curiosity andsurprise.“The note is from Mother, and the flowers from Laurie,” said Megsimply, yet much gratified that he had not forgotten her.“Oh, indeed!” said Annie with a funny look, as Meg slipped the noteinto her pocket as a sort of talisman against envy, vanity, and false pride,for the few loving words had done her good, and the flowers cheered her up bytheir beauty.Feeling almost happy again, she laid by a few ferns and roses for herself, andquickly made up the rest in dainty bouquets for the breasts, hair, or skirts ofher friends, offering them so prettily that Clara, the elder sister, told hershe was ‘the sweetest little thing she ever saw’, and they lookedquite charmed with her small attention. Somehow the kind act finished herdespondency, and when all the rest went to show themselves to Mrs. Moffat, shesaw a happy, bright-eyed face in the mirror, as she laid her ferns against herrippling hair and fastened the roses in the dress that didn’t strike heras so very shabby now.She enjoyed herself very much that evening, for she danced to her heart’scontent. Everyone was very kind, and she had three compliments. Annie made hersing, and some one said she had a remarkably fine voice. Major Lincoln askedwho ‘the fresh little girl with the beautiful eyes’ was, and Mr.Moffat insisted on dancing with her because she ‘didn’t dawdle, buthad some spring in her’, as he gracefully expressed it. So altogether shehad a very nice time, till she overheard a bit of conversation, which disturbedher extremely. She was sitting just inside the conservatory, waiting for herpartner to bring her an ice, when she heard a voice ask on the other side ofthe flowery wall...“How old is he?”“Sixteen or seventeen, I should say,” replied another voice.“It would be a grand thing for one of those girls, wouldn’t it?Sallie says they are very intimate now, and the old man quite dotes onthem.”“Mrs. M. has made her plans, I dare say, and will play her cards well,early as it is. The girl evidently doesn’t think of it yet,” saidMrs. Moffat.“She told that fib about her momma, as if she did know, and colored upwhen the flowers came quite prettily. Poor thing! She’d be so nice if shewas only got up in style. Do you think she’d be offended if we offered tolend her a dress for Thursday?” asked another voice.“She’s proud, but I don’t believe she’d mind, for thatdowdy tarlaton is all she has got. She may tear it tonight, and that will be agood excuse for offering a decent one.”Here Meg’s partner appeared, to find her looking much flushed and ratheragitated. She was proud, and her pride was useful just then, for it helped herhide her mortification, anger, and disgust at what she had just heard. For,innocent and unsuspicious as she was, she could not help understanding thegossip of her friends. She tried to forget it, but could not, and keptrepeating to herself, “Mrs. M. has made her plans,” “that fibabout her mamma,” and “dowdy tarlaton,” till she was ready tocry and rush home to tell her troubles and ask for advice. As that wasimpossible, she did her best to seem gay, and being rather excited, shesucceeded so well that no one dreamed what an effort she was making. She wasvery glad when it was all over and she was quiet in her bed, where she couldthink and wonder and fume till her head ached and her hot cheeks were cooled bya few natural tears. Those foolish, yet well meant words, had opened a newworld to Meg, and much disturbed the peace of the old one in which till now shehad lived as happily as a child. Her innocent friendship with Laurie wasspoiled by the silly speeches she had overheard. Her faith in her mother was alittle shaken by the worldly plans attributed to her by Mrs. Moffat, who judgedothers by herself, and the sensible resolution to be contented with the simplewardrobe which suited a poor man’s daughter was weakened by theunnecessary pity of girls who thought a shabby dress one of the greatestcalamities under heaven.Poor Meg had a restless night, and got up heavy-eyed, unhappy, half resentfultoward her friends, and half ashamed of herself for not speaking out franklyand setting everything right. Everybody dawdled that morning, and it was noonbefore the girls found energy enough even to take up their worsted work.Something in the manner of her friends struck Meg at once. They treated herwith more respect, she thought, took quite a tender interest in what she said,and looked at her with eyes that plainly betrayed curiosity. All this surprisedand flattered her, though she did not understand it till Miss Belle looked upfrom her writing, and said, with a sentimental air...“Daisy, dear, I’ve sent an invitation to your friend, Mr. Laurence,for Thursday. We should like to know him, and it’s only a propercompliment to you.”Meg colored, but a mischievous fancy to tease the girls made her replydemurely, “You are very kind, but I’m afraid he won’tcome.”“Why not, Cherie?” asked Miss Belle.“He’s too old.”“My child, what do you mean? What is his age, I beg to know!” criedMiss Clara.“Nearly seventy, I believe,” answered Meg, counting stitches tohide the merriment in her eyes.“You sly creature! Of course we meant the young man,” exclaimedMiss Belle, laughing.“There isn’t any, Laurie is only a little boy.” And Meglaughed also at the queer look which the sisters exchanged as she thusdescribed her supposed lover.“About your age,” Nan said.“Nearer my sister Jo’s; I am seventeen in August,” returnedMeg, tossing her head.“It’s very nice of him to send you flowers, isn’t it?”said Annie, looking wise about nothing.“Yes, he often does, to all of us, for their house is full, and we are sofond of them. My mother and old Mr. Laurence are friends, you know, so it isquite natural that we children should play together,” and Meg hoped theywould say no more.“It’s evident Daisy isn’t out yet,” said Miss Clara toBelle with a nod.“Quite a pastoral state of innocence all round,” returned MissBelle with a shrug.“I’m going out to get some little matters for my girls. Can I doanything for you, young ladies?” asked Mrs. Moffat, lumbering in like anelephant in silk and lace.“No, thank you, ma’am,” replied Sallie. “I’ve gotmy new pink silk for Thursday and don’t want a thing.”“Nor I...” began Meg, but stopped because it occurred to her thatshe did want several things and could not have them.“What shall you wear?” asked Sallie.“My old white one again, if I can mend it fit to be seen, it got sadlytorn last night,” said Meg, trying to speak quite easily, but feelingvery uncomfortable.“Why don’t you send home for another?” said Sallie, who wasnot an observing young lady.“I haven’t got any other.” It cost Meg an effort to say that,but Sallie did not see it and exclaimed in amiable surprise, “Only that?How funny...” She did not finish her speech, for Belle shook her head ather and broke in, saying kindly...“Not at all. Where is the use of having a lot of dresses when sheisn’t out yet? There’s no need of sending home, Daisy, even if youhad a dozen, for I’ve got a sweet blue silk laid away, which I’veoutgrown, and you shall wear it to please me, won’t you, dear?”“You are very kind, but I don’t mind my old dress if youdon’t, it does well enough for a little girl like me,” said Meg.“Now do let me please myself by dressing you up in style. I admire to doit, and you’d be a regular little beauty with a touch here and there. Ishan’t let anyone see you till you are done, and then we’ll burstupon them like Cinderella and her godmother going to the ball,” saidBelle in her persuasive tone.Meg couldn’t refuse the offer so kindly made, for a desire to see if shewould be ‘a little beauty’ after touching up caused her to acceptand forget all her former uncomfortable feelings toward the Moffats.On the Thursday evening, Belle shut herself up with her maid, and between themthey turned Meg into a fine lady. They crimped and curled her hair, theypolished her neck and arms with some fragrant powder, touched her lips withcoralline salve to make them redder, and Hortense would have added ‘asoupcon of rouge’, if Meg had not rebelled. They laced her into asky-blue dress, which was so tight she could hardly breathe and so low in theneck that modest Meg blushed at herself in the mirror. A set of silver filagreewas added, bracelets, necklace, brooch, and even earrings, for Hortense tiedthem on with a bit of pink silk which did not show. A cluster of tea-rose budsat the bosom, and a ruche, reconciled Meg to the display of her pretty, whiteshoulders, and a pair of high-heeled silk boots satisfied the last wish of herheart. A lace handkerchief, a plumy fan, and a bouquet in a shoulder holderfinished her off, and Miss Belle surveyed her with the satisfaction of a littlegirl with a newly dressed doll.“Mademoiselle is charmante, tres jolie, is she not?” criedHortense, clasping her hands in an affected rapture.“Come and show yourself,” said Miss Belle, leading the way to theroom where the others were waiting.As Meg went rustling after, with her long skirts trailing, her earringstinkling, her curls waving, and her heart beating, she felt as if her fun hadreally begun at last, for the mirror had plainly told her that she was ‘alittle beauty’. Her friends repeated the pleasing phraseenthusiastically, and for several minutes she stood, like a jackdaw in thefable, enjoying her borrowed plumes, while the rest chattered like a party ofmagpies.“While I dress, do you drill her, Nan, in the management of her skirt andthose French heels, or she will trip herself up. Take your silver butterfly,and catch up that long curl on the left side of her head, Clara, anddon’t any of you disturb the charming work of my hands,” saidBelle, as she hurried away, looking well pleased with her success.“You don’t look a bit like yourself, but you are very nice.I’m nowhere beside you, for Belle has heaps of taste, and you’requite French, I assure you. Let your flowers hang, don’t be so careful ofthem, and be sure you don’t trip,” returned Sallie, trying not tocare that Meg was prettier than herself.Keeping that warning carefully in mind, Margaret got safely down stairs andsailed into the drawing rooms where the Moffats and a few early guests wereassembled. She very soon discovered that there is a charm about fine clotheswhich attracts a certain class of people and secures their respect. Severalyoung ladies, who had taken no notice of her before, were very affectionate allof a sudden. Several young gentlemen, who had only stared at her at the otherparty, now not only stared, but asked to be introduced, and said all manner offoolish but agreeable things to her, and several old ladies, who sat on thesofas, and criticized the rest of the party, inquired who she was with an airof interest. She heard Mrs. Moffat reply to one of them...“Daisy March—father a colonel in the army—one of our firstfamilies, but reverses of fortune, you know; intimate friends of the Laurences;sweet creature, I assure you; my Ned is quite wild about her.”“Dear me!” said the old lady, putting up her glass for anotherobservation of Meg, who tried to look as if she had not heard and been rathershocked at Mrs. Moffat’s fibs. The ‘queer feeling’ did notpass away, but she imagined herself acting the new part of fine lady and so goton pretty well, though the tight dress gave her a side-ache, the train keptgetting under her feet, and she was in constant fear lest her earrings shouldfly off and get lost or broken. She was flirting her fan and laughing at thefeeble jokes of a young gentleman who tried to be witty, when she suddenlystopped laughing and looked confused, for just opposite, she saw Laurie. He wasstaring at her with undisguised surprise, and disapproval also, she thought,for though he bowed and smiled, yet something in his honest eyes made her blushand wish she had her old dress on. To complete her confusion, she saw Bellenudge Annie, and both glance from her to Laurie, who, she was happy to see,looked unusually boyish and shy.“Silly creatures, to put such thoughts into my head. I won’t carefor it, or let it change me a bit,” thought Meg, and rustled across theroom to shake hands with her friend.“I’m glad you came, I was afraid you wouldn’t.” shesaid, with her most grown-up air.“Jo wanted me to come, and tell her how you looked, so I did,”answered Laurie, without turning his eyes upon her, though he half smiled ather maternal tone.“What shall you tell her?” asked Meg, full of curiosity to know hisopinion of her, yet feeling ill at ease with him for the first time.“I shall say I didn’t know you, for you look so grown-up and unlikeyourself, I’m quite afraid of you,” he said, fumbling at his glovebutton.“How absurd of you! The girls dressed me up for fun, and I rather likeit. Wouldn’t Jo stare if she saw me?” said Meg, bent on making himsay whether he thought her improved or not.“Yes, I think she would,” returned Laurie gravely.“Don’t you like me so?” asked Meg.“No, I don’t,” was the blunt reply.“Why not?” in an anxious tone.He glanced at her frizzled head, bare shoulders, and fantastically trimmeddress with an expression that abashed her more than his answer, which had not aparticle of his usual politeness in it.“I don’t like fuss and feathers.”That was altogether too much from a lad younger than herself, and Meg walkedaway, saying petulantly, “You are the rudest boy I ever saw.”Feeling very much ruffled, she went and stood at a quiet window to cool hercheeks, for the tight dress gave her an uncomfortably brilliant color. As shestood there, Major Lincoln passed by, and a minute after she heard him sayingto his mother...“They are making a fool of that little girl. I wanted you to see her, butthey have spoiled her entirely. She’s nothing but a doll tonight.”“Oh, dear!” sighed Meg. “I wish I’d been sensible andworn my own things, then I should not have disgusted other people, or felt souncomfortable and ashamed of myself.”She leaned her forehead on the cool pane, and stood half hidden by thecurtains, never minding that her favorite waltz had begun, till some onetouched her, and turning, she saw Laurie, looking penitent, as he said, withhis very best bow and his hand out...“Please forgive my rudeness, and come and dance with me.”“I’m afraid it will be too disagreeable to you,” said Meg,trying to look offended and failing entirely.“Not a bit of it, I’m dying to do it. Come, I’ll be good. Idon’t like your gown, but I do think you are just splendid.” And hewaved his hands, as if words failed to express his admiration.Meg smiled and relented, and whispered as they stood waiting to catch the time,“Take care my skirt doesn’t trip you up. It’s the plague ofmy life and I was a goose to wear it.”“Pin it round your neck, and then it will be useful,” said Laurie,looking down at the little blue boots, which he evidently approved of.Away they went fleetly and gracefully, for having practiced at home, they werewell matched, and the blithe young couple were a pleasant sight to see, as theytwirled merrily round and round, feeling more friendly than ever after theirsmall tiff.“Laurie, I want you to do me a favor, will you?” said Meg, as hestood fanning her when her breath gave out, which it did very soon though shewould not own why.“Won’t I!” said Laurie, with alacrity.“Please don’t tell them at home about my dress tonight. Theywon’t understand the joke, and it will worry Mother.”“Then why did you do it?” said Laurie’s eyes, so plainly thatMeg hastily added...“I shall tell them myself all about it, and ‘fess’ to Motherhow silly I’ve been. But I’d rather do it myself. So you’llnot tell, will you?”“I give you my word I won’t, only what shall I say when they askme?”“Just say I looked pretty well and was having a good time.”“I’ll say the first with all my heart, but how about the other? Youdon’t look as if you were having a good time. Are you?” And Laurielooked at her with an expression which made her answer in a whisper...“No, not just now. Don’t think I’m horrid. I only wanted alittle fun, but this sort doesn’t pay, I find, and I’m gettingtired of it.”“Here comes Ned Moffat. What does he want?” said Laurie, knittinghis black brows as if he did not regard his young host in the light of apleasant addition to the party.“He put his name down for three dances, and I suppose he’s comingfor them. What a bore!” said Meg, assuming a languid air which amusedLaurie immensely.He did not speak to her again till suppertime, when he saw her drinkingchampagne with Ned and his friend Fisher, who were behaving ‘like a pairof fools’, as Laurie said to himself, for he felt a brotherly sort ofright to watch over the Marches and fight their battles whenever a defender wasneeded.“You’ll have a splitting headache tomorrow, if you drink much ofthat. I wouldn’t, Meg, your mother doesn’t like it, youknow,” he whispered, leaning over her chair, as Ned turned to refill herglass and Fisher stooped to pick up her fan.“I’m not Meg tonight, I’m ‘a doll’ who does allsorts of crazy things. Tomorrow I shall put away my ‘fuss andfeathers’ and be desperately good again,” she answered with anaffected little laugh.“Wish tomorrow was here, then,” muttered Laurie, walking off,ill-pleased at the change he saw in her.Meg danced and flirted, chattered and giggled, as the other girls did. Aftersupper she undertook the German, and blundered through it, nearly upsetting herpartner with her long skirt, and romping in a way that scandalized Laurie, wholooked on and meditated a lecture. But he got no chance to deliver it, for Megkept away from him till he came to say good night.“Remember!” she said, trying to smile, for the splitting headachehad already begun.“Silence a la mort,” replied Laurie, with a melodramatic flourish,as he went away.This little bit of byplay excited Annie’s curiosity, but Meg was tootired for gossip and went to bed, feeling as if she had been to a masqueradeand hadn’t enjoyed herself as much as she expected. She was sick all thenext day, and on Saturday went home, quite used up with her fortnight’sfun and feeling that she had ‘sat in the lap of luxury’ longenough.“It does seem pleasant to be quiet, and not have company manners on allthe time. Home is a nice place, though it isn’t splendid,” saidMeg, looking about her with a restful expression, as she sat with her motherand Jo on the Sunday evening.“I’m glad to hear you say so, dear, for I was afraid home wouldseem dull and poor to you after your fine quarters,” replied her mother,who had given her many anxious looks that day. For motherly eyes are quick tosee any change in children’s faces.Meg had told her adventures gayly and said over and over what a charming timeshe had had, but something still seemed to weigh upon her spirits, and when theyounger girls were gone to bed, she sat thoughtfully staring at the fire,saying little and looking worried. As the clock struck nine and Jo proposedbed, Meg suddenly left her chair and, taking Beth’s stool, leaned herelbows on her mother’s knee, saying bravely...“Marmee, I want to ‘fess’.”“I thought so. What is it, dear?”“Shall I go away?” asked Jo discreetly.“Of course not. Don’t I always tell you everything? I was ashamedto speak of it before the younger children, but I want you to know all thedreadful things I did at the Moffats’.”“We are prepared,” said Mrs. March, smiling but looking a littleanxious.“I told you they dressed me up, but I didn’t tell you that theypowdered and squeezed and frizzled, and made me look like a fashion-plate.Laurie thought I wasn’t proper. I know he did, though he didn’t sayso, and one man called me ‘a doll’. I knew it was silly, but theyflattered me and said I was a beauty, and quantities of nonsense, so I let themmake a fool of me.”“Is that all?” asked Jo, as Mrs. March looked silently at thedowncast face of her pretty daughter, and could not find it in her heart toblame her little follies.“No, I drank champagne and romped and tried to flirt, and was altogetherabominable,” said Meg self-reproachfully.“There is something more, I think.” And Mrs. March smoothed thesoft cheek, which suddenly grew rosy as Meg answered slowly...“Yes. It’s very silly, but I want to tell it, because I hate tohave people say and think such things about us and Laurie.”Then she told the various bits of gossip she had heard at the Moffats’,and as she spoke, Jo saw her mother fold her lips tightly, as if ill pleasedthat such ideas should be put into Meg’s innocent mind.“Well, if that isn’t the greatest rubbish I ever heard,”cried Jo indignantly. “Why didn’t you pop out and tell them so onthe spot?”“I couldn’t, it was so embarrassing for me. I couldn’t helphearing at first, and then I was so angry and ashamed, I didn’t rememberthat I ought to go away.”“Just wait till I see Annie Moffat, and I’ll show you how to settlesuch ridiculous stuff. The idea of having ‘plans’ and being kind toLaurie because he’s rich and may marry us by-and-by! Won’t he shoutwhen I tell him what those silly things say about us poor children?” AndJo laughed, as if on second thoughts the thing struck her as a good joke.“If you tell Laurie, I’ll never forgive you! She mustn’t,must she, Mother?” said Meg, looking distressed.“No, never repeat that foolish gossip, and forget it as soon as youcan,” said Mrs. March gravely. “I was very unwise to let you goamong people of whom I know so little, kind, I dare say, but worldly, ill-bred,and full of these vulgar ideas about young people. I am more sorry than I canexpress for the mischief this visit may have done you, Meg.”“Don’t be sorry, I won’t let it hurt me. I’ll forgetall the bad and remember only the good, for I did enjoy a great deal, and thankyou very much for letting me go. I’ll not be sentimental or dissatisfied,Mother. I know I’m a silly little girl, and I’ll stay with you tillI’m fit to take care of myself. But it is nice to be praised and admired,and I can’t help saying I like it,” said Meg, looking half ashamedof the confession.“That is perfectly natural, and quite harmless, if the liking does notbecome a passion and lead one to do foolish or unmaidenly things. Learn to knowand value the praise which is worth having, and to excite the admiration ofexcellent people by being modest as well as pretty, Meg.”Margaret sat thinking a moment, while Jo stood with her hands behind her,looking both interested and a little perplexed, for it was a new thing to seeMeg blushing and talking about admiration, lovers, and things of that sort. AndJo felt as if during that fortnight her sister had grown up amazingly, and wasdrifting away from her into a world where she could not follow.“Mother, do you have ‘plans’, as Mrs. Moffat said?”asked Meg bashfully.“Yes, my dear, I have a great many, all mothers do, but mine differsomewhat from Mrs. Moffat’s, I suspect. I will tell you some of them, forthe time has come when a word may set this romantic little head and heart ofyours right, on a very serious subject. You are young, Meg, but not too youngto understand me, and mothers’ lips are the fittest to speak of suchthings to girls like you. Jo, your turn will come in time, perhaps, so listento my ‘plans’ and help me carry them out, if they are good.”Jo went and sat on one arm of the chair, looking as if she thought they wereabout to join in some very solemn affair. Holding a hand of each, and watchingthe two young faces wistfully, Mrs. March said, in her serious yet cheeryway...“I want my daughters to be beautiful, accomplished, and good. To beadmired, loved, and respected. To have a happy youth, to be well and wiselymarried, and to lead useful, pleasant lives, with as little care and sorrow totry them as God sees fit to send. To be loved and chosen by a good man is thebest and sweetest thing which can happen to a woman, and I sincerely hope mygirls may know this beautiful experience. It is natural to think of it, Meg,right to hope and wait for it, and wise to prepare for it, so that when thehappy time comes, you may feel ready for the duties and worthy of the joy. Mydear girls, I am ambitious for you, but not to have you make a dash in theworld, marry rich men merely because they are rich, or have splendid houses,which are not homes because love is wanting. Money is a needful and preciousthing, and when well used, a noble thing, but I never want you to think it isthe first or only prize to strive for. I’d rather see you poormen’s wives, if you were happy, beloved, contented, than queens onthrones, without self-respect and peace.”“Poor girls don’t stand any chance, Belle says, unless they putthemselves forward,” sighed Meg.“Then we’ll be old maids,” said Jo stoutly.“Right, Jo. Better be happy old maids than unhappy wives, or unmaidenlygirls, running about to find husbands,” said Mrs. March decidedly.“Don’t be troubled, Meg, poverty seldom daunts a sincere lover.Some of the best and most honored women I know were poor girls, but solove-worthy that they were not allowed to be old maids. Leave these things totime. Make this home happy, so that you may be fit for homes of your own, ifthey are offered you, and contented here if they are not. One thing remember,my girls. Mother is always ready to be your confidant, Father to be yourfriend, and both of us hope and trust that our daughters, whether married orsingle, will be the pride and comfort of our lives.”“We will, Marmee, we will!” cried both, with all their hearts, asshe bade them good night.CHAPTER TENTHE P.C. AND P.O.As spring came on, a new set of amusements became the fashion, and thelengthening days gave long afternoons for work and play of all sorts. Thegarden had to be put in order, and each sister had a quarter of the little plotto do what she liked with. Hannah used to say, “I’d know which eachof them gardings belonged to, ef I see ’em in Chiny,” and so shemight, for the girls’ tastes differed as much as their characters.Meg’s had roses and heliotrope, myrtle, and a little orange tree in it.Jo’s bed was never alike two seasons, for she was always tryingexperiments. This year it was to be a plantation of sun flowers, the seeds ofwhich cheerful and aspiring plant were to feed Aunt Cockle-top and her familyof chicks. Beth had old-fashioned fragrant flowers in her garden, sweet peasand mignonette, larkspur, pinks, pansies, and southernwood, with chickweed forthe birds and catnip for the pussies. Amy had a bower in hers, rather small andearwiggy, but very pretty to look at, with honeysuckle and morning-glorieshanging their colored horns and bells in graceful wreaths all over it, tallwhite lilies, delicate ferns, and as many brilliant, picturesque plants aswould consent to blossom there.Gardening, walks, rows on the river, and flower hunts employed the fine days,and for rainy ones, they had house diversions, some old, some new, all more orless original. One of these was the ‘P.C.’, for as secret societieswere the fashion, it was thought proper to have one, and as all of the girlsadmired Dickens, they called themselves the Pickwick Club. With a fewinterruptions, they had kept this up for a year, and met every Saturday eveningin the big garret, on which occasions the ceremonies were as follows: Threechairs were arranged in a row before a table on which was a lamp, also fourwhite badges, with a big ‘P.C.’ in different colors on each, andthe weekly newspaper called, The Pickwick Portfolio, to which all contributedsomething, while Jo, who reveled in pens and ink, was the editor. At seveno’clock, the four members ascended to the clubroom, tied their badgesround their heads, and took their seats with great solemnity. Meg, as theeldest, was Samuel Pickwick, Jo, being of a literary turn, Augustus Snodgrass,Beth, because she was round and rosy, Tracy Tupman, and Amy, who was alwaystrying to do what she couldn’t, was Nathaniel Winkle. Pickwick, thepresident, read the paper, which was filled with original tales, poetry, localnews, funny advertisements, and hints, in which they good-naturedly remindedeach other of their faults and short comings. On one occasion, Mr. Pickwick puton a pair of spectacles without any glass, rapped upon the table, hemmed, andhaving stared hard at Mr. Snodgrass, who was tilting back in his chair, till hearranged himself properly, began to read:“THE PICKWICK PORTFOLIO”MAY 20, 18—POET’S CORNERANNIVERSARY ODEAgain we meet to celebrate    With badge and solemn rite,Our fifty-second anniversary,    In Pickwick Hall, tonight.We all are here in perfect health,    None gone from our small band:Again we see each well-known face,    And press each friendly hand.Our Pickwick, always at his post,    With reverence we greet,As, spectacles on nose, he reads    Our well-filled weekly sheet.Although he suffers from a cold,    We joy to hear him speak,For words of wisdom from him fall,    In spite of croak or squeak.Old six-foot Snodgrass looms on high,    With elephantine grace,And beams upon the company,    With brown and jovial face.Poetic fire lights up his eye,    He struggles ’gainst his lot.Behold ambition on his brow,    And on his nose, a blot.Next our peaceful Tupman comes,    So rosy, plump, and sweet,Who chokes with laughter at the puns,    And tumbles off his seat.Prim little Winkle too is here,    With every hair in place,A model of propriety,    Though he hates to wash his face.The year is gone, we still unite    To joke and laugh and read,And tread the path of literature    That doth to glory lead.Long may our paper prosper well,    Our club unbroken be,And coming years their blessings pour    On the useful, gay ‘P. C.’.A. SNODGRASSTHE MASKED MARRIAGE(A Tale Of Venice)Gondola after gondola swept up to the marble steps, and left its lovely load toswell the brilliant throng that filled the stately halls of Count Adelon. Knights and ladies, elves and pages, monks and flower girls, all mingled gailyin the dance. Sweet voices and rich melody filled the air, and so with mirthand music the masquerade went on. “Has your Highness seen the Lady Violatonight?” asked a gallant troubadour of the fairy queen who floated downthe hall upon his arm.“Yes, is she not lovely, though so sad!  Her dress is well chosen, too,for in a week she weds Count Antonio, whom she passionately hates.”“By my faith, I envy him. Yonder he comes, arrayed like a bridegroom,except the black mask. When that is off we shall see how he regards the fairmaid whose heart he cannot win, though her stern father bestows herhand,” returned the troubadour.“Tis whispered that she loves the young English artist who haunts hersteps, and is spurned by the old Count,” said the lady, as they joinedthe dance. The revel was at its height when a priest appeared, and withdrawingthe young pair to an alcove, hung with purple velvet, he motioned them tokneel. Instant silence fell on the gay throng, and not a sound, but the dash offountains or the rustle of orange groves sleeping in the moonlight, broke thehush, as Count de Adelon spoke thus:“My lords and ladies, pardon the ruse by which I have gathered you hereto witness the marriage of my daughter. Father, we wait your services.”All eyes turned toward the bridal party, and a murmur of amazement went throughthe throng, for neither bride nor groom removed their masks. Curiosity andwonder possessed all hearts, but respect restrained all tongues till the holyrite was over. Then the eager spectators gathered round the count, demanding anexplanation.“Gladly would I give it if I could, but I only know that it was the whimof my timid Viola, and I yielded to it.  Now, my children, let the play end.Unmask and receive my blessing.”But neither bent the knee, for the young bridegroom replied in a tone thatstartled all listeners as the mask fell, disclosing the noble face of FerdinandDevereux, the artist lover, and leaning on the breast where now flashed thestar of an English earl was the lovely Viola, radiant with joy and beauty.“My lord, you scornfully bade me claim your daughter when I could boastas high a name and vast a fortune as the Count Antonio. I can do more, for evenyour ambitious soul cannot refuse the Earl of Devereux and De Vere, when hegives his ancient name and boundless wealth in return for the beloved hand ofthis fair lady, now my wife.”The count stood like one changed to stone, and turning to the bewildered crowd,Ferdinand added, with a gay smile of triumph, “To you, my gallantfriends, I can only wish that your wooing may prosper as mine has done, andthat you may all win as fair a bride as I have by this masked marriage.”S. PICKWICKWhy is the P. C. like the Tower of Babel?It is full of unruly members.THE HISTORY OF A SQUASHOnce upon a time a farmer planted a little seed in his garden, and after awhile it sprouted and became a vine and bore many squashes. One day in October,when they were ripe, he picked one and took it to market. A grocerman boughtand put it in his shop. That same morning, a little girl in a brown hat andblue dress, with a round face and snub nose, went and bought it for her mother.She lugged it home, cut it up, and boiled it in the big pot, mashed some of itwith salt and butter, for dinner. And to the rest she added a pint of milk, twoeggs, four spoons of sugar, nutmeg, and some crackers, put it in a deep dish,and baked it till it was brown and nice, and next day it was eaten by a familynamed March.T. TUPMANMr. Pickwick, Sir:—    I address you upon the subject of sin the sinner I mean is a man namedWinkle who makes trouble in his club by laughing and sometimes won’twrite his piece in this fine paper I hope you will pardon his badness and lethim send a French fable because he can’t write out of his head as he hasso many lessons to do and no brains in future I will try to take time by thefetlock and prepare some work which will be all commy la fo that meansall right I am in haste as it is nearly school time.Yours respectably,N. WINKLE[The above is a manly and handsome acknowledgment of past misdemeanors. If ouryoung friend studied punctuation, it would be well.]A SAD ACCIDENTOn Friday last, we were startled by a violent shock in our basement, followedby cries of distress. On rushing in a body to the cellar, we discovered ourbeloved President prostrate upon the floor, having tripped and fallen whilegetting wood for domestic purposes. A perfect scene of ruin met our eyes, forin his fall Mr. Pickwick had plunged his head and shoulders into a tub ofwater, upset a keg of soft soap upon his manly form, and torn his garmentsbadly. On being removed from this perilous situation, it was discovered that hehad suffered no injury but several bruises, and we are happy to add, is nowdoing well.ED.THE PUBLIC BEREAVEMENTIt is our painful duty to record the sudden and mysterious disappearance of ourcherished friend, Mrs. Snowball Pat Paw. This lovely and beloved cat was thepet of a large circle of warm and admiring friends; for her beauty attractedall eyes, her graces and virtues endeared her to all hearts, and her loss isdeeply felt by the whole community.    When last seen, she was sitting at the gate, watching the butcher’scart, and it is feared that some villain, tempted by her charms, basely stoleher. Weeks have passed, but no trace of her has been discovered, and werelinquish all hope, tie a black ribbon to her basket, set aside her dish, andweep for her as one lost to us forever.A sympathizing friend sends the following gem:A LAMENTFOR S. B. PAT PAWWe mourn the loss of our little pet,    And sigh o’er her hapless fate,For never more by the fire she’ll sit,    Nor play by the old green gate.The little grave where her infant sleeps    Is ’neath the chestnut tree.But o’er her grave we may not weep,    We know not where it may be.Her empty bed, her idle ball,    Will never see her more;No gentle tap, no loving purr    Is heard at the parlor door.Another cat comes after her mice,    A cat with a dirty face,But she does not hunt as our darling did,    Nor play with her airy grace.Her stealthy paws tread the very hall    Where Snowball used to play,But she only spits at the dogs our pet    So gallantly drove away.She is useful and mild, and does her best,    But she is not fair to see,And we cannot give her your place dear,    Nor worship her as we worship thee.A.S.    ADVERTISEMENTSMISS ORANTHY BLUGGAGE, theaccomplished strong-minded lecturer, will deliver her famous lecture on“WOMAN AND HERPOSITION” at Pickwick Hall, next Saturday Evening, afterthe usual performances.A WEEKLY MEETING will be held at Kitchen Place,to teach young ladies how to cook. Hannah Brown will preside, and all areinvited to attend.THE DUSTPAN SOCIETY will meet onWednesday next, and parade in the upper story of the Club House. All members toappear in uniform and shoulder their brooms at nine precisely.MRS. BETH BOUNCER will open hernew assortment of Doll’s Millinery next week. The latest Paris fashionshave arrived, and orders are respectfully solicited.A NEW PLAY will appear at the Barnville Theatre,in the course of a few weeks, which will surpass anything ever seen on theAmerican stage. “THE GREEKSLAVE, or Constantine the Avenger,” is the name of thisthrilling drama!!!HINTSIf S.P. didn’t use so much soap on his hands, he wouldn’t always belate at breakfast. A.S. is requested not to whistle in the street. T.T. pleasedon’t forget Amy’s napkin. N.W. must not fret because his dress hasnot nine tucks.WEEKLY REPORTMeg—Good.Jo—Bad.Beth—Very Good.Amy—Middling.As the President finished reading the paper (which I beg leave to assure myreaders is a bona fide copy of one written by bona fide girls once upon atime), a round of applause followed, and then Mr. Snodgrass rose to make aproposition.“Mr. President and gentlemen,” he began, assuming a parliamentaryattitude and tone, “I wish to propose the admission of a newmember—one who highly deserves the honor, would be deeply grateful forit, and would add immensely to the spirit of the club, the literary value ofthe paper, and be no end jolly and nice. I propose Mr. Theodore Laurence as anhonorary member of the P. C. Come now, do have him.”Jo’s sudden change of tone made the girls laugh, but all looked ratheranxious, and no one said a word as Snodgrass took his seat.“We’ll put it to a vote,” said the President. “All infavor of this motion please to manifest it by saying, ‘Aye’.”A loud response from Snodgrass, followed, to everybody’s surprise, by atimid one from Beth.“Contrary-minded say, ‘No’.”Meg and Amy were contrary-minded, and Mr. Winkle rose to say with greatelegance, “We don’t wish any boys, they only joke and bounce about.This is a ladies’ club, and we wish to be private and proper.”“I’m afraid he’ll laugh at our paper, and make fun of usafterward,” observed Pickwick, pulling the little curl on her forehead,as she always did when doubtful.Up rose Snodgrass, very much in earnest. “Sir, I give you my word as agentleman, Laurie won’t do anything of the sort. He likes to write, andhe’ll give a tone to our contributions and keep us from beingsentimental, don’t you see? We can do so little for him, and he does somuch for us, I think the least we can do is to offer him a place here, and makehim welcome if he comes.”This artful allusion to benefits conferred brought Tupman to his feet, lookingas if he had quite made up his mind.“Yes; we ought to do it, even if we are afraid. I say he may come, andhis grandpa, too, if he likes.”This spirited burst from Beth electrified the club, and Jo left her seat toshake hands approvingly. “Now then, vote again. Everybody rememberit’s our Laurie, and say, ‘Aye!’” cried Snodgrassexcitedly.“Aye! Aye! Aye!” replied three voices at once.“Good! Bless you! Now, as there’s nothing like ‘taking timeby the fetlock’, as Winkle characteristically observes, allow me topresent the new member.” And, to the dismay of the rest of the club, Jothrew open the door of the closet, and displayed Laurie sitting on a rag bag,flushed and twinkling with suppressed laughter.“You rogue! You traitor! Jo, how could you?” cried the three girls,as Snodgrass led her friend triumphantly forth, and producing both a chair anda badge, installed him in a jiffy.“The coolness of you two rascals is amazing,” began Mr. Pickwick,trying to get up an awful frown and only succeeding in producing an amiablesmile. But the new member was equal to the occasion, and rising, with agrateful salutation to the Chair, said in the most engaging manner, “Mr.President and ladies—I beg pardon, gentlemen—allow me to introducemyself as Sam Weller, the very humble servant of the club.”“Good! Good!” cried Jo, pounding with the handle of the old warmingpan on which she leaned.“My faithful friend and noble patron,” continued Laurie with a waveof the hand, “who has so flatteringly presented me, is not to be blamedfor the base stratagem of tonight. I planned it, and she only gave in afterlots of teasing.”“Come now, don’t lay it all on yourself. You know I proposed thecupboard,” broke in Snodgrass, who was enjoying the joke amazingly.“Never mind what she says. I’m the wretch that did it, sir,”said the new member, with a Welleresque nod to Mr. Pickwick. “But on myhonor, I never will do so again, and henceforth devote myself to the interestof this immortal club.”“Hear! Hear!” cried Jo, clashing the lid of the warming pan like acymbal.“Go on, go on!” added Winkle and Tupman, while the President bowedbenignly.“I merely wish to say, that as a slight token of my gratitude for thehonor done me, and as a means of promoting friendly relations between adjoiningnations, I have set up a post office in the hedge in the lower corner of thegarden, a fine, spacious building with padlocks on the doors and everyconvenience for the mails, also the females, if I may be allowed theexpression. It’s the old martin house, but I’ve stopped up the doorand made the roof open, so it will hold all sorts of things, and save ourvaluable time. Letters, manuscripts, books, and bundles can be passed in there,and as each nation has a key, it will be uncommonly nice, I fancy. Allow me topresent the club key, and with many thanks for your favor, take my seat.”Great applause as Mr. Weller deposited a little key on the table and subsided,the warming pan clashed and waved wildly, and it was some time before ordercould be restored. A long discussion followed, and everyone came outsurprising, for everyone did her best. So it was an unusually lively meeting,and did not adjourn till a late hour, when it broke up with three shrill cheersfor the new member.No one ever regretted the admittance of Sam Weller, for a more devoted,well-behaved, and jovial member no club could have. He certainly did add‘spirit’ to the meetings, and ‘a tone’ to the paper,for his orations convulsed his hearers and his contributions were excellent,being patriotic, classical, comical, or dramatic, but never sentimental. Joregarded them as worthy of Bacon, Milton, or Shakespeare, and remodeled her ownworks with good effect, she thought.The P. O. was a capital little institution, and flourished wonderfully, fornearly as many queer things passed through it as through the real post office.Tragedies and cravats, poetry and pickles, garden seeds and long letters, musicand gingerbread, rubbers, invitations, scoldings, and puppies. The oldgentleman liked the fun, and amused himself by sending odd bundles, mysteriousmessages, and funny telegrams, and his gardener, who was smitten withHannah’s charms, actually sent a love letter to Jo’s care. How theylaughed when the secret came out, never dreaming how many love letters thatlittle post office would hold in the years to come.CHAPTER ELEVENEXPERIMENTS“The first of June! The Kings are off to the seashore tomorrow, andI’m free. Three months’ vacation—how I shall enjoy it!”exclaimed Meg, coming home one warm day to find Jo laid upon the sofa in anunusual state of exhaustion, while Beth took off her dusty boots, and Amy madelemonade for the refreshment of the whole party.“Aunt March went today, for which, oh, be joyful!” said Jo.“I was mortally afraid she’d ask me to go with her. If she had, Ishould have felt as if I ought to do it, but Plumfield is about as gay as achurchyard, you know, and I’d rather be excused. We had a flurry gettingthe old lady off, and I had a fright every time she spoke to me, for I was insuch a hurry to be through that I was uncommonly helpful and sweet, and fearedshe’d find it impossible to part from me. I quaked till she was fairly inthe carriage, and had a final fright, for as it drove of, she popped out herhead, saying, ‘Josyphine, won’t you—?’ I didn’thear any more, for I basely turned and fled. I did actually run, and whiskedround the corner where I felt safe.”“Poor old Jo! She came in looking as if bears were after her,” saidBeth, as she cuddled her sister’s feet with a motherly air.“Aunt March is a regular samphire, is she not?” observed Amy,tasting her mixture critically.“She means vampire, not seaweed, but it doesn’t matter. It’stoo warm to be particular about one’s parts of speech,” murmuredJo.“What shall you do all your vacation?” asked Amy, changing thesubject with tact.“I shall lie abed late, and do nothing,” replied Meg, from thedepths of the rocking chair. “I’ve been routed up early all winterand had to spend my days working for other people, so now I’m going torest and revel to my heart’s content.”“No,” said Jo, “that dozy way wouldn’t suit me.I’ve laid in a heap of books, and I’m going to improve my shininghours reading on my perch in the old apple tree, when I’m not havingl——”“Don’t say ‘larks!’” implored Amy, as a returnsnub for the ‘samphire’ correction.“I’ll say ‘nightingales’ then, with Laurie.That’s proper and appropriate, since he’s a warbler.”“Don’t let us do any lessons, Beth, for a while, but play all thetime and rest, as the girls mean to,” proposed Amy.“Well, I will, if Mother doesn’t mind. I want to learn some newsongs, and my children need fitting up for the summer. They are dreadfully outof order and really suffering for clothes.”“May we, Mother?” asked Meg, turning to Mrs. March, who sat sewingin what they called ‘Marmee’s corner’.“You may try your experiment for a week and see how you like it. I thinkby Saturday night you will find that all play and no work is as bad as all workand no play.”“Oh, dear, no! It will be delicious, I’m sure,” said Megcomplacently.“I now propose a toast, as my ‘friend and pardner, SairyGamp’, says. Fun forever, and no grubbing!” cried Jo, rising, glassin hand, as the lemonade went round.They all drank it merrily, and began the experiment by lounging for the rest ofthe day. Next morning, Meg did not appear till ten o’clock. Her solitarybreakfast did not taste good, and the room seemed lonely and untidy, for Jo hadnot filled the vases, Beth had not dusted, and Amy’s books lay scatteredabout. Nothing was neat and pleasant but ‘Marmee’s corner’,which looked as usual. And there Meg sat, to ‘rest and read’, whichmeant to yawn and imagine what pretty summer dresses she would get with hersalary. Jo spent the morning on the river with Laurie and the afternoon readingand crying over The Wide, Wide World, up in the apple tree. Beth beganby rummaging everything out of the big closet where her family resided, butgetting tired before half done, she left her establishment topsy-turvy and wentto her music, rejoicing that she had no dishes to wash. Amy arranged her bower,put on her best white frock, smoothed her curls, and sat down to draw under thehoneysuckle, hoping someone would see and inquire who the young artist was. Asno one appeared but an inquisitive daddy-longlegs, who examined her work withinterest, she went to walk, got caught in a shower, and came home dripping.At teatime they compared notes, and all agreed that it had been a delightful,though unusually long day. Meg, who went shopping in the afternoon and got a‘sweet blue muslin’, had discovered, after she had cut the breadthsoff, that it wouldn’t wash, which mishap made her slightly cross. Jo hadburned the skin off her nose boating, and got a raging headache by reading toolong. Beth was worried by the confusion of her closet and the difficulty oflearning three or four songs at once, and Amy deeply regretted the damage doneher frock, for Katy Brown’s party was to be the next day and now likeFlora McFlimsey, she had ‘nothing to wear’. But these were meretrifles, and they assured their mother that the experiment was working finely.She smiled, said nothing, and with Hannah’s help did their neglectedwork, keeping home pleasant and the domestic machinery running smoothly. It wasastonishing what a peculiar and uncomfortable state of things was produced bythe ‘resting and reveling’ process. The days kept getting longerand longer, the weather was unusually variable and so were tempers; anunsettled feeling possessed everyone, and Satan found plenty of mischief forthe idle hands to do. As the height of luxury, Meg put out some of her sewing,and then found time hang so heavily, that she fell to snipping and spoiling herclothes in her attempts to furbish them up a la Moffat. Jo read till her eyesgave out and she was sick of books, got so fidgety that even good-naturedLaurie had a quarrel with her, and so reduced in spirits that she desperatelywished she had gone with Aunt March. Beth got on pretty well, for she wasconstantly forgetting that it was to be all play and no work, and fell backinto her old ways now and then. But something in the air affected her, and morethan once her tranquility was much disturbed, so much so that on one occasionshe actually shook poor dear Joanna and told her she was ‘afright’. Amy fared worst of all, for her resources were small, and whenher sisters left her to amuse herself, she soon found that accomplished andimportant little self a great burden. She didn’t like dolls, fairy taleswere childish, and one couldn’t draw all the time. Tea partiesdidn’t amount to much, neither did picnics, unless very well conducted.“If one could have a fine house, full of nice girls, or go traveling, thesummer would be delightful, but to stay at home with three selfish sisters anda grown-up boy was enough to try the patience of a Boaz,” complained MissMalaprop, after several days devoted to pleasure, fretting, and ennui.No one would own that they were tired of the experiment, but by Friday nighteach acknowledged to herself that she was glad the week was nearly done. Hopingto impress the lesson more deeply, Mrs. March, who had a good deal of humor,resolved to finish off the trial in an appropriate manner, so she gave Hannah aholiday and let the girls enjoy the full effect of the play system.When they got up on Saturday morning, there was no fire in the kitchen, nobreakfast in the dining room, and no mother anywhere to be seen.“Mercy on us! What has happened?” cried Jo, staring about her indismay.Meg ran upstairs and soon came back again, looking relieved but ratherbewildered, and a little ashamed.“Mother isn’t sick, only very tired, and she says she is going tostay quietly in her room all day and let us do the best we can. It’s avery queer thing for her to do, she doesn’t act a bit like herself. Butshe says it has been a hard week for her, so we mustn’t grumble but takecare of ourselves.”“That’s easy enough, and I like the idea, I’m aching forsomething to do, that is, some new amusement, you know,” added Joquickly.In fact it was an immense relief to them all to have a little work, and theytook hold with a will, but soon realized the truth of Hannah’s saying,“Housekeeping ain’t no joke.” There was plenty of food in thelarder, and while Beth and Amy set the table, Meg and Jo got breakfast,wondering as they did why servants ever talked about hard work.“I shall take some up to Mother, though she said we were not to think ofher, for she’d take care of herself,” said Meg, who presided andfelt quite matronly behind the teapot.So a tray was fitted out before anyone began, and taken up with thecook’s compliments. The boiled tea was very bitter, the omelet scorched,and the biscuits speckled with saleratus, but Mrs. March received her repastwith thanks and laughed heartily over it after Jo was gone.“Poor little souls, they will have a hard time, I’m afraid, butthey won’t suffer, and it will do them good,” she said, producingthe more palatable viands with which she had provided herself, and disposing ofthe bad breakfast, so that their feelings might not be hurt, a motherly littledeception for which they were grateful.Many were the complaints below, and great the chagrin of the head cook at herfailures. “Never mind, I’ll get the dinner and be servant, you bemistress, keep your hands nice, see company, and give orders,” said Jo,who knew still less than Meg about culinary affairs.This obliging offer was gladly accepted, and Margaret retired to the parlor,which she hastily put in order by whisking the litter under the sofa andshutting the blinds to save the trouble of dusting. Jo, with perfect faith inher own powers and a friendly desire to make up the quarrel, immediately put anote in the office, inviting Laurie to dinner.“You’d better see what you have got before you think of havingcompany,” said Meg, when informed of the hospitable but rash act.“Oh, there’s corned beef and plenty of potatoes, and I shall getsome asparagus and a lobster, ‘for a relish’, as Hannah says.We’ll have lettuce and make a salad. I don’t know how, but the booktells. I’ll have blanc mange and strawberries for dessert, and coffeetoo, if you want to be elegant.”“Don’t try too many messes, Jo, for you can’t make anythingbut gingerbread and molasses candy fit to eat. I wash my hands of the dinnerparty, and since you have asked Laurie on your own responsibility, you may justtake care of him.”“I don’t want you to do anything but be civil to him and help tothe pudding. You’ll give me your advice if I get in a muddle, won’tyou?” asked Jo, rather hurt.“Yes, but I don’t know much, except about bread and a few trifles.You had better ask Mother’s leave before you order anything,”returned Meg prudently.“Of course I shall. I’m not a fool.” And Jo went off in ahuff at the doubts expressed of her powers.“Get what you like, and don’t disturb me. I’m going out todinner and can’t worry about things at home,” said Mrs. March, whenJo spoke to her. “I never enjoyed housekeeping, and I’m going totake a vacation today, and read, write, go visiting, and amuse myself.”The unusual spectacle of her busy mother rocking comfortably and reading earlyin the morning made Jo feel as if some unnatural phenomenon had occurred, foran eclipse, an earthquake, or a volcanic eruption would hardly have seemedstranger.“Everything is out of sorts, somehow,” she said to herself, goingdownstairs. “There’s Beth crying, that’s a sure sign thatsomething is wrong in this family. If Amy is bothering, I’ll shakeher.”Feeling very much out of sorts herself, Jo hurried into the parlor to find Bethsobbing over Pip, the canary, who lay dead in the cage with his little clawspathetically extended, as if imploring the food for want of which he had died.“It’s all my fault, I forgot him, there isn’t a seed or adrop left. Oh, Pip! Oh, Pip! How could I be so cruel to you?” cried Beth,taking the poor thing in her hands and trying to restore him.Jo peeped into his half-open eye, felt his little heart, and finding him stiffand cold, shook her head, and offered her domino box for a coffin.“Put him in the oven, and maybe he will get warm and revive,” saidAmy hopefully.“He’s been starved, and he shan’t be baked now he’sdead. I’ll make him a shroud, and he shall be buried in the garden, andI’ll never have another bird, never, my Pip! for I am too bad to ownone,” murmured Beth, sitting on the floor with her pet folded in herhands.“The funeral shall be this afternoon, and we will all go. Now,don’t cry, Bethy. It’s a pity, but nothing goes right this week,and Pip has had the worst of the experiment. Make the shroud, and lay him in mybox, and after the dinner party, we’ll have a nice little funeral,”said Jo, beginning to feel as if she had undertaken a good deal.Leaving the others to console Beth, she departed to the kitchen, which was in amost discouraging state of confusion. Putting on a big apron, she fell to workand got the dishes piled up ready for washing, when she discovered that thefire was out.“Here’s a sweet prospect!” muttered Jo, slamming the stovedoor open, and poking vigorously among the cinders.Having rekindled the fire, she thought she would go to market while the waterheated. The walk revived her spirits, and flattering herself that she had madegood bargains, she trudged home again, after buying a very young lobster, somevery old asparagus, and two boxes of acid strawberries. By the time she gotcleared up, the dinner arrived and the stove was red-hot. Hannah had left a panof bread to rise, Meg had worked it up early, set it on the hearth for a secondrising, and forgotten it. Meg was entertaining Sallie Gardiner in the parlor,when the door flew open and a floury, crocky, flushed, and disheveled figureappeared, demanding tartly...“I say, isn’t bread ‘riz’ enough when it runs over thepans?”Sallie began to laugh, but Meg nodded and lifted her eyebrows as high as theywould go, which caused the apparition to vanish and put the sour bread into theoven without further delay. Mrs. March went out, after peeping here and thereto see how matters went, also saying a word of comfort to Beth, who sat makinga winding sheet, while the dear departed lay in state in the domino box. Astrange sense of helplessness fell upon the girls as the gray bonnet vanishedround the corner, and despair seized them when a few minutes later Miss Crockerappeared, and said she’d come to dinner. Now this lady was a thin, yellowspinster, with a sharp nose and inquisitive eyes, who saw everything andgossiped about all she saw. They disliked her, but had been taught to be kindto her, simply because she was old and poor and had few friends. So Meg gaveher the easy chair and tried to entertain her, while she asked questions,criticized everything, and told stories of the people whom she knew.Language cannot describe the anxieties, experiences, and exertions which Jounderwent that morning, and the dinner she served up became a standing joke.Fearing to ask any more advice, she did her best alone, and discovered thatsomething more than energy and good will is necessary to make a cook. Sheboiled the asparagus for an hour and was grieved to find the heads cooked offand the stalks harder than ever. The bread burned black; for the salad dressingso aggravated her that she could not make it fit to eat. The lobster was ascarlet mystery to her, but she hammered and poked till it was unshelled andits meager proportions concealed in a grove of lettuce leaves. The potatoes hadto be hurried, not to keep the asparagus waiting, and were not done at thelast. The blanc mange was lumpy, and the strawberries not as ripe as theylooked, having been skilfully ‘deaconed’.“Well, they can eat beef and bread and butter, if they are hungry, onlyit’s mortifying to have to spend your whole morning for nothing,”thought Jo, as she rang the bell half an hour later than usual, and stood, hot,tired, and dispirited, surveying the feast spread before Laurie, accustomed toall sorts of elegance, and Miss Crocker, whose tattling tongue would reportthem far and wide.Poor Jo would gladly have gone under the table, as one thing after another wastasted and left, while Amy giggled, Meg looked distressed, Miss Crocker pursedher lips, and Laurie talked and laughed with all his might to give a cheerfultone to the festive scene. Jo’s one strong point was the fruit, for shehad sugared it well, and had a pitcher of rich cream to eat with it. Her hotcheeks cooled a trifle, and she drew a long breath as the pretty glass plateswent round, and everyone looked graciously at the little rosy islands floatingin a sea of cream. Miss Crocker tasted first, made a wry face, and drank somewater hastily. Jo, who refused, thinking there might not be enough, for theydwindled sadly after the picking over, glanced at Laurie, but he was eatingaway manfully, though there was a slight pucker about his mouth and he kept hiseye fixed on his plate. Amy, who was fond of delicate fare, took a heapingspoonful, choked, hid her face in her napkin, and left the table precipitately.“Oh, what is it?” exclaimed Jo, trembling.“Salt instead of sugar, and the cream is sour,” replied Meg with atragic gesture.Jo uttered a groan and fell back in her chair, remembering that she had given alast hasty powdering to the berries out of one of the two boxes on the kitchentable, and had neglected to put the milk in the refrigerator. She turnedscarlet and was on the verge of crying, when she met Laurie’s eyes, whichwould look merry in spite of his heroic efforts. The comical side of the affairsuddenly struck her, and she laughed till the tears ran down her cheeks. So dideveryone else, even ‘Croaker’ as the girls called the old lady, andthe unfortunate dinner ended gaily, with bread and butter, olives and fun.“I haven’t strength of mind enough to clear up now, so we willsober ourselves with a funeral,” said Jo, as they rose, and Miss Crockermade ready to go, being eager to tell the new story at another friend’sdinner table.They did sober themselves for Beth’s sake. Laurie dug a grave under theferns in the grove, little Pip was laid in, with many tears by histender-hearted mistress, and covered with moss, while a wreath of violets andchickweed was hung on the stone which bore his epitaph, composed by Jo whileshe struggled with the dinner.Here lies Pip March,Who died the 7th of June;Loved and lamented sore,And not forgotten soon.At the conclusion of the ceremonies, Beth retired to her room, overcome withemotion and lobster, but there was no place of repose, for the beds were notmade, and she found her grief much assuaged by beating up the pillows andputting things in order. Meg helped Jo clear away the remains of the feast,which took half the afternoon and left them so tired that they agreed to becontented with tea and toast for supper.Laurie took Amy to drive, which was a deed of charity, for the sour creamseemed to have had a bad effect upon her temper. Mrs. March came home to findthe three older girls hard at work in the middle of the afternoon, and a glanceat the closet gave her an idea of the success of one part of the experiment.Before the housewives could rest, several people called, and there was ascramble to get ready to see them. Then tea must be got, errands done, and oneor two necessary bits of sewing neglected until the last minute. As twilightfell, dewy and still, one by one they gathered on the porch where the Juneroses were budding beautifully, and each groaned or sighed as she sat down, asif tired or troubled.“What a dreadful day this has been!” began Jo, usually the first tospeak.“It has seemed shorter than usual, but so uncomfortable,” said Meg.“Not a bit like home,” added Amy.“It can’t seem so without Marmee and little Pip,” sighedBeth, glancing with full eyes at the empty cage above her head.“Here’s Mother, dear, and you shall have another bird tomorrow, ifyou want it.”As she spoke, Mrs. March came and took her place among them, looking as if herholiday had not been much pleasanter than theirs.“Are you satisfied with your experiment, girls, or do you want anotherweek of it?” she asked, as Beth nestled up to her and the rest turnedtoward her with brightening faces, as flowers turn toward the sun.“I don’t!” cried Jo decidedly.“Nor I,” echoed the others.“You think then, that it is better to have a few duties and live a littlefor others, do you?”“Lounging and larking doesn’t pay,” observed Jo, shaking herhead. “I’m tired of it and mean to go to work at something rightoff.”“Suppose you learn plain cooking. That’s a useful accomplishment,which no woman should be without,” said Mrs. March, laughing inaudibly atthe recollection of Jo’s dinner party, for she had met Miss Crocker andheard her account of it.“Mother, did you go away and let everything be, just to see howwe’d get on?” cried Meg, who had had suspicions all day.“Yes, I wanted you to see how the comfort of all depends on each doingher share faithfully. While Hannah and I did your work, you got on pretty well,though I don’t think you were very happy or amiable. So I thought, as alittle lesson, I would show you what happens when everyone thinks only ofherself. Don’t you feel that it is pleasanter to help one another, tohave daily duties which make leisure sweet when it comes, and to bear andforbear, that home may be comfortable and lovely to us all?”“We do, Mother, we do!” cried the girls.“Then let me advise you to take up your little burdens again, for thoughthey seem heavy sometimes, they are good for us, and lighten as we learn tocarry them. Work is wholesome, and there is plenty for everyone. It keeps usfrom ennui and mischief, is good for health and spirits, and gives us a senseof power and independence better than money or fashion.”“We’ll work like bees, and love it too, see if wedon’t,” said Jo. “I’ll learn plain cooking for myholiday task, and the next dinner party I have shall be a success.”“I’ll make the set of shirts for father, instead of letting you doit, Marmee. I can and I will, though I’m not fond of sewing. That will bebetter than fussing over my own things, which are plenty nice enough as theyare.” said Meg.“I’ll do my lessons every day, and not spend so much time with mymusic and dolls. I am a stupid thing, and ought to be studying, notplaying,” was Beth’s resolution, while Amy followed their exampleby heroically declaring, “I shall learn to make buttonholes, and attendto my parts of speech.”“Very good! Then I am quite satisfied with the experiment, and fancy thatwe shall not have to repeat it, only don’t go to the other extreme anddelve like slaves. Have regular hours for work and play, make each day bothuseful and pleasant, and prove that you understand the worth of time byemploying it well. Then youth will be delightful, old age will bring fewregrets, and life become a beautiful success, in spite of poverty.”“We’ll remember, Mother!” and they did.CHAPTER TWELVECAMP LAURENCEBeth was postmistress, for, being most at home, she could attend to itregularly, and dearly liked the daily task of unlocking the little door anddistributing the mail. One July day she came in with her hands full, and wentabout the house leaving letters and parcels like the penny post.“Here’s your posy, Mother! Laurie never forgets that,” shesaid, putting the fresh nosegay in the vase that stood in ‘Marmee’scorner’, and was kept supplied by the affectionate boy.“Miss Meg March, one letter and a glove,” continued Beth,delivering the articles to her sister, who sat near her mother, stitchingwristbands.“Why, I left a pair over there, and here is only one,” said Meg,looking at the gray cotton glove. “Didn’t you drop the other in thegarden?”“No, I’m sure I didn’t, for there was only one in theoffice.”“I hate to have odd gloves! Never mind, the other may be found. My letteris only a translation of the German song I wanted. I think Mr. Brooke did it,for this isn’t Laurie’s writing.”Mrs. March glanced at Meg, who was looking very pretty in her gingham morninggown, with the little curls blowing about her forehead, and very womanly, asshe sat sewing at her little worktable, full of tidy white rolls, sounconscious of the thought in her mother’s mind as she sewed and sang,while her fingers flew and her thoughts were busied with girlish fancies asinnocent and fresh as the pansies in her belt, that Mrs. March smiled and wassatisfied.“Two letters for Doctor Jo, a book, and a funny old hat, which coveredthe whole post office and stuck outside,” said Beth, laughing as she wentinto the study where Jo sat writing.“What a sly fellow Laurie is! I said I wished bigger hats were thefashion, because I burn my face every hot day. He said, ‘Why mind thefashion? Wear a big hat, and be comfortable!’ I said I would if I hadone, and he has sent me this, to try me. I’ll wear it for fun, and showhim I don’t care for the fashion.” And hanging the antiquebroad-brim on a bust of Plato, Jo read her letters.One from her mother made her cheeks glow and her eyes fill, for it said toher...My Dear:I write a little word to tell you with how much satisfaction I watch yourefforts to control your temper. You say nothing about your trials, failures, orsuccesses, and think, perhaps, that no one sees them but the Friend whose helpyou daily ask, if I may trust the well-worn cover of your guidebook. I, too,have seen them all, and heartily believe in the sincerity of your resolution,since it begins to bear fruit. Go on, dear, patiently and bravely, and alwaysbelieve that no one sympathizes more tenderly with you than your loving...Mother“That does me good! That’s worth millions of money and pecks ofpraise. Oh, Marmee, I do try! I will keep on trying, and not get tired, since Ihave you to help me.”Laying her head on her arms, Jo wet her little romance with a few happy tears,for she had thought that no one saw and appreciated her efforts to be good, andthis assurance was doubly precious, doubly encouraging, because unexpected andfrom the person whose commendation she most valued. Feeling stronger than everto meet and subdue her Apollyon, she pinned the note inside her frock, as ashield and a reminder, lest she be taken unaware, and proceeded to open herother letter, quite ready for either good or bad news. In a big, dashing hand,Laurie wrote...Dear Jo, What ho!Some English girls and boys are coming to see me tomorrow and I want to have ajolly time. If it’s fine, I’m going to pitch my tent in Longmeadow,and row up the whole crew to lunch and croquet—have a fire, make messes,gypsy fashion, and all sorts of larks. They are nice people, and like suchthings. Brooke will go to keep us boys steady, and Kate Vaughn will playpropriety for the girls. I want you all to come, can’t let Beth off atany price, and nobody shall worry her. Don’t bother about rations,I’ll see to that and everything else, only do come, there’s a goodfellow!In a tearing hurry, Yours ever, Laurie.“Here’s richness!” cried Jo, flying in to tell the news toMeg.“Of course we can go, Mother? It will be such a help to Laurie, for I canrow, and Meg see to the lunch, and the children be useful in some way.”“I hope the Vaughns are not fine grown-up people. Do you know anythingabout them, Jo?” asked Meg.“Only that there are four of them. Kate is older than you, Fred and Frank(twins) about my age, and a little girl (Grace), who is nine or ten. Laurieknew them abroad, and liked the boys. I fancied, from the way he primmed up hismouth in speaking of her, that he didn’t admire Kate much.”“I’m so glad my French print is clean, it’s just the thingand so becoming!” observed Meg complacently. “Have you anythingdecent, Jo?”“Scarlet and gray boating suit, good enough for me. I shall row and trampabout, so I don’t want any starch to think of. You’ll come,Betty?”“If you won’t let any boys talk to me.”“Not a boy!”“I like to please Laurie, and I’m not afraid of Mr. Brooke, he isso kind. But I don’t want to play, or sing, or say anything. I’llwork hard and not trouble anyone, and you’ll take care of me, Jo, soI’ll go.”“That’s my good girl. You do try to fight off your shyness, and Ilove you for it. Fighting faults isn’t easy, as I know, and a cheery wordkind of gives a lift. Thank you, Mother,” And Jo gave the thin cheek agrateful kiss, more precious to Mrs. March than if it had given back the rosyroundness of her youth.“I had a box of chocolate drops, and the picture I wanted to copy,”said Amy, showing her mail.“And I got a note from Mr. Laurence, asking me to come over and play tohim tonight, before the lamps are lighted, and I shall go,” added Beth,whose friendship with the old gentleman prospered finely.“Now let’s fly round, and do double duty today, so that we can playtomorrow with free minds,” said Jo, preparing to replace her pen with abroom.When the sun peeped into the girls’ room early next morning to promisethem a fine day, he saw a comical sight. Each had made such preparation for thefete as seemed necessary and proper. Meg had an extra row of little curlpapersacross her forehead, Jo had copiously anointed her afflicted face with coldcream, Beth had taken Joanna to bed with her to atone for the approachingseparation, and Amy had capped the climax by putting a clothespin on her noseto uplift the offending feature. It was one of the kind artists use to hold thepaper on their drawing boards, therefore quite appropriate and effective forthe purpose it was now being put. This funny spectacle appeared to amuse thesun, for he burst out with such radiance that Jo woke up and roused her sistersby a hearty laugh at Amy’s ornament.Sunshine and laughter were good omens for a pleasure party, and soon a livelybustle began in both houses. Beth, who was ready first, kept reporting whatwent on next door, and enlivened her sisters’ toilets by frequenttelegrams from the window.“There goes the man with the tent! I see Mrs. Barker doing up the lunchin a hamper and a great basket. Now Mr. Laurence is looking up at the sky andthe weathercock. I wish he would go too. There’s Laurie, looking like asailor, nice boy! Oh, mercy me! Here’s a carriage full of people, a talllady, a little girl, and two dreadful boys. One is lame, poor thing, he’sgot a crutch. Laurie didn’t tell us that. Be quick, girls! It’sgetting late. Why, there is Ned Moffat, I do declare. Meg, isn’t that theman who bowed to you one day when we were shopping?”“So it is. How queer that he should come. I thought he was at themountains. There is Sallie. I’m glad she got back in time. Am I allright, Jo?” cried Meg in a flutter.“A regular daisy. Hold up your dress and put your hat on straight, itlooks sentimental tipped that way and will fly off at the first puff. Now then,come on!”“Oh, Jo, you are not going to wear that awful hat? It’s too absurd!You shall not make a guy of yourself,” remonstrated Meg, as Jo tied downwith a red ribbon the broad-brimmed, old-fashioned leghorn Laurie had sent fora joke.“I just will, though, for it’s capital, so shady, light, and big.It will make fun, and I don’t mind being a guy if I’mcomfortable.” With that Jo marched straight away and the rest followed, abright little band of sisters, all looking their best in summer suits, withhappy faces under the jaunty hatbrims.Laurie ran to meet and present them to his friends in the most cordial manner.The lawn was the reception room, and for several minutes a lively scene wasenacted there. Meg was grateful to see that Miss Kate, though twenty, wasdressed with a simplicity which American girls would do well to imitate, andwho was much flattered by Mr. Ned’s assurances that he came especially tosee her. Jo understood why Laurie ‘primmed up his mouth’ whenspeaking of Kate, for that young lady had a standoff-don’t-touch-me air,which contrasted strongly with the free and easy demeanor of the other girls.Beth took an observation of the new boys and decided that the lame one was not‘dreadful’, but gentle and feeble, and she would be kind to him onthat account. Amy found Grace a well-mannered, merry, little person, and afterstaring dumbly at one another for a few minutes, they suddenly became very goodfriends.Tents, lunch, and croquet utensils having been sent on beforehand, the partywas soon embarked, and the two boats pushed off together, leaving Mr. Laurencewaving his hat on the shore. Laurie and Jo rowed one boat, Mr. Brooke and Nedthe other, while Fred Vaughn, the riotous twin, did his best to upset both bypaddling about in a wherry like a disturbed water bug. Jo’s funny hatdeserved a vote of thanks, for it was of general utility. It broke the ice inthe beginning by producing a laugh, it created quite a refreshing breeze,flapping to and fro as she rowed, and would make an excellent umbrella for thewhole party, if a shower came up, she said. Miss Kate decided that she was‘odd’, but rather clever, and smiled upon her from afar.Meg, in the other boat, was delightfully situated, face to face with therowers, who both admired the prospect and feathered their oars with uncommon‘skill and dexterity’. Mr. Brooke was a grave, silent young man,with handsome brown eyes and a pleasant voice. Meg liked his quiet manners andconsidered him a walking encyclopedia of useful knowledge. He never talked toher much, but he looked at her a good deal, and she felt sure that he did notregard her with aversion. Ned, being in college, of course put on all the airswhich freshmen think it their bounden duty to assume. He was not very wise, butvery good-natured, and altogether an excellent person to carry on a picnic.Sallie Gardiner was absorbed in keeping her white pique dress clean andchattering with the ubiquitous Fred, who kept Beth in constant terror by hispranks.It was not far to Longmeadow, but the tent was pitched and the wickets down bythe time they arrived. A pleasant green field, with three wide-spreading oaksin the middle and a smooth strip of turf for croquet.“Welcome to Camp Laurence!” said the young host, as they landedwith exclamations of delight.“Brooke is commander in chief, I am commissary general, the other fellowsare staff officers, and you, ladies, are company. The tent is for your especialbenefit and that oak is your drawing room, this is the messroom and the thirdis the camp kitchen. Now, let’s have a game before it gets hot, and thenwe’ll see about dinner.”Frank, Beth, Amy, and Grace sat down to watch the game played by the othereight. Mr. Brooke chose Meg, Kate, and Fred. Laurie took Sallie, Jo, and Ned.The English played well, but the Americans played better, and contested everyinch of the ground as strongly as if the spirit of ’76 inspired them. Joand Fred had several skirmishes and once narrowly escaped high words. Jo wasthrough the last wicket and had missed the stroke, which failure ruffled her agood deal. Fred was close behind her and his turn came before hers. He gave astroke, his ball hit the wicket, and stopped an inch on the wrong side. No onewas very near, and running up to examine, he gave it a sly nudge with his toe,which put it just an inch on the right side.“I’m through! Now, Miss Jo, I’ll settle you, and get infirst,” cried the young gentleman, swinging his mallet for another blow.“You pushed it. I saw you. It’s my turn now,” said Josharply.“Upon my word, I didn’t move it. It rolled a bit, perhaps, but thatis allowed. So, stand off please, and let me have a go at the stake.”“We don’t cheat in America, but you can, if you choose,” saidJo angrily.“Yankees are a deal the most tricky, everybody knows. There yougo!” returned Fred, croqueting her ball far away.Jo opened her lips to say something rude, but checked herself in time, coloredup to her forehead and stood a minute, hammering down a wicket with all hermight, while Fred hit the stake and declared himself out with much exultation.She went off to get her ball, and was a long time finding it among the bushes,but she came back, looking cool and quiet, and waited her turn patiently. Ittook several strokes to regain the place she had lost, and when she got there,the other side had nearly won, for Kate’s ball was the last but one andlay near the stake.“By George, it’s all up with us! Goodbye, Kate. Miss Jo owes meone, so you are finished,” cried Fred excitedly, as they all drew near tosee the finish.“Yankees have a trick of being generous to their enemies,” said Jo,with a look that made the lad redden, “especially when they beatthem,” she added, as, leaving Kate’s ball untouched, she won thegame by a clever stroke.Laurie threw up his hat, then remembered that it wouldn’t do to exultover the defeat of his guests, and stopped in the middle of the cheer towhisper to his friend, “Good for you, Jo! He did cheat, I saw him. Wecan’t tell him so, but he won’t do it again, take my word forit.”Meg drew her aside, under pretense of pinning up a loose braid, and saidapprovingly, “It was dreadfully provoking, but you kept your temper, andI’m so glad, Jo.”“Don’t praise me, Meg, for I could box his ears this minute. Ishould certainly have boiled over if I hadn’t stayed among the nettlestill I got my rage under control enough to hold my tongue. It’s simmeringnow, so I hope he’ll keep out of my way,” returned Jo, biting herlips as she glowered at Fred from under her big hat.“Time for lunch,” said Mr. Brooke, looking at his watch.“Commissary general, will you make the fire and get water, while MissMarch, Miss Sallie, and I spread the table? Who can make good coffee?”“Jo can,” said Meg, glad to recommend her sister. So Jo, feelingthat her late lessons in cookery were to do her honor, went to preside over thecoffeepot, while the children collected dry sticks, and the boys made a fireand got water from a spring near by. Miss Kate sketched and Frank talked toBeth, who was making little mats of braided rushes to serve as plates.The commander in chief and his aides soon spread the tablecloth with aninviting array of eatables and drinkables, prettily decorated with greenleaves. Jo announced that the coffee was ready, and everyone settled themselvesto a hearty meal, for youth is seldom dyspeptic, and exercise developswholesome appetites. A very merry lunch it was, for everything seemed fresh andfunny, and frequent peals of laughter startled a venerable horse who fed nearby. There was a pleasing inequality in the table, which produced many mishapsto cups and plates, acorns dropped in the milk, little black ants partook ofthe refreshments without being invited, and fuzzy caterpillars swung down fromthe tree to see what was going on. Three white-headed children peeped over thefence, and an objectionable dog barked at them from the other side of the riverwith all his might and main.“There’s salt here,” said Laurie, as he handed Jo a saucer ofberries.“Thank you, I prefer spiders,” she replied, fishing up two unwarylittle ones who had gone to a creamy death. “How dare you remind me ofthat horrid dinner party, when yours is so nice in every way?” added Jo,as they both laughed and ate out of one plate, the china having run short.“I had an uncommonly good time that day, and haven’t got over ityet. This is no credit to me, you know, I don’t do anything. It’syou and Meg and Brooke who make it all go, and I’m no end obliged to you.What shall we do when we can’t eat anymore?” asked Laurie, feelingthat his trump card had been played when lunch was over.“Have games till it’s cooler. I brought Authors, and I dare sayMiss Kate knows something new and nice. Go and ask her. She’s company,and you ought to stay with her more.”“Aren’t you company too? I thought she’d suit Brooke, but hekeeps talking to Meg, and Kate just stares at them through that ridiculousglass of hers. I’m going, so you needn’t try to preach propriety,for you can’t do it, Jo.”Miss Kate did know several new games, and as the girls would not, and the boyscould not, eat any more, they all adjourned to the drawing room to playRig-marole.“One person begins a story, any nonsense you like, and tells as long ashe pleases, only taking care to stop short at some exciting point, when thenext takes it up and does the same. It’s very funny when well done, andmakes a perfect jumble of tragical comical stuff to laugh over. Please startit, Mr. Brooke,” said Kate, with a commanding air, which surprised Meg,who treated the tutor with as much respect as any other gentleman.Lying on the grass at the feet of the two young ladies, Mr. Brooke obedientlybegan the story, with the handsome brown eyes steadily fixed upon the sunshinyriver.“Once on a time, a knight went out into the world to seek his fortune,for he had nothing but his sword and his shield. He traveled a long while,nearly eight-and-twenty years, and had a hard time of it, till he came to thepalace of a good old king, who had offered a reward to anyone who could tameand train a fine but unbroken colt, of which he was very fond. The knightagreed to try, and got on slowly but surely, for the colt was a gallant fellow,and soon learned to love his new master, though he was freakish and wild. Everyday, when he gave his lessons to this pet of the king’s, the knight rodehim through the city, and as he rode, he looked everywhere for a certainbeautiful face, which he had seen many times in his dreams, but never found.One day, as he went prancing down a quiet street, he saw at the window of aruinous castle the lovely face. He was delighted, inquired who lived in thisold castle, and was told that several captive princesses were kept there by aspell, and spun all day to lay up money to buy their liberty. The knight wishedintensely that he could free them, but he was poor and could only go by eachday, watching for the sweet face and longing to see it out in the sunshine. Atlast he resolved to get into the castle and ask how he could help them. He wentand knocked. The great door flew open, and he beheld...”“A ravishingly lovely lady, who exclaimed, with a cry of rapture,‘At last! At last!’” continued Kate, who had read Frenchnovels, and admired the style. “’Tis she!’ cried CountGustave, and fell at her feet in an ecstasy of joy. ‘Oh, rise!’ shesaid, extending a hand of marble fairness. ‘Never! Till you tell me how Imay rescue you,’ swore the knight, still kneeling. ‘Alas, my cruelfate condemns me to remain here till my tyrant is destroyed.’‘Where is the villain?’ ‘In the mauve salon. Go, brave heart,and save me from despair.’ ‘I obey, and return victorious ordead!’ With these thrilling words he rushed away, and flinging open thedoor of the mauve salon, was about to enter, when he received...”“A stunning blow from the big Greek lexicon, which an old fellow in ablack gown fired at him,” said Ned. “Instantly, SirWhat’s-his-name recovered himself, pitched the tyrant out of the window,and turned to join the lady, victorious, but with a bump on his brow, found thedoor locked, tore up the curtains, made a rope ladder, got halfway down whenthe ladder broke, and he went headfirst into the moat, sixty feet below. Couldswim like a duck, paddled round the castle till he came to a little doorguarded by two stout fellows, knocked their heads together till they crackedlike a couple of nuts, then, by a trifling exertion of his prodigious strength,he smashed in the door, went up a pair of stone steps covered with dust a footthick, toads as big as your fist, and spiders that would frighten you intohysterics, Miss March. At the top of these steps he came plump upon a sightthat took his breath away and chilled his blood...”“A tall figure, all in white with a veil over its face and a lamp in itswasted hand,” went on Meg. “It beckoned, gliding noiselessly beforehim down a corridor as dark and cold as any tomb. Shadowy effigies in armorstood on either side, a dead silence reigned, the lamp burned blue, and theghostly figure ever and anon turned its face toward him, showing the glitter ofawful eyes through its white veil. They reached a curtained door, behind whichsounded lovely music. He sprang forward to enter, but the specter plucked himback, and waved threateningly before him a...”“Snuffbox,” said Jo, in a sepulchral tone, which convulsed theaudience. “‘Thankee,’ said the knight politely, as he took apinch and sneezed seven times so violently that his head fell off. ‘Ha!Ha!’ laughed the ghost, and having peeped through the keyhole at theprincesses spinning away for dear life, the evil spirit picked up her victimand put him in a large tin box, where there were eleven other knights packedtogether without their heads, like sardines, who all rose and beganto...”“Dance a hornpipe,” cut in Fred, as Jo paused for breath,“and, as they danced, the rubbishy old castle turned to a man-of-war infull sail. ‘Up with the jib, reef the tops’l halliards, helm hardalee, and man the guns!’ roared the captain, as a Portuguese pirate hovein sight, with a flag black as ink flying from her foremast. ‘Go in andwin, my hearties!’ says the captain, and a tremendous fight began. Ofcourse the British beat—they always do.”“No, they don’t!” cried Jo, aside.“Having taken the pirate captain prisoner, sailed slap over the schooner,whose decks were piled high with dead and whose lee scuppers ran blood, for theorder had been ‘Cutlasses, and die hard!’ ‘Bosun’smate, take a bight of the flying-jib sheet, and start this villain if hedoesn’t confess his sins double quick,’ said the British captain.The Portuguese held his tongue like a brick, and walked the plank, while thejolly tars cheered like mad. But the sly dog dived, came up under theman-of-war, scuttled her, and down she went, with all sail set, ‘To thebottom of the sea, sea, sea’ where...”“Oh, gracious! What shall I say?” cried Sallie, as Fred ended hisrigmarole, in which he had jumbled together pell-mell nautical phrases andfacts out of one of his favorite books. “Well, they went to the bottom,and a nice mermaid welcomed them, but was much grieved on finding the box ofheadless knights, and kindly pickled them in brine, hoping to discover themystery about them, for being a woman, she was curious. By-and-by a diver camedown, and the mermaid said, ‘I’ll give you a box of pearls if youcan take it up,’ for she wanted to restore the poor things to life, andcouldn’t raise the heavy load herself. So the diver hoisted it up, andwas much disappointed on opening it to find no pearls. He left it in a greatlonely field, where it was found by a...”“Little goose girl, who kept a hundred fat geese in the field,”said Amy, when Sallie’s invention gave out. “The little girl wassorry for them, and asked an old woman what she should do to help them.‘Your geese will tell you, they know everything.’ said the oldwoman. So she asked what she should use for new heads, since the old ones werelost, and all the geese opened their hundred mouths and screamed...”“‘Cabbages!’” continued Laurie promptly.“‘Just the thing,’ said the girl, and ran to get twelve fineones from her garden. She put them on, the knights revived at once, thankedher, and went on their way rejoicing, never knowing the difference, for therewere so many other heads like them in the world that no one thought anything ofit. The knight in whom I’m interested went back to find the pretty face,and learned that the princesses had spun themselves free and all gone andmarried, but one. He was in a great state of mind at that, and mounting thecolt, who stood by him through thick and thin, rushed to the castle to seewhich was left. Peeping over the hedge, he saw the queen of his affectionspicking flowers in her garden. ‘Will you give me a rose?’ said he.‘You must come and get it. I can’t come to you, it isn’tproper,’ said she, as sweet as honey. He tried to climb over the hedge,but it seemed to grow higher and higher. Then he tried to push through, but itgrew thicker and thicker, and he was in despair. So he patiently broke twigafter twig till he had made a little hole through which he peeped, sayingimploringly, ‘Let me in! Let me in!’ But the pretty princess didnot seem to understand, for she picked her roses quietly, and left him to fighthis way in. Whether he did or not, Frank will tell you.”“I can’t. I’m not playing, I never do,” said Frank,dismayed at the sentimental predicament out of which he was to rescue theabsurd couple. Beth had disappeared behind Jo, and Grace was asleep.“So the poor knight is to be left sticking in the hedge, is he?”asked Mr. Brooke, still watching the river, and playing with the wild rose inhis buttonhole.“I guess the princess gave him a posy, and opened the gate after awhile,” said Laurie, smiling to himself, as he threw acorns at his tutor.“What a piece of nonsense we have made! With practice we might dosomething quite clever. Do you know Truth?”“I hope so,” said Meg soberly.“The game, I mean?”“What is it?” said Fred.“Why, you pile up your hands, choose a number, and draw out in turn, andthe person who draws at the number has to answer truly any question put by therest. It’s great fun.”“Let’s try it,” said Jo, who liked new experiments.Miss Kate and Mr. Brooke, Meg, and Ned declined, but Fred, Sallie, Jo, andLaurie piled and drew, and the lot fell to Laurie.“Who are your heroes?” asked Jo.“Grandfather and Napoleon.”“Which lady here do you think prettiest?” said Sallie.“Margaret.”“Which do you like best?” from Fred.“Jo, of course.”“What silly questions you ask!” And Jo gave a disdainful shrug asthe rest laughed at Laurie’s matter-of-fact tone.“Try again. Truth isn’t a bad game,” said Fred.“It’s a very good one for you,” retorted Jo in a low voice.Her turn came next.“What is your greatest fault?” asked Fred, by way of testing in herthe virtue he lacked himself.“A quick temper.”“What do you most wish for?” said Laurie.“A pair of boot lacings,” returned Jo, guessing and defeating hispurpose.“Not a true answer. You must say what you really do want most.”“Genius. Don’t you wish you could give it to me, Laurie?” Andshe slyly smiled in his disappointed face.“What virtues do you most admire in a man?” asked Sallie.“Courage and honesty.”“Now my turn,” said Fred, as his hand came last.“Let’s give it to him,” whispered Laurie to Jo, who noddedand asked at once...“Didn’t you cheat at croquet?”“Well, yes, a little bit.”“Good! Didn’t you take your story out of The SeaLion?” said Laurie.“Rather.”“Don’t you think the English nation perfect in everyrespect?” asked Sallie.“I should be ashamed of myself if I didn’t.”“He’s a true John Bull. Now, Miss Sallie, you shall have a chancewithout waiting to draw. I’ll harrrow up your feelings first by asking ifyou don’t think you are something of a flirt,” said Laurie, as Jonodded to Fred as a sign that peace was declared.“You impertinent boy! Of course I’m not,” exclaimed Sallie,with an air that proved the contrary.“What do you hate most?” asked Fred.“Spiders and rice pudding.”“What do you like best?” asked Jo.“Dancing and French gloves.”“Well, I think Truth is a very silly play. Let’s have a sensiblegame of Authors to refresh our minds,” proposed Jo.Ned, Frank, and the little girls joined in this, and while it went on, thethree elders sat apart, talking. Miss Kate took out her sketch again, andMargaret watched her, while Mr. Brooke lay on the grass with a book, which hedid not read.“How beautifully you do it! I wish I could draw,” said Meg, withmingled admiration and regret in her voice.“Why don’t you learn? I should think you had taste and talent forit,” replied Miss Kate graciously.“I haven’t time.”“Your mamma prefers other accomplishments, I fancy. So did mine, but Iproved to her that I had talent by taking a few lessons privately, and then shewas quite willing I should go on. Can’t you do the same with yourgoverness?”“I have none.”“I forgot young ladies in America go to school more than with us. Veryfine schools they are, too, Papa says. You go to a private one, Isuppose?”“I don’t go at all. I am a governess myself.”“Oh, indeed!” said Miss Kate, but she might as well have said,“Dear me, how dreadful!” for her tone implied it, and something inher face made Meg color, and wish she had not been so frank.Mr. Brooke looked up and said quickly, “Young ladies in America loveindependence as much as their ancestors did, and are admired and respected forsupporting themselves.”“Oh, yes, of course it’s very nice and proper in them to do so. Wehave many most respectable and worthy young women who do the same and areemployed by the nobility, because, being the daughters of gentlemen, they areboth well bred and accomplished, you know,” said Miss Kate in apatronizing tone that hurt Meg’s pride, and made her work seem not onlymore distasteful, but degrading.“Did the German song suit, Miss March?” inquired Mr. Brooke,breaking an awkward pause.“Oh, yes! It was very sweet, and I’m much obliged to whoevertranslated it for me.” And Meg’s downcast face brightened as shespoke.“Don’t you read German?” asked Miss Kate with a look ofsurprise.“Not very well. My father, who taught me, is away, and I don’t geton very fast alone, for I’ve no one to correct my pronunciation.”“Try a little now. Here is Schiller’s Mary Stuart and a tutor wholoves to teach.” And Mr. Brooke laid his book on her lap with an invitingsmile.“It’s so hard I’m afraid to try,” said Meg, grateful,but bashful in the presence of the accomplished young lady beside her.“I’ll read a bit to encourage you.” And Miss Kate read one ofthe most beautiful passages in a perfectly correct but perfectly expressionlessmanner.Mr. Brooke made no comment as she returned the book to Meg, who saidinnocently, “I thought it was poetry.”“Some of it is. Try this passage.”There was a queer smile about Mr. Brooke’s mouth as he opened at poorMary’s lament.Meg obediently following the long grass-blade which her new tutor used to pointwith, read slowly and timidly, unconsciously making poetry of the hard words bythe soft intonation of her musical voice. Down the page went the green guide,and presently, forgetting her listener in the beauty of the sad scene, Meg readas if alone, giving a little touch of tragedy to the words of the unhappyqueen. If she had seen the brown eyes then, she would have stopped short, butshe never looked up, and the lesson was not spoiled for her.“Very well indeed!” said Mr. Brooke, as she paused, quite ignoringher many mistakes, and looking as if he did indeed love to teach.Miss Kate put up her glass, and, having taken a survey of the little tableaubefore her, shut her sketch book, saying with condescension,“You’ve a nice accent and in time will be a clever reader. I adviseyou to learn, for German is a valuable accomplishment to teachers. I must lookafter Grace, she is romping.” And Miss Kate strolled away, adding toherself with a shrug, “I didn’t come to chaperone a governess,though she is young and pretty. What odd people these Yankees are. I’mafraid Laurie will be quite spoiled among them.”“I forgot that English people rather turn up their noses at governessesand don’t treat them as we do,” said Meg, looking after theretreating figure with an annoyed expression.“Tutors also have rather a hard time of it there, as I know to my sorrow.There’s no place like America for us workers, Miss Margaret.” AndMr. Brooke looked so contented and cheerful that Meg was ashamed to lament herhard lot.“I’m glad I live in it then. I don’t like my work, but I geta good deal of satisfaction out of it after all, so I won’t complain. Ionly wished I liked teaching as you do.”“I think you would if you had Laurie for a pupil. I shall be very sorryto lose him next year,” said Mr. Brooke, busily punching holes in theturf.“Going to college, I suppose?” Meg’s lips asked the question,but her eyes added, “And what becomes of you?”“Yes, it’s high time he went, for he is ready, and as soon as he isoff, I shall turn soldier. I am needed.”“I am glad of that!” exclaimed Meg. “I should think everyyoung man would want to go, though it is hard for the mothers and sisters whostay at home,” she added sorrowfully.“I have neither, and very few friends to care whether I live ordie,” said Mr. Brooke rather bitterly as he absently put the dead rose inthe hole he had made and covered it up, like a little grave.“Laurie and his grandfather would care a great deal, and we should all bevery sorry to have any harm happen to you,” said Meg heartily.“Thank you, that sounds pleasant,” began Mr. Brooke, lookingcheerful again, but before he could finish his speech, Ned, mounted on the oldhorse, came lumbering up to display his equestrian skill before the youngladies, and there was no more quiet that day.“Don’t you love to ride?” asked Grace of Amy, as they stoodresting after a race round the field with the others, led by Ned.“I dote upon it. My sister, Meg, used to ride when Papa was rich, but wedon’t keep any horses now, except Ellen Tree,” added Amy, laughing.“Tell me about Ellen Tree. Is it a donkey?” asked Grace curiously.“Why, you see, Jo is crazy about horses and so am I, but we’ve onlygot an old sidesaddle and no horse. Out in our garden is an apple tree that hasa nice low branch, so Jo put the saddle on it, fixed some reins on the partthat turns up, and we bounce away on Ellen Tree whenever we like.”“How funny!” laughed Grace. “I have a pony at home, and ridenearly every day in the park with Fred and Kate. It’s very nice, for myfriends go too, and the Row is full of ladies and gentlemen.”“Dear, how charming! I hope I shall go abroad some day, but I’drather go to Rome than the Row,” said Amy, who had not the remotest ideawhat the Row was and wouldn’t have asked for the world.Frank, sitting just behind the little girls, heard what they were saying, andpushed his crutch away from him with an impatient gesture as he watched theactive lads going through all sorts of comical gymnastics. Beth, who wascollecting the scattered Author cards, looked up and said, in her shy yetfriendly way, “I’m afraid you are tired. Can I do anything foryou?”“Talk to me, please. It’s dull, sitting by myself,” answeredFrank, who had evidently been used to being made much of at home.If he asked her to deliver a Latin oration, it would not have seemed a moreimpossible task to bashful Beth, but there was no place to run to, no Jo tohide behind now, and the poor boy looked so wistfully at her that she bravelyresolved to try.“What do you like to talk about?” she asked, fumbling over thecards and dropping half as she tried to tie them up.“Well, I like to hear about cricket and boating and hunting,” saidFrank, who had not yet learned to suit his amusements to his strength.My heart! What shall I do? I don’t know anything about them, thoughtBeth, and forgetting the boy’s misfortune in her flurry, she said, hopingto make him talk, “I never saw any hunting, but I suppose you know allabout it.”“I did once, but I can never hunt again, for I got hurt leaping aconfounded five-barred gate, so there are no more horses and hounds forme,” said Frank with a sigh that made Beth hate herself for her innocentblunder.“Your deer are much prettier than our ugly buffaloes,” she said,turning to the prairies for help and feeling glad that she had read one of theboys’ books in which Jo delighted.Buffaloes proved soothing and satisfactory, and in her eagerness to amuseanother, Beth forgot herself, and was quite unconscious of her sisters’surprise and delight at the unusual spectacle of Beth talking away to one ofthe dreadful boys, against whom she had begged protection.“Bless her heart! She pities him, so she is good to him,” said Jo,beaming at her from the croquet ground.“I always said she was a little saint,” added Meg, as if therecould be no further doubt of it.“I haven’t heard Frank laugh so much for ever so long,” saidGrace to Amy, as they sat discussing dolls and making tea sets out of the acorncups.“My sister Beth is a very fastidious girl, when she likes to be,”said Amy, well pleased at Beth’s success. She meant‘facinating’, but as Grace didn’t know the exact meaning ofeither word, fastidious sounded well and made a good impression.An impromptu circus, fox and geese, and an amicable game of croquet finishedthe afternoon. At sunset the tent was struck, hampers packed, wickets pulledup, boats loaded, and the whole party floated down the river, singing at thetops of their voices. Ned, getting sentimental, warbled a serenade with thepensive refrain...Alone, alone, ah! Woe, alone,and at the lines...We each are young, we each have a heart,Oh, why should we stand thus coldly apart?he looked at Meg with such a lackadaisical expression that she laughed outrightand spoiled his song.“How can you be so cruel to me?” he whispered, under cover of alively chorus. “You’ve kept close to that starched-up Englishwomanall day, and now you snub me.”“I didn’t mean to, but you looked so funny I really couldn’thelp it,” replied Meg, passing over the first part of his reproach, forit was quite true that she had shunned him, remembering the Moffat party andthe talk after it.Ned was offended and turned to Sallie for consolation, saying to her ratherpettishly, “There isn’t a bit of flirt in that girl, isthere?”“Not a particle, but she’s a dear,” returned Sallie,defending her friend even while confessing her shortcomings.“She’s not a stricken deer anyway,” said Ned, trying to bewitty, and succeeding as well as very young gentlemen usually do.On the lawn where it had gathered, the little party separated with cordial goodnights and good-byes, for the Vaughns were going to Canada. As the four sisterswent home through the garden, Miss Kate looked after them, saying, without thepatronizing tone in her voice, “In spite of their demonstrative manners,American girls are very nice when one knows them.”“I quite agree with you,” said Mr. Brooke.CHAPTER THIRTEENCASTLES IN THE AIRLaurie lay luxuriously swinging to and fro in his hammock one warm Septemberafternoon, wondering what his neighbors were about, but too lazy to go and findout. He was in one of his moods, for the day had been both unprofitable andunsatisfactory, and he was wishing he could live it over again. The hot weathermade him indolent, and he had shirked his studies, tried Mr. Brooke’spatience to the utmost, displeased his grandfather by practicing half theafternoon, frightened the maidservants half out of their wits by mischievouslyhinting that one of his dogs was going mad, and, after high words with thestableman about some fancied neglect of his horse, he had flung himself intohis hammock to fume over the stupidity of the world in general, till the peaceof the lovely day quieted him in spite of himself. Staring up into the greengloom of the horse-chestnut trees above him, he dreamed dreams of all sorts,and was just imagining himself tossing on the ocean in a voyage round theworld, when the sound of voices brought him ashore in a flash. Peeping throughthe meshes of the hammock, he saw the Marches coming out, as if bound on someexpedition.“What in the world are those girls about now?” thought Laurie,opening his sleepy eyes to take a good look, for there was something ratherpeculiar in the appearance of his neighbors. Each wore a large, flapping hat, abrown linen pouch slung over one shoulder, and carried a long staff. Meg had acushion, Jo a book, Beth a basket, and Amy a portfolio. All walked quietlythrough the garden, out at the little back gate, and began to climb the hillthat lay between the house and river.“Well, that’s cool,” said Laurie to himself, “to have apicnic and never ask me! They can’t be going in the boat, for theyhaven’t got the key. Perhaps they forgot it. I’ll take it to them,and see what’s going on.”Though possessed of half a dozen hats, it took him some time to find one, thenthere was a hunt for the key, which was at last discovered in his pocket, sothat the girls were quite out of sight when he leaped the fence and ran afterthem. Taking the shortest way to the boathouse, he waited for them to appear,but no one came, and he went up the hill to take an observation. A grove ofpines covered one part of it, and from the heart of this green spot came aclearer sound than the soft sigh of the pines or the drowsy chirp of thecrickets.“Here’s a landscape!” thought Laurie, peeping through thebushes, and looking wide-awake and good-natured already.It was a rather pretty little picture, for the sisters sat together in theshady nook, with sun and shadow flickering over them, the aromatic wind liftingtheir hair and cooling their hot cheeks, and all the little wood people goingon with their affairs as if these were no strangers but old friends. Meg satupon her cushion, sewing daintily with her white hands, and looking as freshand sweet as a rose in her pink dress among the green. Beth was sorting thecones that lay thick under the hemlock near by, for she made pretty things withthem. Amy was sketching a group of ferns, and Jo was knitting as she readaloud. A shadow passed over the boy’s face as he watched them, feelingthat he ought to go away because uninvited; yet lingering because home seemedvery lonely and this quiet party in the woods most attractive to his restlessspirit. He stood so still that a squirrel, busy with its harvesting, ran down apine close beside him, saw him suddenly and skipped back, scolding so shrillythat Beth looked up, espied the wistful face behind the birches, and beckonedwith a reassuring smile.“May I come in, please? Or shall I be a bother?” he asked,advancing slowly.Meg lifted her eyebrows, but Jo scowled at her defiantly and said at once,“Of course you may. We should have asked you before, only we thought youwouldn’t care for such a girl’s game as this.”“I always like your games, but if Meg doesn’t want me, I’llgo away.”“I’ve no objection, if you do something. It’s against therules to be idle here,” replied Meg gravely but graciously.“Much obliged. I’ll do anything if you’ll let me stop a bit,for it’s as dull as the Desert of Sahara down there. Shall I sew, read,cone, draw, or do all at once? Bring on your bears. I’m ready.” AndLaurie sat down with a submissive expression delightful to behold.“Finish this story while I set my heel,” said Jo, handing him thebook.“Yes’m.” was the meek answer, as he began, doing his best toprove his gratitude for the favor of admission into the ‘Busy BeeSociety’.The story was not a long one, and when it was finished, he ventured to ask afew questions as a reward of merit.“Please, ma’am, could I inquire if this highly instructive andcharming institution is a new one?”“Would you tell him?” asked Meg of her sisters.“He’ll laugh,” said Amy warningly.“Who cares?” said Jo.“I guess he’ll like it,” added Beth.“Of course I shall! I give you my word I won’t laugh. Tell away,Jo, and don’t be afraid.”“The idea of being afraid of you! Well, you see we used to playPilgrim’s Progress, and we have been going on with it in earnest, allwinter and summer.”“Yes, I know,” said Laurie, nodding wisely.“Who told you?” demanded Jo.“Spirits.”“No, I did. I wanted to amuse him one night when you were all away, andhe was rather dismal. He did like it, so don’t scold, Jo,” saidBeth meekly.“You can’t keep a secret. Never mind, it saves trouble now.”“Go on, please,” said Laurie, as Jo became absorbed in her work,looking a trifle displeased.“Oh, didn’t she tell you about this new plan of ours? Well, we havetried not to waste our holiday, but each has had a task and worked at it with awill. The vacation is nearly over, the stints are all done, and we are ever soglad that we didn’t dawdle.”“Yes, I should think so,” and Laurie thought regretfully of his ownidle days.“Mother likes to have us out-of-doors as much as possible, so we bringour work here and have nice times. For the fun of it we bring our things inthese bags, wear the old hats, use poles to climb the hill, and play pilgrims,as we used to do years ago. We call this hill the Delectable Mountain, for wecan look far away and see the country where we hope to live some time.”Jo pointed, and Laurie sat up to examine, for through an opening in the woodone could look cross the wide, blue river, the meadows on the other side, farover the outskirts of the great city, to the green hills that rose to meet thesky. The sun was low, and the heavens glowed with the splendor of an autumnsunset. Gold and purple clouds lay on the hilltops, and rising high into theruddy light were silvery white peaks that shone like the airy spires of someCelestial City.“How beautiful that is!” said Laurie softly, for he was quick tosee and feel beauty of any kind.“It’s often so, and we like to watch it, for it is never the same,but always splendid,” replied Amy, wishing she could paint it.“Jo talks about the country where we hope to live sometime—the realcountry, she means, with pigs and chickens and haymaking. It would be nice, butI wish the beautiful country up there was real, and we could ever go toit,” said Beth musingly.“There is a lovelier country even than that, where we shall go,by-and-by, when we are good enough,” answered Meg with her sweetestvoice.“It seems so long to wait, so hard to do. I want to fly away at once, asthose swallows fly, and go in at that splendid gate.”“You’ll get there, Beth, sooner or later, no fear of that,”said Jo. “I’m the one that will have to fight and work, and climband wait, and maybe never get in after all.”“You’ll have me for company, if that’s any comfort. I shallhave to do a deal of traveling before I come in sight of your Celestial City.If I arrive late, you’ll say a good word for me, won’t you,Beth?”Something in the boy’s face troubled his little friend, but she saidcheerfully, with her quiet eyes on the changing clouds, “If people reallywant to go, and really try all their lives, I think they will get in, for Idon’t believe there are any locks on that door or any guards at the gate.I always imagine it is as it is in the picture, where the shining ones stretchout their hands to welcome poor Christian as he comes up from the river.”“Wouldn’t it be fun if all the castles in the air which we makecould come true, and we could live in them?” said Jo, after a littlepause.“I’ve made such quantities it would be hard to choose whichI’d have,” said Laurie, lying flat and throwing cones at thesquirrel who had betrayed him.“You’d have to take your favorite one. What is it?” askedMeg.“If I tell mine, will you tell yours?”“Yes, if the girls will too.”“We will. Now, Laurie.”“After I’d seen as much of the world as I want to, I’d liketo settle in Germany and have just as much music as I choose. I’m to be afamous musician myself, and all creation is to rush to hear me. And I’mnever to be bothered about money or business, but just enjoy myself and livefor what I like. That’s my favorite castle. What’s yours,Meg?”Margaret seemed to find it a little hard to tell hers, and waved a brake beforeher face, as if to disperse imaginary gnats, while she said slowly, “Ishould like a lovely house, full of all sorts of luxurious things—nicefood, pretty clothes, handsome furniture, pleasant people, and heaps of money.I am to be mistress of it, and manage it as I like, with plenty of servants, soI never need work a bit. How I should enjoy it! For I wouldn’t be idle,but do good, and make everyone love me dearly.”“Wouldn’t you have a master for your castle in the air?”asked Laurie slyly.“I said ‘pleasant people’, you know,” and Meg carefullytied up her shoe as she spoke, so that no one saw her face.“Why don’t you say you’d have a splendid, wise, good husbandand some angelic little children? You know your castle wouldn’t beperfect without,” said blunt Jo, who had no tender fancies yet, andrather scorned romance, except in books.“You’d have nothing but horses, inkstands, and novels inyours,” answered Meg petulantly.“Wouldn’t I though? I’d have a stable full of Arabian steeds,rooms piled high with books, and I’d write out of a magic inkstand, sothat my works should be as famous as Laurie’s music. I want to dosomething splendid before I go into my castle, something heroic or wonderfulthat won’t be forgotten after I’m dead. I don’t know what,but I’m on the watch for it, and mean to astonish you all some day. Ithink I shall write books, and get rich and famous, that would suit me, so thatis my favorite dream.”“Mine is to stay at home safe with Father and Mother, and help take careof the family,” said Beth contentedly.“Don’t you wish for anything else?” asked Laurie.“Since I had my little piano, I am perfectly satisfied. I only wish wemay all keep well and be together, nothing else.”“I have ever so many wishes, but the pet one is to be an artist, and goto Rome, and do fine pictures, and be the best artist in the wholeworld,” was Amy’s modest desire.“We’re an ambitious set, aren’t we? Every one of us, butBeth, wants to be rich and famous, and gorgeous in every respect. I do wonderif any of us will ever get our wishes,” said Laurie, chewing grass like ameditative calf.“I’ve got the key to my castle in the air, but whether I can unlockthe door remains to be seen,” observed Jo mysteriously.“I’ve got the key to mine, but I’m not allowed to try it.Hang college!” muttered Laurie with an impatient sigh.“Here’s mine!” and Amy waved her pencil.“I haven’t got any,” said Meg forlornly.“Yes, you have,” said Laurie at once.“Where?”“In your face.”“Nonsense, that’s of no use.”“Wait and see if it doesn’t bring you something worthhaving,” replied the boy, laughing at the thought of a charming littlesecret which he fancied he knew.Meg colored behind the brake, but asked no questions and looked across theriver with the same expectant expression which Mr. Brooke had worn when he toldthe story of the knight.“If we are all alive ten years hence, let’s meet, and see how manyof us have got our wishes, or how much nearer we are then than now,” saidJo, always ready with a plan.“Bless me! How old I shall be, twenty-seven!” exclaimed Meg, whofelt grown up already, having just reached seventeen.“You and I will be twenty-six, Teddy, Beth twenty-four, and Amytwenty-two. What a venerable party!” said Jo.“I hope I shall have done something to be proud of by that time, butI’m such a lazy dog, I’m afraid I shall dawdle, Jo.”“You need a motive, Mother says, and when you get it, she is sureyou’ll work splendidly.”“Is she? By Jupiter, I will, if I only get the chance!” criedLaurie, sitting up with sudden energy. “I ought to be satisfied to pleaseGrandfather, and I do try, but it’s working against the grain, you see,and comes hard. He wants me to be an India merchant, as he was, and I’drather be shot. I hate tea and silk and spices, and every sort of rubbish hisold ships bring, and I don’t care how soon they go to the bottom when Iown them. Going to college ought to satisfy him, for if I give him four yearshe ought to let me off from the business. But he’s set, and I’vegot to do just as he did, unless I break away and please myself, as my fatherdid. If there was anyone left to stay with the old gentleman, I’d do ittomorrow.”Laurie spoke excitedly, and looked ready to carry his threat into execution onthe slightest provocation, for he was growing up very fast and, in spite of hisindolent ways, had a young man’s hatred of subjection, a youngman’s restless longing to try the world for himself.“I advise you to sail away in one of your ships, and never come homeagain till you have tried your own way,” said Jo, whose imagination wasfired by the thought of such a daring exploit, and whose sympathy was excitedby what she called ‘Teddy’s Wrongs’.“That’s not right, Jo. You mustn’t talk in that way, andLaurie mustn’t take your bad advice. You should do just what yourgrandfather wishes, my dear boy,” said Meg in her most maternal tone.“Do your best at college, and when he sees that you try to please him,I’m sure he won’t be hard on you or unjust to you. As you say,there is no one else to stay with and love him, and you’d never forgiveyourself if you left him without his permission. Don’t be dismal or fret,but do your duty and you’ll get your reward, as good Mr. Brooke has, bybeing respected and loved.”“What do you know about him?” asked Laurie, grateful for the goodadvice, but objecting to the lecture, and glad to turn the conversation fromhimself after his unusual outbreak.“Only what your grandpa told us about him, how he took good care of hisown mother till she died, and wouldn’t go abroad as tutor to some niceperson because he wouldn’t leave her. And how he provides now for an oldwoman who nursed his mother, and never tells anyone, but is just as generousand patient and good as he can be.”“So he is, dear old fellow!” said Laurie heartily, as Meg paused,looking flushed and earnest with her story. “It’s like Grandpa tofind out all about him without letting him know, and to tell all his goodnessto others, so that they might like him. Brooke couldn’t understand whyyour mother was so kind to him, asking him over with me and treating him in herbeautiful friendly way. He thought she was just perfect, and talked about itfor days and days, and went on about you all in flaming style. If ever I do getmy wish, you see what I’ll do for Brooke.”“Begin to do something now by not plaguing his life out,” said Megsharply.“How do you know I do, Miss?”“I can always tell by his face when he goes away. If you have been good,he looks satisfied and walks briskly. If you have plagued him, he’s soberand walks slowly, as if he wanted to go back and do his work better.”“Well, I like that? So you keep an account of my good and bad marks inBrooke’s face, do you? I see him bow and smile as he passes your window,but I didn’t know you’d got up a telegraph.”“We haven’t. Don’t be angry, and oh, don’t tell him Isaid anything! It was only to show that I cared how you get on, and what issaid here is said in confidence, you know,” cried Meg, much alarmed atthe thought of what might follow from her careless speech.“I don’t tell tales,” replied Laurie, with his ‘highand mighty’ air, as Jo called a certain expression which he occasionallywore. “Only if Brooke is going to be a thermometer, I must mind and havefair weather for him to report.”“Please don’t be offended. I didn’t mean to preach or telltales or be silly. I only thought Jo was encouraging you in a feeling whichyou’d be sorry for by-and-by. You are so kind to us, we feel as if youwere our brother and say just what we think. Forgive me, I meant itkindly.” And Meg offered her hand with a gesture both affectionate andtimid.Ashamed of his momentary pique, Laurie squeezed the kind little hand, and saidfrankly, “I’m the one to be forgiven. I’m cross and have beenout of sorts all day. I like to have you tell me my faults and be sisterly, sodon’t mind if I am grumpy sometimes. I thank you all the same.”Bent on showing that he was not offended, he made himself as agreeable aspossible, wound cotton for Meg, recited poetry to please Jo, shook down conesfor Beth, and helped Amy with her ferns, proving himself a fit person to belongto the ‘Busy Bee Society’. In the midst of an animated discussionon the domestic habits of turtles (one of those amiable creatures havingstrolled up from the river), the faint sound of a bell warned them that Hannahhad put the tea ‘to draw’, and they would just have time to gethome to supper.“May I come again?” asked Laurie.“Yes, if you are good, and love your book, as the boys in the primer aretold to do,” said Meg, smiling.“I’ll try.”“Then you may come, and I’ll teach you to knit as the Scotchmen do.There’s a demand for socks just now,” added Jo, waving hers like abig blue worsted banner as they parted at the gate.That night, when Beth played to Mr. Laurence in the twilight, Laurie, standingin the shadow of the curtain, listened to the little David, whose simple musicalways quieted his moody spirit, and watched the old man, who sat with his grayhead on his hand, thinking tender thoughts of the dead child he had loved somuch. Remembering the conversation of the afternoon, the boy said to himself,with the resolve to make the sacrifice cheerfully, “I’ll let mycastle go, and stay with the dear old gentleman while he needs me, for I am allhe has.”CHAPTER FOURTEENSECRETSJo was very busy in the garret, for the October days began to grow chilly, andthe afternoons were short. For two or three hours the sun lay warmly in thehigh window, showing Jo seated on the old sofa, writing busily, with her papersspread out upon a trunk before her, while Scrabble, the pet rat, promenaded thebeams overhead, accompanied by his oldest son, a fine young fellow, who wasevidently very proud of his whiskers. Quite absorbed in her work, Jo scribbledaway till the last page was filled, when she signed her name with a flourishand threw down her pen, exclaiming...“There, I’ve done my best! If this won’t suit I shall have towait till I can do better.”Lying back on the sofa, she read the manuscript carefully through, makingdashes here and there, and putting in many exclamation points, which lookedlike little balloons. Then she tied it up with a smart red ribbon, and sat aminute looking at it with a sober, wistful expression, which plainly showed howearnest her work had been. Jo’s desk up here was an old tin kitchen whichhung against the wall. In it she kept her papers, and a few books, safely shutaway from Scrabble, who, being likewise of a literary turn, was fond of makinga circulating library of such books as were left in his way by eating theleaves. From this tin receptacle Jo produced another manuscript, and puttingboth in her pocket, crept quietly downstairs, leaving her friends to nibble onher pens and taste her ink.She put on her hat and jacket as noiselessly as possible, and going to the backentry window, got out upon the roof of a low porch, swung herself down to thegrassy bank, and took a roundabout way to the road. Once there, she composedherself, hailed a passing omnibus, and rolled away to town, looking very merryand mysterious.If anyone had been watching her, he would have thought her movements decidedlypeculiar, for on alighting, she went off at a great pace till she reached acertain number in a certain busy street. Having found the place with somedifficulty, she went into the doorway, looked up the dirty stairs, and afterstanding stock still a minute, suddenly dived into the street and walked awayas rapidly as she came. This maneuver she repeated several times, to the greatamusement of a black-eyed young gentleman lounging in the window of a buildingopposite. On returning for the third time, Jo gave herself a shake, pulled herhat over her eyes, and walked up the stairs, looking as if she were going tohave all her teeth out.There was a dentist’s sign, among others, which adorned the entrance, andafter staring a moment at the pair of artificial jaws which slowly opened andshut to draw attention to a fine set of teeth, the young gentleman put on hiscoat, took his hat, and went down to post himself in the opposite doorway,saying with a smile and a shiver, “It’s like her to come alone, butif she has a bad time she’ll need someone to help her home.”In ten minutes Jo came running downstairs with a very red face and the generalappearance of a person who had just passed through a trying ordeal of somesort. When she saw the young gentleman she looked anything but pleased, andpassed him with a nod. But he followed, asking with an air of sympathy,“Did you have a bad time?”“Not very.”“You got through quickly.”“Yes, thank goodness!”“Why did you go alone?”“Didn’t want anyone to know.”“You’re the oddest fellow I ever saw. How many did you haveout?”Jo looked at her friend as if she did not understand him, then began to laughas if mightily amused at something.“There are two which I want to have come out, but I must wait aweek.”“What are you laughing at? You are up to some mischief, Jo,” saidLaurie, looking mystified.“So are you. What were you doing, sir, up in that billiard saloon?”“Begging your pardon, ma’am, it wasn’t a billiard saloon, buta gymnasium, and I was taking a lesson in fencing.”“I’m glad of that.”“Why?”“You can teach me, and then when we play Hamlet, you can beLaertes, and we’ll make a fine thing of the fencing scene.”Laurie burst out with a hearty boy’s laugh, which made several passers-bysmile in spite of themselves.“I’ll teach you whether we play Hamlet or not. It’sgrand fun and will straighten you up capitally. But I don’t believe thatwas your only reason for saying ‘I’m glad’ in that decidedway, was it now?”“No, I was glad that you were not in the saloon, because I hope you nevergo to such places. Do you?”“Not often.”“I wish you wouldn’t.”“It’s no harm, Jo. I have billiards at home, but it’s no fununless you have good players, so, as I’m fond of it, I come sometimes andhave a game with Ned Moffat or some of the other fellows.”“Oh, dear, I’m so sorry, for you’ll get to liking it betterand better, and will waste time and money, and grow like those dreadful boys. Idid hope you’d stay respectable and be a satisfaction to yourfriends,” said Jo, shaking her head.“Can’t a fellow take a little innocent amusement now and thenwithout losing his respectability?” asked Laurie, looking nettled.“That depends upon how and where he takes it. I don’t like Ned andhis set, and wish you’d keep out of it. Mother won’t let us havehim at our house, though he wants to come. And if you grow like him shewon’t be willing to have us frolic together as we do now.”“Won’t she?” asked Laurie anxiously.“No, she can’t bear fashionable young men, and she’d shut usall up in bandboxes rather than have us associate with them.”“Well, she needn’t get out her bandboxes yet. I’m not afashionable party and don’t mean to be, but I do like harmless larks nowand then, don’t you?”“Yes, nobody minds them, so lark away, but don’t get wild, willyou? Or there will be an end of all our good times.”“I’ll be a double distilled saint.”“I can’t bear saints. Just be a simple, honest, respectable boy,and we’ll never desert you. I don’t know what I should do if youacted like Mr. King’s son. He had plenty of money, but didn’t knowhow to spend it, and got tipsy and gambled, and ran away, and forged hisfather’s name, I believe, and was altogether horrid.”“You think I’m likely to do the same? Much obliged.”“No, I don’t—oh, dear, no!—but I hear people talkingabout money being such a temptation, and I sometimes wish you were poor. Ishouldn’t worry then.”“Do you worry about me, Jo?”“A little, when you look moody and discontented, as you sometimes do, foryou’ve got such a strong will, if you once get started wrong, I’mafraid it would be hard to stop you.”Laurie walked in silence a few minutes, and Jo watched him, wishing she hadheld her tongue, for his eyes looked angry, though his lips smiled as if at herwarnings.“Are you going to deliver lectures all the way home?” he askedpresently.“Of course not. Why?”“Because if you are, I’ll take a bus. If you’re not,I’d like to walk with you and tell you something very interesting.”“I won’t preach any more, and I’d like to hear the newsimmensely.”“Very well, then, come on. It’s a secret, and if I tell you, youmust tell me yours.”“I haven’t got any,” began Jo, but stopped suddenly,remembering that she had.“You know you have—you can’t hide anything, so up and’fess, or I won’t tell,” cried Laurie.“Is your secret a nice one?”“Oh, isn’t it! All about people you know, and such fun! You oughtto hear it, and I’ve been aching to tell it this long time. Come, youbegin.”“You’ll not say anything about it at home, will you?”“Not a word.”“And you won’t tease me in private?”“I never tease.”“Yes, you do. You get everything you want out of people. I don’tknow how you do it, but you are a born wheedler.”“Thank you. Fire away.”“Well, I’ve left two stories with a newspaperman, and he’s togive his answer next week,” whispered Jo, in her confidant’s ear.“Hurrah for Miss March, the celebrated American authoress!” criedLaurie, throwing up his hat and catching it again, to the great delight of twoducks, four cats, five hens, and half a dozen Irish children, for they were outof the city now.“Hush! It won’t come to anything, I dare say, but I couldn’trest till I had tried, and I said nothing about it because I didn’t wantanyone else to be disappointed.”“It won’t fail. Why, Jo, your stories are works of Shakespearecompared to half the rubbish that is published every day. Won’t it be funto see them in print, and shan’t we feel proud of our authoress?”Jo’s eyes sparkled, for it is always pleasant to be believed in, and afriend’s praise is always sweeter than a dozen newspaper puffs.“Where’s your secret? Play fair, Teddy, or I’ll never believeyou again,” she said, trying to extinguish the brilliant hopes thatblazed up at a word of encouragement.“I may get into a scrape for telling, but I didn’t promise not to,so I will, for I never feel easy in my mind till I’ve told you any plummybit of news I get. I know where Meg’s glove is.”“Is that all?” said Jo, looking disappointed, as Laurie nodded andtwinkled with a face full of mysterious intelligence.“It’s quite enough for the present, as you’ll agree when Itell you where it is.”“Tell, then.”Laurie bent, and whispered three words in Jo’s ear, which produced acomical change. She stood and stared at him for a minute, looking bothsurprised and displeased, then walked on, saying sharply, “How do youknow?”“Saw it.”“Where?”“Pocket.”“All this time?”“Yes, isn’t that romantic?”“No, it’s horrid.”“Don’t you like it?”“Of course I don’t. It’s ridiculous, it won’t beallowed. My patience! What would Meg say?”“You are not to tell anyone. Mind that.”“I didn’t promise.”“That was understood, and I trusted you.”“Well, I won’t for the present, anyway, but I’m disgusted,and wish you hadn’t told me.”“I thought you’d be pleased.”“At the idea of anybody coming to take Meg away? No, thank you.”“You’ll feel better about it when somebody comes to take youaway.”“I’d like to see anyone try it,” cried Jo fiercely.“So should I!” and Laurie chuckled at the idea.“I don’t think secrets agree with me, I feel rumpled up in my mindsince you told me that,” said Jo rather ungratefully.“Race down this hill with me, and you’ll be all right,”suggested Laurie.No one was in sight, the smooth road sloped invitingly before her, and findingthe temptation irresistible, Jo darted away, soon leaving hat and comb behindher and scattering hairpins as she ran. Laurie reached the goal first and wasquite satisfied with the success of his treatment, for his Atlanta came pantingup with flying hair, bright eyes, ruddy cheeks, and no signs of dissatisfactionin her face.“I wish I was a horse, then I could run for miles in this splendid air,and not lose my breath. It was capital, but see what a guy it’s made me.Go, pick up my things, like a cherub, as you are,” said Jo, dropping downunder a maple tree, which was carpeting the bank with crimson leaves.Laurie leisurely departed to recover the lost property, and Jo bundled up herbraids, hoping no one would pass by till she was tidy again. But someone didpass, and who should it be but Meg, looking particularly ladylike in her stateand festival suit, for she had been making calls.“What in the world are you doing here?” she asked, regarding herdisheveled sister with well-bred surprise.“Getting leaves,” meekly answered Jo, sorting the rosy handful shehad just swept up.“And hairpins,” added Laurie, throwing half a dozen into Jo’slap. “They grow on this road, Meg, so do combs and brown strawhats.”“You have been running, Jo. How could you? When will you stop suchromping ways?” said Meg reprovingly, as she settled her cuffs andsmoothed her hair, with which the wind had taken liberties.“Never till I’m stiff and old and have to use a crutch. Don’ttry to make me grow up before my time, Meg. It’s hard enough to have youchange all of a sudden. Let me be a little girl as long as I can.”As she spoke, Jo bent over the leaves to hide the trembling of her lips, forlately she had felt that Margaret was fast getting to be a woman, andLaurie’s secret made her dread the separation which must surely come sometime and now seemed very near. He saw the trouble in her face and drewMeg’s attention from it by asking quickly, “Where have you beencalling, all so fine?”“At the Gardiners’, and Sallie has been telling me all about BelleMoffat’s wedding. It was very splendid, and they have gone to spend thewinter in Paris. Just think how delightful that must be!”“Do you envy her, Meg?” said Laurie.“I’m afraid I do.”“I’m glad of it!” muttered Jo, tying on her hat with a jerk.“Why?” asked Meg, looking surprised.“Because if you care much about riches, you will never go and marry apoor man,” said Jo, frowning at Laurie, who was mutely warning her tomind what she said.“I shall never ‘go and marry’ anyone,” observedMeg, walking on with great dignity while the others followed, laughing,whispering, skipping stones, and ‘behaving like children’, as Megsaid to herself, though she might have been tempted to join them if she had nothad her best dress on.For a week or two, Jo behaved so queerly that her sisters were quitebewildered. She rushed to the door when the postman rang, was rude to Mr.Brooke whenever they met, would sit looking at Meg with a woe-begone face,occasionally jumping up to shake and then kiss her in a very mysterious manner.Laurie and she were always making signs to one another, and talking about‘Spread Eagles’ till the girls declared they had both lost theirwits. On the second Saturday after Jo got out of the window, Meg, as she satsewing at her window, was scandalized by the sight of Laurie chasing Jo allover the garden and finally capturing her in Amy’s bower. What went onthere, Meg could not see, but shrieks of laughter were heard, followed by themurmur of voices and a great flapping of newspapers.“What shall we do with that girl? She never will behave like ayoung lady,” sighed Meg, as she watched the race with a disapprovingface.“I hope she won’t. She is so funny and dear as she is,” saidBeth, who had never betrayed that she was a little hurt at Jo’s havingsecrets with anyone but her.“It’s very trying, but we never can make her commy lafo,” added Amy, who sat making some new frills for herself, with hercurls tied up in a very becoming way, two agreeable things that made her feelunusually elegant and ladylike.In a few minutes Jo bounced in, laid herself on the sofa, and affected to read.“Have you anything interesting there?” asked Meg, withcondescension.“Nothing but a story, won’t amount to much, I guess,”returned Jo, carefully keeping the name of the paper out of sight.“You’d better read it aloud. That will amuse us and keep you out ofmischief,” said Amy in her most grown-up tone.“What’s the name?” asked Beth, wondering why Jo kept her facebehind the sheet.“The Rival Painters.”“That sounds well. Read it,” said Meg.With a loud “Hem!” and a long breath, Jo began to read very fast.The girls listened with interest, for the tale was romantic, and somewhatpathetic, as most of the characters died in the end. “I like that aboutthe splendid picture,” was Amy’s approving remark, as Jo paused.“I prefer the lovering part. Viola and Angelo are two of our favoritenames, isn’t that queer?” said Meg, wiping her eyes, for thelovering part was tragical.“Who wrote it?” asked Beth, who had caught a glimpse of Jo’sface.The reader suddenly sat up, cast away the paper, displaying a flushedcountenance, and with a funny mixture of solemnity and excitement replied in aloud voice, “Your sister.”“You?” cried Meg, dropping her work.“It’s very good,” said Amy critically.“I knew it! I knew it! Oh, my Jo, I am so proud!” and Beth ran tohug her sister and exult over this splendid success.Dear me, how delighted they all were, to be sure! How Meg wouldn’tbelieve it till she saw the words. “Miss Josephine March,” actuallyprinted in the paper. How graciously Amy criticized the artistic parts of thestory, and offered hints for a sequel, which unfortunately couldn’t becarried out, as the hero and heroine were dead. How Beth got excited, andskipped and sang with joy. How Hannah came in to exclaim, “Sakes alive,well I never!” in great astonishment at ‘that Jo’sdoin’s’. How proud Mrs. March was when she knew it. How Jo laughed,with tears in her eyes, as she declared she might as well be a peacock and donewith it, and how the ‘Spread Eagle’ might be said to flap his wingstriumphantly over the House of March, as the paper passed from hand to hand.“Tell us about it.” “When did it come?” “How muchdid you get for it?” “What will Father say?”“Won’t Laurie laugh?” cried the family, all in one breath asthey clustered about Jo, for these foolish, affectionate people made a jubileeof every little household joy.“Stop jabbering, girls, and I’ll tell you everything,” saidJo, wondering if Miss Burney felt any grander over her Evelina than she didover her ‘Rival Painters’. Having told how she disposed of hertales, Jo added, “And when I went to get my answer, the man said he likedthem both, but didn’t pay beginners, only let them print in his paper,and noticed the stories. It was good practice, he said, and when the beginnersimproved, anyone would pay. So I let him have the two stories, and today thiswas sent to me, and Laurie caught me with it and insisted on seeing it, so Ilet him. And he said it was good, and I shall write more, and he’s goingto get the next paid for, and I am so happy, for in time I may be able tosupport myself and help the girls.”Jo’s breath gave out here, and wrapping her head in the paper, shebedewed her little story with a few natural tears, for to be independent andearn the praise of those she loved were the dearest wishes of her heart, andthis seemed to be the first step toward that happy end.CHAPTER FIFTEENA TELEGRAM“November is the most disagreeable month in the whole year,” saidMargaret, standing at the window one dull afternoon, looking out at thefrostbitten garden.“That’s the reason I was born in it,” observed Jo pensively,quite unconscious of the blot on her nose.“If something very pleasant should happen now, we should think it adelightful month,” said Beth, who took a hopeful view of everything, evenNovember.“I dare say, but nothing pleasant ever does happen in this family,”said Meg, who was out of sorts. “We go grubbing along day after day,without a bit of change, and very little fun. We might as well be in atreadmill.”“My patience, how blue we are!” cried Jo. “I don’t muchwonder, poor dear, for you see other girls having splendid times, while yougrind, grind, year in and year out. Oh, don’t I wish I could managethings for you as I do for my heroines! You’re pretty enough and goodenough already, so I’d have some rich relation leave you a fortuneunexpectedly. Then you’d dash out as an heiress, scorn everyone who hasslighted you, go abroad, and come home my Lady Something in a blaze of splendorand elegance.”“People don’t have fortunes left them in that style nowadays, menhave to work and women marry for money. It’s a dreadfully unjustworld,” said Meg bitterly.“Jo and I are going to make fortunes for you all. Just wait ten years,and see if we don’t,” said Amy, who sat in a corner making mudpies, as Hannah called her little clay models of birds, fruit, and faces.“Can’t wait, and I’m afraid I haven’t much faith in inkand dirt, though I’m grateful for your good intentions.”Meg sighed, and turned to the frostbitten garden again. Jo groaned and leanedboth elbows on the table in a despondent attitude, but Amy spatted awayenergetically, and Beth, who sat at the other window, said, smiling, “Twopleasant things are going to happen right away. Marmee is coming down thestreet, and Laurie is tramping through the garden as if he had something niceto tell.”In they both came, Mrs. March with her usual question, “Any letter fromFather, girls?” and Laurie to say in his persuasive way,“Won’t some of you come for a drive? I’ve been working awayat mathematics till my head is in a muddle, and I’m going to freshen mywits by a brisk turn. It’s a dull day, but the air isn’t bad, andI’m going to take Brooke home, so it will be gay inside, if itisn’t out. Come, Jo, you and Beth will go, won’t you?”“Of course we will.”“Much obliged, but I’m busy.” And Meg whisked out herworkbasket, for she had agreed with her mother that it was best, for her atleast, not to drive too often with the young gentleman.“We three will be ready in a minute,” cried Amy, running away towash her hands.“Can I do anything for you, Madam Mother?” asked Laurie, leaningover Mrs. March’s chair with the affectionate look and tone he alwaysgave her.“No, thank you, except call at the office, if you’ll be so kind,dear. It’s our day for a letter, and the postman hasn’t been.Father is as regular as the sun, but there’s some delay on the way,perhaps.”A sharp ring interrupted her, and a minute after Hannah came in with a letter.“It’s one of them horrid telegraph things, mum,” she said,handling it as if she was afraid it would explode and do some damage.At the word ‘telegraph’, Mrs. March snatched it, read the two linesit contained, and dropped back into her chair as white as if the little paperhad sent a bullet to her heart. Laurie dashed downstairs for water, while Megand Hannah supported her, and Jo read aloud, in a frightened voice...Mrs. March:Your husband is very ill. Come at once.S. HALEBlank Hospital, Washington.How still the room was as they listened breathlessly, how strangely the daydarkened outside, and how suddenly the whole world seemed to change, as thegirls gathered about their mother, feeling as if all the happiness and supportof their lives was about to be taken from them.Mrs. March was herself again directly, read the message over, and stretched outher arms to her daughters, saying, in a tone they never forgot, “I shallgo at once, but it may be too late. Oh, children, children, help me to bearit!”For several minutes there was nothing but the sound of sobbing in the room,mingled with broken words of comfort, tender assurances of help, and hopefulwhispers that died away in tears. Poor Hannah was the first to recover, andwith unconscious wisdom she set all the rest a good example, for with her, workwas panacea for most afflictions.“The Lord keep the dear man! I won’t waste no time a-cryin’,but git your things ready right away, mum,” she said heartily, as shewiped her face on her apron, gave her mistress a warm shake of the hand withher own hard one, and went away to work like three women in one.“She’s right, there’s no time for tears now. Be calm, girls,and let me think.”They tried to be calm, poor things, as their mother sat up, looking pale butsteady, and put away her grief to think and plan for them.“Where’s Laurie?” she asked presently, when she had collectedher thoughts and decided on the first duties to be done.“Here, ma’am. Oh, let me do something!” cried the boy,hurrying from the next room whither he had withdrawn, feeling that their firstsorrow was too sacred for even his friendly eyes to see.“Send a telegram saying I will come at once. The next train goes early inthe morning. I’ll take that.”“What else? The horses are ready. I can go anywhere, do anything,”he said, looking ready to fly to the ends of the earth.“Leave a note at Aunt March’s. Jo, give me that pen andpaper.”Tearing off the blank side of one of her newly copied pages, Jo drew the tablebefore her mother, well knowing that money for the long, sad journey must beborrowed, and feeling as if she could do anything to add a little to the sumfor her father.“Now go, dear, but don’t kill yourself driving at a desperate pace.There is no need of that.”Mrs. March’s warning was evidently thrown away, for five minutes laterLaurie tore by the window on his own fleet horse, riding as if for his life.“Jo, run to the rooms, and tell Mrs. King that I can’t come. On theway get these things. I’ll put them down, they’ll be needed and Imust go prepared for nursing. Hospital stores are not always good. Beth, go andask Mr. Laurence for a couple of bottles of old wine. I’m not too proudto beg for Father. He shall have the best of everything. Amy, tell Hannah toget down the black trunk, and Meg, come and help me find my things, forI’m half bewildered.”Writing, thinking, and directing all at once might well bewilder the poor lady,and Meg begged her to sit quietly in her room for a little while, and let themwork. Everyone scattered like leaves before a gust of wind, and the quiet,happy household was broken up as suddenly as if the paper had been an evilspell.Mr. Laurence came hurrying back with Beth, bringing every comfort the kind oldgentleman could think of for the invalid, and friendliest promises ofprotection for the girls during the mother’s absence, which comforted hervery much. There was nothing he didn’t offer, from his own dressing gownto himself as escort. But the last was impossible. Mrs. March would not hear ofthe old gentleman’s undertaking the long journey, yet an expression ofrelief was visible when he spoke of it, for anxiety ill fits one for traveling.He saw the look, knit his heavy eyebrows, rubbed his hands, and marchedabruptly away, saying he’d be back directly. No one had time to think ofhim again till, as Meg ran through the entry, with a pair of rubbers in onehand and a cup of tea in the other, she came suddenly upon Mr. Brooke.“I’m very sorry to hear of this, Miss March,” he said, in thekind, quiet tone which sounded very pleasantly to her perturbed spirit.“I came to offer myself as escort to your mother. Mr. Laurence hascommissions for me in Washington, and it will give me real satisfaction to beof service to her there.”Down dropped the rubbers, and the tea was very near following, as Meg put outher hand, with a face so full of gratitude that Mr. Brooke would have feltrepaid for a much greater sacrifice than the trifling one of time and comfortwhich he was about to take.“How kind you all are! Mother will accept, I’m sure, and it will besuch a relief to know that she has someone to take care of her. Thank you very,very much!”Meg spoke earnestly, and forgot herself entirely till something in the browneyes looking down at her made her remember the cooling tea, and lead the wayinto the parlor, saying she would call her mother.Everything was arranged by the time Laurie returned with a note from AuntMarch, enclosing the desired sum, and a few lines repeating what she had oftensaid before, that she had always told them it was absurd for March to go intothe army, always predicted that no good would come of it, and she hoped theywould take her advice the next time. Mrs. March put the note in the fire, themoney in her purse, and went on with her preparations, with her lips foldedtightly in a way which Jo would have understood if she had been there.The short afternoon wore away. All other errands were done, and Meg and hermother busy at some necessary needlework, while Beth and Amy got tea, andHannah finished her ironing with what she called a ‘slap and abang’, but still Jo did not come. They began to get anxious, and Lauriewent off to find her, for no one knew what freak Jo might take into her head.He missed her, however, and she came walking in with a very queer expression ofcountenance, for there was a mixture of fun and fear, satisfaction and regretin it, which puzzled the family as much as did the roll of bills she laidbefore her mother, saying with a little choke in her voice, “That’smy contribution toward making Father comfortable and bringing him home!”“My dear, where did you get it? Twenty-five dollars! Jo, I hope youhaven’t done anything rash?”“No, it’s mine honestly. I didn’t beg, borrow, or steal it. Iearned it, and I don’t think you’ll blame me, for I only sold whatwas my own.”As she spoke, Jo took off her bonnet, and a general outcry arose, for all herabundant hair was cut short.“Your hair! Your beautiful hair!” “Oh, Jo, how could you?Your one beauty.” “My dear girl, there was no need of this.”“She doesn’t look like my Jo any more, but I love her dearly forit!”As everyone exclaimed, and Beth hugged the cropped head tenderly, Jo assumed anindifferent air, which did not deceive anyone a particle, and said, rumpling upthe brown bush and trying to look as if she liked it, “It doesn’taffect the fate of the nation, so don’t wail, Beth. It will be good formy vanity, I was getting too proud of my wig. It will do my brains good to havethat mop taken off. My head feels deliciously light and cool, and the barbersaid I could soon have a curly crop, which will be boyish, becoming, and easyto keep in order. I’m satisfied, so please take the money and let’shave supper.”“Tell me all about it, Jo. I am not quite satisfied, but I can’tblame you, for I know how willingly you sacrificed your vanity, as you call it,to your love. But, my dear, it was not necessary, and I’m afraid you willregret it one of these days,” said Mrs. March.“No, I won’t!” returned Jo stoutly, feeling much relievedthat her prank was not entirely condemned.“What made you do it?” asked Amy, who would as soon have thought ofcutting off her head as her pretty hair.“Well, I was wild to do something for Father,” replied Jo, as theygathered about the table, for healthy young people can eat even in the midst oftrouble. “I hate to borrow as much as Mother does, and I knew Aunt Marchwould croak, she always does, if you ask for a ninepence. Meg gave all herquarterly salary toward the rent, and I only got some clothes with mine, so Ifelt wicked, and was bound to have some money, if I sold the nose off my faceto get it.”“You needn’t feel wicked, my child! You had no winter things andgot the simplest with your own hard earnings,” said Mrs. March with alook that warmed Jo’s heart.“I hadn’t the least idea of selling my hair at first, but as I wentalong I kept thinking what I could do, and feeling as if I’d like to diveinto some of the rich stores and help myself. In a barber’s window I sawtails of hair with the prices marked, and one black tail, not so thick as mine,was forty dollars. It came to me all of a sudden that I had one thing to makemoney out of, and without stopping to think, I walked in, asked if they boughthair, and what they would give for mine.”“I don’t see how you dared to do it,” said Beth in a tone ofawe.“Oh, he was a little man who looked as if he merely lived to oil hishair. He rather stared at first, as if he wasn’t used to having girlsbounce into his shop and ask him to buy their hair. He said he didn’tcare about mine, it wasn’t the fashionable color, and he never paid muchfor it in the first place. The work put into it made it dear, and so on. It wasgetting late, and I was afraid if it wasn’t done right away that Ishouldn’t have it done at all, and you know when I start to do a thing, Ihate to give it up. So I begged him to take it, and told him why I was in sucha hurry. It was silly, I dare say, but it changed his mind, for I got ratherexcited, and told the story in my topsy-turvy way, and his wife heard, and saidso kindly, ‘Take it, Thomas, and oblige the young lady. I’d do asmuch for our Jimmy any day if I had a spire of hair worth selling.”“Who was Jimmy?” asked Amy, who liked to have things explained asthey went along.“Her son, she said, who was in the army. How friendly such things makestrangers feel, don’t they? She talked away all the time the man clipped,and diverted my mind nicely.”“Didn’t you feel dreadfully when the first cut came?” askedMeg, with a shiver.“I took a last look at my hair while the man got his things, and that wasthe end of it. I never snivel over trifles like that. I will confess, though, Ifelt queer when I saw the dear old hair laid out on the table, and felt onlythe short rough ends of my head. It almost seemed as if I’d an arm or legoff. The woman saw me look at it, and picked out a long lock for me to keep.I’ll give it to you, Marmee, just to remember past glories by, for a cropis so comfortable I don’t think I shall ever have a mane again.”Mrs. March folded the wavy chestnut lock, and laid it away with a short grayone in her desk. She only said, “Thank you, deary,” but somethingin her face made the girls change the subject, and talk as cheerfully as theycould about Mr. Brooke’s kindness, the prospect of a fine day tomorrow,and the happy times they would have when Father came home to be nursed.No one wanted to go to bed when at ten o’clock Mrs. March put by the lastfinished job, and said, “Come girls.” Beth went to the piano andplayed the father’s favorite hymn. All began bravely, but broke down oneby one till Beth was left alone, singing with all her heart, for to her musicwas always a sweet consoler.“Go to bed and don’t talk, for we must be up early and shall needall the sleep we can get. Good night, my darlings,” said Mrs. March, asthe hymn ended, for no one cared to try another.They kissed her quietly, and went to bed as silently as if the dear invalid layin the next room. Beth and Amy soon fell asleep in spite of the great trouble,but Meg lay awake, thinking the most serious thoughts she had ever known in hershort life. Jo lay motionless, and her sister fancied that she was asleep, tilla stifled sob made her exclaim, as she touched a wet cheek...“Jo, dear, what is it? Are you crying about father?”“No, not now.”“What then?”“My... My hair!” burst out poor Jo, trying vainly to smother heremotion in the pillow.It did not seem at all comical to Meg, who kissed and caressed the afflictedheroine in the tenderest manner.“I’m not sorry,” protested Jo, with a choke. “I’ddo it again tomorrow, if I could. It’s only the vain part of me that goesand cries in this silly way. Don’t tell anyone, it’s all over now.I thought you were asleep, so I just made a little private moan for my onebeauty. How came you to be awake?”“I can’t sleep, I’m so anxious,” said Meg.“Think about something pleasant, and you’ll soon drop off.”“I tried it, but felt wider awake than ever.”“What did you think of?”“Handsome faces—eyes particularly,” answered Meg, smiling toherself in the dark.“What color do you like best?”“Brown, that is, sometimes. Blue are lovely.”Jo laughed, and Meg sharply ordered her not to talk, then amiably promised tomake her hair curl, and fell asleep to dream of living in her castle in theair.The clocks were striking midnight and the rooms were very still as a figureglided quietly from bed to bed, smoothing a coverlet here, settling a pillowthere, and pausing to look long and tenderly at each unconscious face, to kisseach with lips that mutely blessed, and to pray the fervent prayers which onlymothers utter. As she lifted the curtain to look out into the dreary night, themoon broke suddenly from behind the clouds and shone upon her like a bright,benignant face, which seemed to whisper in the silence, “Be comforted,dear soul! There is always light behind the clouds.”CHAPTER SIXTEENLETTERSIn the cold gray dawn the sisters lit their lamp and read their chapter with anearnestness never felt before. For now the shadow of a real trouble had come,the little books were full of help and comfort, and as they dressed, theyagreed to say goodbye cheerfully and hopefully, and send their mother on heranxious journey unsaddened by tears or complaints from them. Everything seemedvery strange when they went down, so dim and still outside, so full of lightand bustle within. Breakfast at that early hour seemed odd, and evenHannah’s familiar face looked unnatural as she flew about her kitchenwith her nightcap on. The big trunk stood ready in the hall, Mother’scloak and bonnet lay on the sofa, and Mother herself sat trying to eat, butlooking so pale and worn with sleeplessness and anxiety that the girls found itvery hard to keep their resolution. Meg’s eyes kept filling in spite ofherself, Jo was obliged to hide her face in the kitchen roller more than once,and the little girls wore a grave, troubled expression, as if sorrow was a newexperience to them.Nobody talked much, but as the time drew very near and they sat waiting for thecarriage, Mrs. March said to the girls, who were all busied about her, onefolding her shawl, another smoothing out the strings of her bonnet, a thirdputting on her overshoes, and a fourth fastening up her travelling bag...“Children, I leave you to Hannah’s care and Mr. Laurence’sprotection. Hannah is faithfulness itself, and our good neighbor will guard youas if you were his own. I have no fears for you, yet I am anxious that youshould take this trouble rightly. Don’t grieve and fret when I am gone,or think that you can be idle and comfort yourselves by being idle and tryingto forget. Go on with your work as usual, for work is a blessed solace. Hopeand keep busy, and whatever happens, remember that you never can befatherless.”“Yes, Mother.”“Meg, dear, be prudent, watch over your sisters, consult Hannah, and inany perplexity, go to Mr. Laurence. Be patient, Jo, don’t get despondentor do rash things, write to me often, and be my brave girl, ready to help andcheer all. Beth, comfort yourself with your music, and be faithful to thelittle home duties, and you, Amy, help all you can, be obedient, and keep happysafe at home.”“We will, Mother! We will!”The rattle of an approaching carriage made them all start and listen. That wasthe hard minute, but the girls stood it well. No one cried, no one ran away oruttered a lamentation, though their hearts were very heavy as they sent lovingmessages to Father, remembering, as they spoke that it might be too late todeliver them. They kissed their mother quietly, clung about her tenderly, andtried to wave their hands cheerfully when she drove away.Laurie and his grandfather came over to see her off, and Mr. Brooke looked sostrong and sensible and kind that the girls christened him ‘Mr.Greatheart’ on the spot.“Good-by, my darlings! God bless and keep us all!” whispered Mrs.March, as she kissed one dear little face after the other, and hurried into thecarriage.As she rolled away, the sun came out, and looking back, she saw it shining onthe group at the gate like a good omen. They saw it also, and smiled and wavedtheir hands, and the last thing she beheld as she turned the corner was thefour bright faces, and behind them like a bodyguard, old Mr. Laurence, faithfulHannah, and devoted Laurie.“How kind everyone is to us!” she said, turning to find fresh proofof it in the respectful sympathy of the young man’s face.“I don’t see how they can help it,” returned Mr. Brooke,laughing so infectiously that Mrs. March could not help smiling. And so thejourney began with the good omens of sunshine, smiles, and cheerful words.“I feel as if there had been an earthquake,” said Jo, as theirneighbors went home to breakfast, leaving them to rest and refresh themselves.“It seems as if half the house was gone,” added Meg forlornly.Beth opened her lips to say something, but could only point to the pile ofnicely mended hose which lay on Mother’s table, showing that even in herlast hurried moments she had thought and worked for them. It was a littlething, but it went straight to their hearts, and in spite of their braveresolutions, they all broke down and cried bitterly.Hannah wisely allowed them to relieve their feelings, and when the showershowed signs of clearing up, she came to the rescue, armed with a coffeepot.“Now, my dear young ladies, remember what your ma said, and don’tfret. Come and have a cup of coffee all round, and then let’s fall towork and be a credit to the family.”Coffee was a treat, and Hannah showed great tact in making it that morning. Noone could resist her persuasive nods, or the fragrant invitation issuing fromthe nose of the coffee pot. They drew up to the table, exchanged theirhandkerchiefs for napkins, and in ten minutes were all right again.“‘Hope and keep busy’, that’s the motto for us, solet’s see who will remember it best. I shall go to Aunt March, as usual.Oh, won’t she lecture though!” said Jo, as she sipped withreturning spirit.“I shall go to my Kings, though I’d much rather stay at home andattend to things here,” said Meg, wishing she hadn’t made her eyesso red.“No need of that. Beth and I can keep house perfectly well,” put inAmy, with an important air.“Hannah will tell us what to do, and we’ll have everything nicewhen you come home,” added Beth, getting out her mop and dish tub withoutdelay.“I think anxiety is very interesting,” observed Amy, eating sugarpensively.The girls couldn’t help laughing, and felt better for it, though Megshook her head at the young lady who could find consolation in a sugar bowl.The sight of the turnovers made Jo sober again; and when the two went out totheir daily tasks, they looked sorrowfully back at the window where they wereaccustomed to see their mother’s face. It was gone, but Beth hadremembered the little household ceremony, and there she was, nodding away atthem like a rosyfaced mandarin.“That’s so like my Beth!” said Jo, waving her hat, with agrateful face. “Goodbye, Meggy, I hope the Kings won’t straintoday. Don’t fret about Father, dear,” she added, as they parted.“And I hope Aunt March won’t croak. Your hair is becoming, and itlooks very boyish and nice,” returned Meg, trying not to smile at thecurly head, which looked comically small on her tall sister’s shoulders.“That’s my only comfort.” And, touching her hat a la Laurie,away went Jo, feeling like a shorn sheep on a wintry day.News from their father comforted the girls very much, for though dangerouslyill, the presence of the best and tenderest of nurses had already done himgood. Mr. Brooke sent a bulletin every day, and as the head of the family, Meginsisted on reading the dispatches, which grew more cheerful as the weekpassed. At first, everyone was eager to write, and plump envelopes werecarefully poked into the letter box by one or other of the sisters, who feltrather important with their Washington correspondence. As one of these packetscontained characteristic notes from the party, we will rob an imaginary mail,and read them.My dearest Mother:It is impossible to tell you how happy your last letter made us, for the newswas so good we couldn’t help laughing and crying over it. How very kindMr. Brooke is, and how fortunate that Mr. Laurence’s business detains himnear you so long, since he is so useful to you and Father. The girls are all asgood as gold. Jo helps me with the sewing, and insists on doing all sorts ofhard jobs. I should be afraid she might overdo, if I didn’t know her‘moral fit’ wouldn’t last long. Beth is as regular about hertasks as a clock, and never forgets what you told her. She grieves aboutFather, and looks sober except when she is at her little piano. Amy minds menicely, and I take great care of her. She does her own hair, and I am teachingher to make buttonholes and mend her stockings. She tries very hard, and I knowyou will be pleased with her improvement when you come. Mr. Laurence watchesover us like a motherly old hen, as Jo says, and Laurie is very kind andneighborly. He and Jo keep us merry, for we get pretty blue sometimes, and feellike orphans, with you so far away. Hannah is a perfect saint. She does notscold at all, and always calls me Miss Margaret, which is quite proper, youknow, and treats me with respect. We are all well and busy, but we long, dayand night, to have you back. Give my dearest love to Father, and believe me,ever your own...MEGThis note, prettily written on scented paper, was a great contrast to the next,which was scribbled on a big sheet of thin foreign paper, ornamented with blotsand all manner of flourishes and curly-tailed letters.My precious Marmee:Three cheers for dear Father! Brooke was a trump to telegraph right off, andlet us know the minute he was better. I rushed up garret when the letter came,and tried to thank God for being so good to us, but I could only cry, and say,“I’m glad! I’m glad!” Didn’t that do as well as aregular prayer? For I felt a great many in my heart. We have such funny times,and now I can enjoy them, for everyone is so desperately good, it’s likeliving in a nest of turtledoves. You’d laugh to see Meg head the tableand try to be motherish. She gets prettier every day, and I’m in lovewith her sometimes. The children are regular archangels, and I—well,I’m Jo, and never shall be anything else. Oh, I must tell you that I camenear having a quarrel with Laurie. I freed my mind about a silly little thing,and he was offended. I was right, but didn’t speak as I ought, and hemarched home, saying he wouldn’t come again till I begged pardon. Ideclared I wouldn’t and got mad. It lasted all day. I felt bad and wantedyou very much. Laurie and I are both so proud, it’s hard to beg pardon.But I thought he’d come to it, for I was in the right. He didn’tcome, and just at night I remembered what you said when Amy fell into theriver. I read my little book, felt better, resolved not to let the sun set onmy anger, and ran over to tell Laurie I was sorry. I met him at the gate,coming for the same thing. We both laughed, begged each other’s pardon,and felt all good and comfortable again.I made a ‘pome’ yesterday, when I was helping Hannah wash, and asFather likes my silly little things, I put it in to amuse him. Give him mylovingest hug that ever was, and kiss yourself a dozen times for your...TOPSY-TURVY JOA SONG FROM THE SUDSQueen of my tub, I merrily sing,While the white foam rises high,And sturdily wash and rinse and wring,And fasten the clothes to dry.Then out in the free fresh air they swing,Under the sunny sky.I wish we could wash from our hearts and soulsThe stains of the week away,And let water and air by their magic makeOurselves as pure as they.Then on the earth there would be indeed,A glorious washing day!Along the path of a useful life,Will heart’s-ease ever bloom.The busy mind has no time to thinkOf sorrow or care or gloom.And anxious thoughts may be swept away,As we bravely wield a broom.I am glad a task to me is given,To labor at day by day,For it brings me health and strength and hope,And I cheerfully learn to say,“Head, you may think, Heart, you may feel,But, Hand, you shall work alway!”Dear Mother,There is only room for me to send my love, and some pressed pansies from theroot I have been keeping safe in the house for Father to see. I read everymorning, try to be good all day, and sing myself to sleep with Father’stune. I can’t sing ‘LAND OF THE LEAL’ now, it makes me cry.Everyone is very kind, and we are as happy as we can be without you. Amy wantsthe rest of the page, so I must stop. I didn’t forget to cover theholders, and I wind the clock and air the rooms every day.Kiss dear Father on the cheek he calls mine. Oh, do come soon to your loving...LITTLE BETHMa Chere Mamma,We are all well I do my lessons always and never corroberate thegirls—Meg says I mean contradick so I put in both words and you can takethe properest. Meg is a great comfort to me and lets me have jelly every nightat tea its so good for me Jo says because it keeps me sweet tempered. Laurie isnot as respeckful as he ought to be now I am almost in my teens, he calls meChick and hurts my feelings by talking French to me very fast when I say Mercior Bon jour as Hattie King does. The sleeves of my blue dress were all wornout, and Meg put in new ones, but the full front came wrong and they are moreblue than the dress. I felt bad but did not fret I bear my troubles well but Ido wish Hannah would put more starch in my aprons and have buckwheats everyday. Can’t she? Didn’t I make that interrigation point nice? Megsays my punchtuation and spelling are disgraceful and I am mortyfied but dearme I have so many things to do, I can’t stop. Adieu, I send heaps of loveto Papa. Your affectionate daughter...AMY CURTIS MARCHDear Mis March,I jes drop a line to say we git on fust rate. The girls is clever and fly roundright smart. Miss Meg is going to make a proper good housekeeper. She hes theliking for it, and gits the hang of things surprisin quick. Jo doos beat allfor goin ahead, but she don’t stop to cal’k’late fust, andyou never know where she’s like to bring up. She done out a tub ofclothes on Monday, but she starched ’em afore they was wrenched, andblued a pink calico dress till I thought I should a died a laughin. Beth is thebest of little creeters, and a sight of help to me, bein so forehanded anddependable. She tries to learn everything, and really goes to market beyond heryears, likewise keeps accounts, with my help, quite wonderful. We have got onvery economical so fur. I don’t let the girls hev coffee only once aweek, accordin to your wish, and keep em on plain wholesome vittles. Amy doeswell without frettin, wearin her best clothes and eatin sweet stuff. Mr. Laurieis as full of didoes as usual, and turns the house upside down frequent, but heheartens the girls, so I let em hev full swing. The old gentleman sends heapsof things, and is rather wearin, but means wal, and it aint my place to saynothin. My bread is riz, so no more at this time. I send my duty to Mr. March,and hope he’s seen the last of his Pewmonia.Yours respectful, Hannah MulletHead Nurse of Ward No. 2, All serene on the Rappahannock, troops in fine condition, commisary departmentwell conducted, the Home Guard under Colonel Teddy always on duty, Commander inChief General Laurence reviews the army daily, Quartermaster Mullet keeps orderin camp, and Major Lion does picket duty at night. A salute of twenty-four gunswas fired on receipt of good news from Washington, and a dress parade tookplace at headquarters. Commander in chief sends best wishes, in which he isheartily joined by... COLONEL TEDDYDear Madam:The little girls are all well. Beth and my boy report daily. Hannah is a modelservant, and guards pretty Meg like a dragon. Glad the fine weather holds. Praymake Brooke useful, and draw on me for funds if expenses exceed your estimate.Don’t let your husband want anything. Thank God he is mending.Your sincere friend and servant, JAMES LAURENCECHAPTER SEVENTEENLITTLE FAITHFULFor a week the amount of virtue in the old house would have supplied theneighborhood. It was really amazing, for everyone seemed in a heavenly frame ofmind, and self-denial was all the fashion. Relieved of their first anxietyabout their father, the girls insensibly relaxed their praiseworthy efforts alittle, and began to fall back into old ways. They did not forget their motto,but hoping and keeping busy seemed to grow easier, and after such tremendousexertions, they felt that Endeavor deserved a holiday, and gave it a good many.Jo caught a bad cold through neglect to cover the shorn head enough, and wasordered to stay at home till she was better, for Aunt March didn’t liketo hear people read with colds in their heads. Jo liked this, and after anenergetic rummage from garret to cellar, subsided on the sofa to nurse her coldwith arsenicum and books. Amy found that housework and art did not go welltogether, and returned to her mud pies. Meg went daily to her pupils, andsewed, or thought she did, at home, but much time was spent in writing longletters to her mother, or reading the Washington dispatches over and over. Bethkept on, with only slight relapses into idleness or grieving.All the little duties were faithfully done each day, and many of hersisters’ also, for they were forgetful, and the house seemed like a clockwhose pendulum was gone a-visiting. When her heart got heavy with longings forMother or fears for Father, she went away into a certain closet, hid her facein the folds of a dear old gown, and made her little moan and prayed her littleprayer quietly by herself. Nobody knew what cheered her up after a sober fit,but everyone felt how sweet and helpful Beth was, and fell into a way of goingto her for comfort or advice in their small affairs.All were unconscious that this experience was a test of character, and when thefirst excitement was over, felt that they had done well and deserved praise. Sothey did, but their mistake was in ceasing to do well, and they learned thislesson through much anxiety and regret.“Meg, I wish you’d go and see the Hummels. You know Mother told usnot to forget them.” said Beth, ten days after Mrs. March’sdeparture.“I’m too tired to go this afternoon,” replied Meg, rockingcomfortably as she sewed.“Can’t you, Jo?” asked Beth.“Too stormy for me with my cold.”“I thought it was almost well.”“It’s well enough for me to go out with Laurie, but not well enoughto go to the Hummels’,” said Jo, laughing, but looking a littleashamed of her inconsistency.“Why don’t you go yourself?” asked Meg.“I have been every day, but the baby is sick, and I don’t know whatto do for it. Mrs. Hummel goes away to work, and Lottchen takes care of it. Butit gets sicker and sicker, and I think you or Hannah ought to go.”Beth spoke earnestly, and Meg promised she would go tomorrow.“Ask Hannah for some nice little mess, and take it round, Beth, the airwill do you good,” said Jo, adding apologetically, “I’d gobut I want to finish my writing.”“My head aches and I’m tired, so I thought maybe some of you wouldgo,” said Beth.“Amy will be in presently, and she will run down for us,” suggestedMeg.So Beth lay down on the sofa, the others returned to their work, and theHummels were forgotten. An hour passed. Amy did not come, Meg went to her roomto try on a new dress, Jo was absorbed in her story, and Hannah was soundasleep before the kitchen fire, when Beth quietly put on her hood, filled herbasket with odds and ends for the poor children, and went out into the chillyair with a heavy head and a grieved look in her patient eyes. It was late whenshe came back, and no one saw her creep upstairs and shut herself into hermother’s room. Half an hour after, Jo went to ‘Mother’scloset’ for something, and there found little Beth sitting on themedicine chest, looking very grave, with red eyes and a camphor bottle in herhand.“Christopher Columbus! What’s the matter?” cried Jo, as Bethput out her hand as if to warn her off, and asked quickly. . .“You’ve had the scarlet fever, haven’t you?”“Years ago, when Meg did. Why?”“Then I’ll tell you. Oh, Jo, the baby’s dead!”“What baby?”“Mrs. Hummel’s. It died in my lap before she got home,” criedBeth with a sob.“My poor dear, how dreadful for you! I ought to have gone,” saidJo, taking her sister in her arms as she sat down in her mother’s bigchair, with a remorseful face.“It wasn’t dreadful, Jo, only so sad! I saw in a minute it wassicker, but Lottchen said her mother had gone for a doctor, so I took Baby andlet Lotty rest. It seemed asleep, but all of a sudden if gave a little cry andtrembled, and then lay very still. I tried to warm its feet, and Lotty gave itsome milk, but it didn’t stir, and I knew it was dead.”“Don’t cry, dear! What did you do?”“I just sat and held it softly till Mrs. Hummel came with the doctor. Hesaid it was dead, and looked at Heinrich and Minna, who have sore throats.‘Scarlet fever, ma’am. Ought to have called me before,’ hesaid crossly. Mrs. Hummel told him she was poor, and had tried to cure babyherself, but now it was too late, and she could only ask him to help the othersand trust to charity for his pay. He smiled then, and was kinder, but it wasvery sad, and I cried with them till he turned round all of a sudden, and toldme to go home and take belladonna right away, or I’d have thefever.”“No, you won’t!” cried Jo, hugging her close, with afrightened look. “Oh, Beth, if you should be sick I never could forgivemyself! What shall we do?”“Don’t be frightened, I guess I shan’t have it badly. Ilooked in Mother’s book, and saw that it begins with headache, sorethroat, and queer feelings like mine, so I did take some belladonna, and I feelbetter,” said Beth, laying her cold hands on her hot forehead and tryingto look well.“If Mother was only at home!” exclaimed Jo, seizing the book, andfeeling that Washington was an immense way off. She read a page, looked atBeth, felt her head, peeped into her throat, and then said gravely,“You’ve been over the baby every day for more than a week, andamong the others who are going to have it, so I’m afraid you are going tohave it, Beth. I’ll call Hannah, she knows all about sickness.”“Don’t let Amy come. She never had it, and I should hate to give itto her. Can’t you and Meg have it over again?” asked Beth,anxiously.“I guess not. Don’t care if I do. Serve me right, selfish pig, tolet you go, and stay writing rubbish myself!” muttered Jo, as she went toconsult Hannah.The good soul was wide awake in a minute, and took the lead at once, assuringthat there was no need to worry; every one had scarlet fever, and if rightlytreated, nobody died, all of which Jo believed, and felt much relieved as theywent up to call Meg.“Now I’ll tell you what we’ll do,” said Hannah, whenshe had examined and questioned Beth, “we will have Dr. Bangs, just totake a look at you, dear, and see that we start right. Then we’ll sendAmy off to Aunt March’s for a spell, to keep her out of harm’s way,and one of you girls can stay at home and amuse Beth for a day or two.”“I shall stay, of course, I’m oldest,” began Meg, lookinganxious and self-reproachful.“I shall, because it’s my fault she is sick. I told MotherI’d do the errands, and I haven’t,” said Jo decidedly.“Which will you have, Beth? There ain’t no need of but one,”aid Hannah.“Jo, please.” And Beth leaned her head against her sister with acontented look, which effectually settled that point.“I’ll go and tell Amy,” said Meg, feeling a little hurt, yetrather relieved on the whole, for she did not like nursing, and Jo did.Amy rebelled outright, and passionately declared that she had rather have thefever than go to Aunt March. Meg reasoned, pleaded, and commanded, all in vain.Amy protested that she would not go, and Meg left her in despair to ask Hannahwhat should be done. Before she came back, Laurie walked into the parlor tofind Amy sobbing, with her head in the sofa cushions. She told her story,expecting to be consoled, but Laurie only put his hands in his pockets andwalked about the room, whistling softly, as he knit his brows in deep thought.Presently he sat down beside her, and said, in his most wheedlesome tone,“Now be a sensible little woman, and do as they say. No, don’t cry,but hear what a jolly plan I’ve got. You go to Aunt March’s, andI’ll come and take you out every day, driving or walking, and we’llhave capital times. Won’t that be better than moping here?”“I don’t wish to be sent off as if I was in the way,” beganAmy, in an injured voice.“Bless your heart, child, it’s to keep you well. You don’twant to be sick, do you?”“No, I’m sure I don’t, but I dare say I shall be, forI’ve been with Beth all the time.”“That’s the very reason you ought to go away at once, so that youmay escape it. Change of air and care will keep you well, I dare say, or if itdoes not entirely, you will have the fever more lightly. I advise you to be offas soon as you can, for scarlet fever is no joke, miss.”“But it’s dull at Aunt March’s, and she is so cross,”said Amy, looking rather frightened.“It won’t be dull with me popping in every day to tell you how Bethis, and take you out gallivanting. The old lady likes me, and I’ll be assweet as possible to her, so she won’t peck at us, whatever we do.”“Will you take me out in the trotting wagon with Puck?”“On my honor as a gentleman.”“And come every single day?”“See if I don’t!”“And bring me back the minute Beth is well?”“The identical minute.”“And go to the theater, truly?”“A dozen theaters, if we may.”“Well—I guess I will,” said Amy slowly.“Good girl! Call Meg, and tell her you’ll give in,” saidLaurie, with an approving pat, which annoyed Amy more than the ‘givingin’.Meg and Jo came running down to behold the miracle which had been wrought, andAmy, feeling very precious and self-sacrificing, promised to go, if the doctorsaid Beth was going to be ill.“How is the little dear?” asked Laurie, for Beth was his especialpet, and he felt more anxious about her than he liked to show.“She is lying down on Mother’s bed, and feels better. Thebaby’s death troubled her, but I dare say she has only got cold. Hannahsays she thinks so, but she looks worried, and that makes me fidgety,”answered Meg.“What a trying world it is!” said Jo, rumpling up her hair in afretful way. “No sooner do we get out of one trouble than down comesanother. There doesn’t seem to be anything to hold on to whenMother’s gone, so I’m all at sea.”“Well, don’t make a porcupine of yourself, it isn’t becoming.Settle your wig, Jo, and tell me if I shall telegraph to your mother, or doanything?” asked Laurie, who never had been reconciled to the loss of hisfriend’s one beauty.“That is what troubles me,” said Meg. “I think we ought totell her if Beth is really ill, but Hannah says we mustn’t, for Mothercan’t leave Father, and it will only make them anxious. Beth won’tbe sick long, and Hannah knows just what to do, and Mother said we were to mindher, so I suppose we must, but it doesn’t seem quite right to me.”“Hum, well, I can’t say. Suppose you ask Grandfather after thedoctor has been.”“We will. Jo, go and get Dr. Bangs at once,” commanded Meg.“We can’t decide anything till he has been.”“Stay where you are, Jo. I’m errand boy to thisestablishment,” said Laurie, taking up his cap.“I’m afraid you are busy,” began Meg.“No, I’ve done my lessons for the day.”“Do you study in vacation time?” asked Jo.“I follow the good example my neighbors set me,” was Laurie’sanswer, as he swung himself out of the room.“I have great hopes for my boy,” observed Jo, watching him fly overthe fence with an approving smile.“He does very well, for a boy,” was Meg’s somewhat ungraciousanswer, for the subject did not interest her.Dr. Bangs came, said Beth had symptoms of the fever, but he thought she wouldhave it lightly, though he looked sober over the Hummel story. Amy was orderedoff at once, and provided with something to ward off danger, she departed ingreat state, with Jo and Laurie as escort.Aunt March received them with her usual hospitality.“What do you want now?” she asked, looking sharply over herspectacles, while the parrot, sitting on the back of her chair, called out...“Go away. No boys allowed here.”Laurie retired to the window, and Jo told her story.“No more than I expected, if you are allowed to go poking about amongpoor folks. Amy can stay and make herself useful if she isn’t sick, whichI’ve no doubt she will be, looks like it now. Don’t cry, child, itworries me to hear people sniff.”Amy was on the point of crying, but Laurie slyly pulled the parrot’stail, which caused Polly to utter an astonished croak and call out,“Bless my boots!” in such a funny way, that she laughed instead.“What do you hear from your mother?” asked the old lady gruffly.“Father is much better,” replied Jo, trying to keep sober.“Oh, is he? Well, that won’t last long, I fancy. March never hadany stamina,” was the cheerful reply.“Ha, ha! Never say die, take a pinch of snuff, goodbye, goodbye!”squalled Polly, dancing on her perch, and clawing at the old lady’s capas Laurie tweaked him in the rear.“Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird! And, Jo, you’dbetter go at once. It isn’t proper to be gadding about so late with arattlepated boy like...”“Hold your tongue, you disrespectful old bird!” cried Polly,tumbling off the chair with a bounce, and running to peck the‘rattlepated’ boy, who was shaking with laughter at the lastspeech.“I don’t think I can bear it, but I’ll try,” thoughtAmy, as she was left alone with Aunt March.“Get along, you fright!” screamed Polly, and at that rude speechAmy could not restrain a sniff.CHAPTER EIGHTEENDARK DAYSBeth did have the fever, and was much sicker than anyone but Hannah and thedoctor suspected. The girls knew nothing about illness, and Mr. Laurence wasnot allowed to see her, so Hannah had everything her own way, and busy Dr.Bangs did his best, but left a good deal to the excellent nurse. Meg stayed athome, lest she should infect the Kings, and kept house, feeling very anxiousand a little guilty when she wrote letters in which no mention was made ofBeth’s illness. She could not think it right to deceive her mother, butshe had been bidden to mind Hannah, and Hannah wouldn’t hear of‘Mrs. March bein’ told, and worried just for sech a trifle.’Jo devoted herself to Beth day and night, not a hard task, for Beth was verypatient, and bore her pain uncomplainingly as long as she could controlherself. But there came a time when during the fever fits she began to talk ina hoarse, broken voice, to play on the coverlet as if on her beloved littlepiano, and try to sing with a throat so swollen that there was no music left, atime when she did not know the familiar faces around her, but addressed them bywrong names, and called imploringly for her mother. Then Jo grew frightened,Meg begged to be allowed to write the truth, and even Hannah said she‘would think of it, though there was no danger yet’. A letter fromWashington added to their trouble, for Mr. March had had a relapse, and couldnot think of coming home for a long while.How dark the days seemed now, how sad and lonely the house, and how heavy werethe hearts of the sisters as they worked and waited, while the shadow of deathhovered over the once happy home. Then it was that Margaret, sitting alone withtears dropping often on her work, felt how rich she had been in things moreprecious than any luxuries money could buy—in love, protection, peace,and health, the real blessings of life. Then it was that Jo, living in thedarkened room, with that suffering little sister always before her eyes andthat pathetic voice sounding in her ears, learned to see the beauty and thesweetness of Beth’s nature, to feel how deep and tender a place shefilled in all hearts, and to acknowledge the worth of Beth’s unselfishambition to live for others, and make home happy by that exercise of thosesimple virtues which all may possess, and which all should love and value morethan talent, wealth, or beauty. And Amy, in her exile, longed eagerly to be athome, that she might work for Beth, feeling now that no service would be hardor irksome, and remembering, with regretful grief, how many neglected tasksthose willing hands had done for her. Laurie haunted the house like a restlessghost, and Mr. Laurence locked the grand piano, because he could not bear to bereminded of the young neighbor who used to make the twilight pleasant for him.Everyone missed Beth. The milkman, baker, grocer, and butcher inquired how shedid, poor Mrs. Hummel came to beg pardon for her thoughtlessness and to get ashroud for Minna, the neighbors sent all sorts of comforts and good wishes, andeven those who knew her best were surprised to find how many friends shy littleBeth had made.Meanwhile she lay on her bed with old Joanna at her side, for even in herwanderings she did not forget her forlorn protege. She longed for her cats, butwould not have them brought, lest they should get sick, and in her quiet hoursshe was full of anxiety about Jo. She sent loving messages to Amy, bade themtell her mother that she would write soon, and often begged for pencil andpaper to try to say a word, that Father might not think she had neglected him.But soon even these intervals of consciousness ended, and she lay hour afterhour, tossing to and fro, with incoherent words on her lips, or sank into aheavy sleep which brought her no refreshment. Dr. Bangs came twice a day,Hannah sat up at night, Meg kept a telegram in her desk all ready to send offat any minute, and Jo never stirred from Beth’s side.The first of December was a wintry day indeed to them, for a bitter wind blew,snow fell fast, and the year seemed getting ready for its death. When Dr. Bangscame that morning, he looked long at Beth, held the hot hand in both his ownfor a minute, and laid it gently down, saying, in a low voice to Hannah,“If Mrs. March can leave her husband she’d better be sentfor.”Hannah nodded without speaking, for her lips twitched nervously, Meg droppeddown into a chair as the strength seemed to go out of her limbs at the sound ofthose words, and Jo, standing with a pale face for a minute, ran to the parlor,snatched up the telegram, and throwing on her things, rushed out into thestorm. She was soon back, and while noiselessly taking off her cloak, Lauriecame in with a letter, saying that Mr. March was mending again. Jo read itthankfully, but the heavy weight did not seem lifted off her heart, and herface was so full of misery that Laurie asked quickly, “What is it? IsBeth worse?”“I’ve sent for Mother,” said Jo, tugging at her rubber bootswith a tragic expression.“Good for you, Jo! Did you do it on your own responsibility?” askedLaurie, as he seated her in the hall chair and took off the rebellious boots,seeing how her hands shook.“No. The doctor told us to.”“Oh, Jo, it’s not so bad as that?” cried Laurie, with astartled face.“Yes, it is. She doesn’t know us, she doesn’t even talk aboutthe flocks of green doves, as she calls the vine leaves on the wall. Shedoesn’t look like my Beth, and there’s nobody to help us bear it.Mother and father both gone, and God seems so far away I can’t findHim.”As the tears streamed fast down poor Jo’s cheeks, she stretched out herhand in a helpless sort of way, as if groping in the dark, and Laurie took itin his, whispering as well as he could with a lump in his throat,“I’m here. Hold on to me, Jo, dear!”She could not speak, but she did ‘hold on’, and the warm grasp ofthe friendly human hand comforted her sore heart, and seemed to lead her nearerto the Divine arm which alone could uphold her in her trouble.Laurie longed to say something tender and comfortable, but no fitting wordscame to him, so he stood silent, gently stroking her bent head as her motherused to do. It was the best thing he could have done, far more soothing thanthe most eloquent words, for Jo felt the unspoken sympathy, and in the silencelearned the sweet solace which affection administers to sorrow. Soon she driedthe tears which had relieved her, and looked up with a grateful face.“Thank you, Teddy, I’m better now. I don’t feel so forlorn,and will try to bear it if it comes.”“Keep hoping for the best, that will help you, Jo. Soon your mother willbe here, and then everything will be all right.”“I’m so glad Father is better. Now she won’t feel so badabout leaving him. Oh, me! It does seem as if all the troubles came in a heap,and I got the heaviest part on my shoulders,” sighed Jo, spreading herwet handkerchief over her knees to dry.“Doesn’t Meg pull fair?” asked Laurie, looking indignant.“Oh, yes, she tries to, but she can’t love Bethy as I do, and shewon’t miss her as I shall. Beth is my conscience, and I can’t giveher up. I can’t! I can’t!”Down went Jo’s face into the wet handkerchief, and she crieddespairingly, for she had kept up bravely till now and never shed a tear.Laurie drew his hand across his eyes, but could not speak till he had subduedthe choky feeling in his throat and steadied his lips. It might be unmanly, buthe couldn’t help it, and I am glad of it. Presently, as Jo’s sobsquieted, he said hopefully, “I don’t think she will die.She’s so good, and we all love her so much, I don’t believe Godwill take her away yet.”“The good and dear people always do die,” groaned Jo, but shestopped crying, for her friend’s words cheered her up in spite of her owndoubts and fears.“Poor girl, you’re worn out. It isn’t like you to be forlorn.Stop a bit. I’ll hearten you up in a jiffy.”Laurie went off two stairs at a time, and Jo laid her wearied head down onBeth’s little brown hood, which no one had thought of moving from thetable where she left it. It must have possessed some magic, for the submissivespirit of its gentle owner seemed to enter into Jo, and when Laurie camerunning down with a glass of wine, she took it with a smile, and said bravely,“I drink— Health to my Beth! You are a good doctor, Teddy, and sucha comfortable friend. How can I ever pay you?” she added, as the winerefreshed her body, as the kind words had done her troubled mind.“I’ll send my bill, by-and-by, and tonight I’ll give yousomething that will warm the cockles of your heart better than quarts ofwine,” said Laurie, beaming at her with a face of suppressed satisfactionat something.“What is it?” cried Jo, forgetting her woes for a minute in herwonder.“I telegraphed to your mother yesterday, and Brooke answered she’dcome at once, and she’ll be here tonight, and everything will be allright. Aren’t you glad I did it?”Laurie spoke very fast, and turned red and excited all in a minute, for he hadkept his plot a secret, for fear of disappointing the girls or harming Beth. Jogrew quite white, flew out of her chair, and the moment he stopped speaking sheelectrified him by throwing her arms round his neck, and crying out, with ajoyful cry, “Oh, Laurie! Oh, Mother! I am so glad!” She did notweep again, but laughed hysterically, and trembled and clung to her friend asif she was a little bewildered by the sudden news.Laurie, though decidedly amazed, behaved with great presence of mind. He pattedher back soothingly, and finding that she was recovering, followed it up by abashful kiss or two, which brought Jo round at once. Holding on to thebanisters, she put him gently away, saying breathlessly, “Oh,don’t! I didn’t mean to, it was dreadful of me, but you were such adear to go and do it in spite of Hannah that I couldn’t help flying atyou. Tell me all about it, and don’t give me wine again, it makes me actso.”“I don’t mind,” laughed Laurie, as he settled his tie.“Why, you see I got fidgety, and so did Grandpa. We thought Hannah wasoverdoing the authority business, and your mother ought to know. She’dnever forgive us if Beth... Well, if anything happened, you know. So I gotgrandpa to say it was high time we did something, and off I pelted to theoffice yesterday, for the doctor looked sober, and Hannah most took my head offwhen I proposed a telegram. I never can bear to be ‘lorded over’,so that settled my mind, and I did it. Your mother will come, I know, and thelate train is in at two A.M. I shall go for her, and you’ve only got tobottle up your rapture, and keep Beth quiet till that blessed lady getshere.”“Laurie, you’re an angel! How shall I ever thank you?”“Fly at me again. I rather liked it,” said Laurie, lookingmischievous, a thing he had not done for a fortnight.“No, thank you. I’ll do it by proxy, when your grandpa comes.Don’t tease, but go home and rest, for you’ll be up half the night.Bless you, Teddy, bless you!”Jo had backed into a corner, and as she finished her speech, she vanishedprecipitately into the kitchen, where she sat down upon a dresser and told theassembled cats that she was “happy, oh, so happy!” while Lauriedeparted, feeling that he had made a rather neat thing of it.“That’s the interferingest chap I ever see, but I forgive him anddo hope Mrs. March is coming right away,” said Hannah, with an air ofrelief, when Jo told the good news.Meg had a quiet rapture, and then brooded over the letter, while Jo set thesickroom in order, and Hannah “knocked up a couple of pies in case ofcompany unexpected”. A breath of fresh air seemed to blow through thehouse, and something better than sunshine brightened the quiet rooms.Everything appeared to feel the hopeful change. Beth’s bird began tochirp again, and a half-blown rose was discovered on Amy’s bush in thewindow. The fires seemed to burn with unusual cheeriness, and every time thegirls met, their pale faces broke into smiles as they hugged one another,whispering encouragingly, “Mother’s coming, dear! Mother’scoming!” Every one rejoiced but Beth. She lay in that heavy stupor, alikeunconscious of hope and joy, doubt and danger. It was a piteous sight, the oncerosy face so changed and vacant, the once busy hands so weak and wasted, theonce smiling lips quite dumb, and the once pretty, well-kept hair scatteredrough and tangled on the pillow. All day she lay so, only rousing now and thento mutter, “Water!” with lips so parched they could hardly shapethe word. All day Jo and Meg hovered over her, watching, waiting, hoping, andtrusting in God and Mother, and all day the snow fell, the bitter wind raged,and the hours dragged slowly by. But night came at last, and every time theclock struck, the sisters, still sitting on either side of the bed, looked ateach other with brightening eyes, for each hour brought help nearer. The doctorhad been in to say that some change, for better or worse, would probably takeplace about midnight, at which time he would return.Hannah, quite worn out, lay down on the sofa at the bed’s foot and fellfast asleep, Mr. Laurence marched to and fro in the parlor, feeling that hewould rather face a rebel battery than Mrs. March’s countenance as sheentered. Laurie lay on the rug, pretending to rest, but staring into the firewith the thoughtful look which made his black eyes beautifully soft and clear.The girls never forgot that night, for no sleep came to them as they kept theirwatch, with that dreadful sense of powerlessness which comes to us in hourslike those.“If God spares Beth, I never will complain again,” whispered Megearnestly.“If God spares Beth, I’ll try to love and serve Him all mylife,” answered Jo, with equal fervor.“I wish I had no heart, it aches so,” sighed Meg, after a pause.“If life is often as hard as this, I don’t see how we ever shallget through it,” added her sister despondently.Here the clock struck twelve, and both forgot themselves in watching Beth, forthey fancied a change passed over her wan face. The house was still as death,and nothing but the wailing of the wind broke the deep hush. Weary Hannah slepton, and no one but the sisters saw the pale shadow which seemed to fall uponthe little bed. An hour went by, and nothing happened except Laurie’squiet departure for the station. Another hour, still no one came, and anxiousfears of delay in the storm, or accidents by the way, or, worst of all, a greatgrief at Washington, haunted the girls.It was past two, when Jo, who stood at the window thinking how dreary the worldlooked in its winding sheet of snow, heard a movement by the bed, and turningquickly, saw Meg kneeling before their mother’s easy chair with her facehidden. A dreadful fear passed coldly over Jo, as she thought, “Beth isdead, and Meg is afraid to tell me.”She was back at her post in an instant, and to her excited eyes a great changeseemed to have taken place. The fever flush and the look of pain were gone, andthe beloved little face looked so pale and peaceful in its utter repose that Jofelt no desire to weep or to lament. Leaning low over this dearest of hersisters, she kissed the damp forehead with her heart on her lips, and softlywhispered, “Good-by, my Beth. Good-by!”As if awaked by the stir, Hannah started out of her sleep, hurried to the bed,looked at Beth, felt her hands, listened at her lips, and then, throwing herapron over her head, sat down to rock to and fro, exclaiming, under her breath,“The fever’s turned, she’s sleepin’ nat’ral, herskin’s damp, and she breathes easy. Praise be given! Oh, my goodnessme!”Before the girls could believe the happy truth, the doctor came to confirm it.He was a homely man, but they thought his face quite heavenly when he smiledand said, with a fatherly look at them, “Yes, my dears, I think thelittle girl will pull through this time. Keep the house quiet, let her sleep,and when she wakes, give her...”What they were to give, neither heard, for both crept into the dark hall, and,sitting on the stairs, held each other close, rejoicing with hearts too fullfor words. When they went back to be kissed and cuddled by faithful Hannah,they found Beth lying, as she used to do, with her cheek pillowed on her hand,the dreadful pallor gone, and breathing quietly, as if just fallen asleep.“If Mother would only come now!” said Jo, as the winter night beganto wane.“See,” said Meg, coming up with a white, half-opened rose, “Ithought this would hardly be ready to lay in Beth’s hand tomorrow ifshe—went away from us. But it has blossomed in the night, and now I meanto put it in my vase here, so that when the darling wakes, the first thing shesees will be the little rose, and Mother’s face.”Never had the sun risen so beautifully, and never had the world seemed solovely as it did to the heavy eyes of Meg and Jo, as they looked out in theearly morning, when their long, sad vigil was done.“It looks like a fairy world,” said Meg, smiling to herself, as shestood behind the curtain, watching the dazzling sight.“Hark!” cried Jo, starting to her feet.Yes, there was a sound of bells at the door below, a cry from Hannah, and thenLaurie’s voice saying in a joyful whisper, “Girls, she’scome! She’s come!”CHAPTER NINETEENAMY’S WILLWhile these things were happening at home, Amy was having hard times at AuntMarch’s. She felt her exile deeply, and for the first time in her life,realized how much she was beloved and petted at home. Aunt March never pettedany one; she did not approve of it, but she meant to be kind, for thewell-behaved little girl pleased her very much, and Aunt March had a soft placein her old heart for her nephew’s children, though she didn’t thinkit proper to confess it. She really did her best to make Amy happy, but, dearme, what mistakes she made. Some old people keep young at heart in spite ofwrinkles and gray hairs, can sympathize with children’s little cares andjoys, make them feel at home, and can hide wise lessons under pleasant plays,giving and receiving friendship in the sweetest way. But Aunt March had notthis gift, and she worried Amy very much with her rules and orders, her primways, and long, prosy talks. Finding the child more docile and amiable than hersister, the old lady felt it her duty to try and counteract, as far aspossible, the bad effects of home freedom and indulgence. So she took Amy bythe hand, and taught her as she herself had been taught sixty years ago, aprocess which carried dismay to Amy’s soul, and made her feel like a flyin the web of a very strict spider.She had to wash the cups every morning, and polish up the old-fashioned spoons,the fat silver teapot, and the glasses till they shone. Then she must dust theroom, and what a trying job that was. Not a speck escaped Aunt March’seye, and all the furniture had claw legs and much carving, which was neverdusted to suit. Then Polly had to be fed, the lap dog combed, and a dozen tripsupstairs and down to get things or deliver orders, for the old lady was verylame and seldom left her big chair. After these tiresome labors, she must doher lessons, which was a daily trial of every virtue she possessed. Then shewas allowed one hour for exercise or play, and didn’t she enjoy it?Laurie came every day, and wheedled Aunt March till Amy was allowed to go outwith him, when they walked and rode and had capital times. After dinner, shehad to read aloud, and sit still while the old lady slept, which she usuallydid for an hour, as she dropped off over the first page. Then patchwork ortowels appeared, and Amy sewed with outward meekness and inward rebellion tilldusk, when she was allowed to amuse herself as she liked till teatime. Theevenings were the worst of all, for Aunt March fell to telling long storiesabout her youth, which were so unutterably dull that Amy was always ready to goto bed, intending to cry over her hard fate, but usually going to sleep beforeshe had squeezed out more than a tear or two.If it had not been for Laurie, and old Esther, the maid, she felt that shenever could have got through that dreadful time. The parrot alone was enough todrive her distracted, for he soon felt that she did not admire him, andrevenged himself by being as mischievous as possible. He pulled her hairwhenever she came near him, upset his bread and milk to plague her when she hadnewly cleaned his cage, made Mop bark by pecking at him while Madam dozed,called her names before company, and behaved in all respects like anreprehensible old bird. Then she could not endure the dog, a fat, cross beastwho snarled and yelped at her when she made his toilet, and who lay on his backwith all his legs in the air and a most idiotic expression of countenance whenhe wanted something to eat, which was about a dozen times a day. The cook wasbad-tempered, the old coachman was deaf, and Esther the only one who ever tookany notice of the young lady.Esther was a Frenchwoman, who had lived with ‘Madame’, as shecalled her mistress, for many years, and who rather tyrannized over the oldlady, who could not get along without her. Her real name was Estelle, but AuntMarch ordered her to change it, and she obeyed, on condition that she was neverasked to change her religion. She took a fancy to Mademoiselle, and amused hervery much with odd stories of her life in France, when Amy sat with her whileshe got up Madame’s laces. She also allowed her to roam about the greathouse, and examine the curious and pretty things stored away in the bigwardrobes and the ancient chests, for Aunt March hoarded like a magpie.Amy’s chief delight was an Indian cabinet, full of queer drawers, littlepigeonholes, and secret places, in which were kept all sorts of ornaments, someprecious, some merely curious, all more or less antique. To examine and arrangethese things gave Amy great satisfaction, especially the jewel cases, in whichon velvet cushions reposed the ornaments which had adorned a belle forty yearsago. There was the garnet set which Aunt March wore when she came out, thepearls her father gave her on her wedding day, her lover’s diamonds, thejet mourning rings and pins, the queer lockets, with portraits of dead friendsand weeping willows made of hair inside, the baby bracelets her one littledaughter had worn, Uncle March’s big watch, with the red seal so manychildish hands had played with, and in a box all by itself lay AuntMarch’s wedding ring, too small now for her fat finger, but put carefullyaway like the most precious jewel of them all.“Which would Mademoiselle choose if she had her will?” askedEsther, who always sat near to watch over and lock up the valuables.“I like the diamonds best, but there is no necklace among them, andI’m fond of necklaces, they are so becoming. I should choose this if Imight,” replied Amy, looking with great admiration at a string of goldand ebony beads from which hung a heavy cross of the same.“I, too, covet that, but not as a necklace. Ah, no! To me it is a rosary,and as such I should use it like a good catholic,” said Esther, eyeingthe handsome thing wistfully.“Is it meant to use as you use the string of good-smelling wooden beadshanging over your glass?” asked Amy.“Truly, yes, to pray with. It would be pleasing to the saints if one usedso fine a rosary as this, instead of wearing it as a vain bijou.”“You seem to take a great deal of comfort in your prayers, Esther, andalways come down looking quiet and satisfied. I wish I could.”“If Mademoiselle was a Catholic, she would find true comfort, but as thatis not to be, it would be well if you went apart each day to meditate and pray,as did the good mistress whom I served before Madame. She had a little chapel,and in it found solacement for much trouble.”“Would it be right for me to do so too?” asked Amy, who in herloneliness felt the need of help of some sort, and found that she was apt toforget her little book, now that Beth was not there to remind her of it.“It would be excellent and charming, and I shall gladly arrange thelittle dressing room for you if you like it. Say nothing to Madame, but whenshe sleeps go you and sit alone a while to think good thoughts, and pray thedear God preserve your sister.”Esther was truly pious, and quite sincere in her advice, for she had anaffectionate heart, and felt much for the sisters in their anxiety. Amy likedthe idea, and gave her leave to arrange the light closet next her room, hopingit would do her good.“I wish I knew where all these pretty things would go when Aunt Marchdies,” she said, as she slowly replaced the shining rosary and shut thejewel cases one by one.“To you and your sisters. I know it, Madame confides in me. I witnessedher will, and it is to be so,” whispered Esther smiling.“How nice! But I wish she’d let us have them now. Procrastinationis not agreeable,” observed Amy, taking a last look at the diamonds.“It is too soon yet for the young ladies to wear these things. The firstone who is affianced will have the pearls, Madame has said it, and I have afancy that the little turquoise ring will be given to you when you go, forMadame approves your good behavior and charming manners.”“Do you think so? Oh, I’ll be a lamb, if I can only have thatlovely ring! It’s ever so much prettier than Kitty Bryant’s. I dolike Aunt March after all.” And Amy tried on the blue ring with adelighted face and a firm resolve to earn it.From that day she was a model of obedience, and the old lady complacentlyadmired the success of her training. Esther fitted up the closet with a littletable, placed a footstool before it, and over it a picture taken from one ofthe shut-up rooms. She thought it was of no great value, but, beingappropriate, she borrowed it, well knowing that Madame would never know it, norcare if she did. It was, however, a very valuable copy of one of the famouspictures of the world, and Amy’s beauty-loving eyes were never tired oflooking up at the sweet face of the Divine Mother, while her tender thoughts ofher own were busy at her heart. On the table she laid her little testament andhymnbook, kept a vase always full of the best flowers Laurie brought her, andcame every day to ‘sit alone’ thinking good thoughts, and prayingthe dear God to preserve her sister. Esther had given her a rosary of blackbeads with a silver cross, but Amy hung it up and did not use it, feelingdoubtful as to its fitness for Protestant prayers.The little girl was very sincere in all this, for being left alone outside thesafe home nest, she felt the need of some kind hand to hold by so sorely thatshe instinctively turned to the strong and tender Friend, whose fatherly lovemost closely surrounds His little children. She missed her mother’s helpto understand and rule herself, but having been taught where to look, she didher best to find the way and walk in it confidingly. But, Amy was a youngpilgrim, and just now her burden seemed very heavy. She tried to forgetherself, to keep cheerful, and be satisfied with doing right, though no one sawor praised her for it. In her first effort at being very, very good, shedecided to make her will, as Aunt March had done, so that if she did fall illand die, her possessions might be justly and generously divided. It cost her apang even to think of giving up the little treasures which in her eyes were asprecious as the old lady’s jewels.During one of her play hours she wrote out the important document as well asshe could, with some help from Esther as to certain legal terms, and when thegood-natured Frenchwoman had signed her name, Amy felt relieved and laid it byto show Laurie, whom she wanted as a second witness. As it was a rainy day, shewent upstairs to amuse herself in one of the large chambers, and took Pollywith her for company. In this room there was a wardrobe full of old-fashionedcostumes with which Esther allowed her to play, and it was her favoriteamusement to array herself in the faded brocades, and parade up and down beforethe long mirror, making stately curtsies, and sweeping her train about with arustle which delighted her ears. So busy was she on this day that she did nothear Laurie’s ring nor see his face peeping in at her as she gravelypromenaded to and fro, flirting her fan and tossing her head, on which she worea great pink turban, contrasting oddly with her blue brocade dress and yellowquilted petticoat. She was obliged to walk carefully, for she had onhigh-heeled shoes, and, as Laurie told Jo afterward, it was a comical sight tosee her mince along in her gay suit, with Polly sidling and bridling justbehind her, imitating her as well as he could, and occasionally stopping tolaugh or exclaim, “Ain’t we fine? Get along, you fright! Hold yourtongue! Kiss me, dear! Ha! Ha!”Having with difficulty restrained an explosion of merriment, lest it shouldoffend her majesty, Laurie tapped and was graciously received.“Sit down and rest while I put these things away, then I want to consultyou about a very serious matter,” said Amy, when she had shown hersplendor and driven Polly into a corner. “That bird is the trial of mylife,” she continued, removing the pink mountain from her head, whileLaurie seated himself astride a chair.“Yesterday, when Aunt was asleep and I was trying to be as still as amouse, Polly began to squall and flap about in his cage, so I went to let himout, and found a big spider there. I poked it out, and it ran under thebookcase. Polly marched straight after it, stooped down and peeped under thebookcase, saying, in his funny way, with a cock of his eye, ‘Come out andtake a walk, my dear.’ I couldn’t help laughing, which made Pollswear, and Aunt woke up and scolded us both.”“Did the spider accept the old fellow’s invitation?” askedLaurie, yawning.“Yes, out it came, and away ran Polly, frightened to death, and scrambledup on Aunt’s chair, calling out, ‘Catch her! Catch her! Catchher!’ as I chased the spider.”“That’s a lie! Oh, lor!” cried the parrot, pecking atLaurie’s toes.“I’d wring your neck if you were mine, you old torment,”cried Laurie, shaking his fist at the bird, who put his head on one side andgravely croaked, “Allyluyer! bless your buttons, dear!”“Now I’m ready,” said Amy, shutting the wardrobe and taking apiece of paper out of her pocket. “I want you to read that, please, andtell me if it is legal and right. I felt I ought to do it, for life isuncertain and I don’t want any ill feeling over my tomb.”Laurie bit his lips, and turning a little from the pensive speaker, read thefollowing document, with praiseworthy gravity, considering the spelling:MY LAST WILL AND TESTIMENTI, Amy Curtis March, being in my sane mind, go give and bequeethe all myearthly property—viz. to wit:—namelyTo my father, my best pictures, sketches, maps, and works of art, includingframes. Also my $100, to do what he likes with.To my mother, all my clothes, except the blue apron with pockets—also mylikeness, and my medal, with much love.To my dear sister Margaret, I give my turkquoise ring (if I get it), also mygreen box with the doves on it, also my piece of real lace for her neck, and mysketch of her as a memorial of her ‘little girl’.To Jo I leave my breastpin, the one mended with sealing wax, also my bronzeinkstand—she lost the cover—and my most precious plaster rabbit,because I am sorry I burned up her story.To Beth (if she lives after me) I give my dolls and the little bureau, my fan,my linen collars and my new slippers if she can wear them being thin when shegets well. And I herewith also leave her my regret that I ever made fun of oldJoanna.To my friend and neighbor Theodore Laurence I bequeethe my paper mashayportfolio, my clay model of a horse though he did say it hadn’t any neck.Also in return for his great kindness in the hour of affliction any one of myartistic works he likes, Noter Dame is the best.To our venerable benefactor Mr. Laurence I leave my purple box with a lookingglass in the cover which will be nice for his pens and remind him of thedeparted girl who thanks him for his favors to her family, especially Beth.I wish my favorite playmate Kitty Bryant to have the blue silk apron and mygold-bead ring with a kiss.To Hannah I give the bandbox she wanted and all the patchwork I leave hopingshe ‘will remember me, when it you see’.And now having disposed of my most valuable property I hope all will besatisfied and not blame the dead. I forgive everyone, and trust we may all meetwhen the trump shall sound. Amen.To this will and testiment I set my hand and seal on this 20th day of Nov. AnniDomino 1861.Amy Curtis MarchWitnesses:Estelle Valnor, Theodore Laurence.The last name was written in pencil, and Amy explained that he was to rewriteit in ink and seal it up for her properly.“What put it into your head? Did anyone tell you about Beth’sgiving away her things?” asked Laurie soberly, as Amy laid a bit of redtape, with sealing wax, a taper, and a standish before him.She explained and then asked anxiously, “What about Beth?”“I’m sorry I spoke, but as I did, I’ll tell you. She felt soill one day that she told Jo she wanted to give her piano to Meg, her cats toyou, and the poor old doll to Jo, who would love it for her sake. She was sorryshe had so little to give, and left locks of hair to the rest of us, and herbest love to Grandpa. She never thought of a will.”Laurie was signing and sealing as he spoke, and did not look up till a greattear dropped on the paper. Amy’s face was full of trouble, but she onlysaid, “Don’t people put sort of postscripts to their wills,sometimes?”“Yes, ‘codicils’, they call them.”“Put one in mine then, that I wish all my curls cut off, and given roundto my friends. I forgot it, but I want it done though it will spoil mylooks.”Laurie added it, smiling at Amy’s last and greatest sacrifice. Then heamused her for an hour, and was much interested in all her trials. But when hecame to go, Amy held him back to whisper with trembling lips, “Is therereally any danger about Beth?”“I’m afraid there is, but we must hope for the best, so don’tcry, dear.” And Laurie put his arm about her with a brotherly gesturewhich was very comforting.When he had gone, she went to her little chapel, and sitting in the twilight,prayed for Beth, with streaming tears and an aching heart, feeling that amillion turquoise rings would not console her for the loss of her gentle littlesister.CHAPTER TWENTYCONFIDENTIALI don’t think I have any words in which to tell the meeting of the motherand daughters. Such hours are beautiful to live, but very hard to describe, soI will leave it to the imagination of my readers, merely saying that the housewas full of genuine happiness, and that Meg’s tender hope was realized,for when Beth woke from that long, healing sleep, the first objects on whichher eyes fell were the little rose and Mother’s face. Too weak to wonderat anything, she only smiled and nestled close in the loving arms about her,feeling that the hungry longing was satisfied at last. Then she slept again,and the girls waited upon their mother, for she would not unclasp the thin handwhich clung to hers even in sleep.Hannah had ‘dished up’ an astonishing breakfast for the traveler,finding it impossible to vent her excitement in any other way, and Meg and Jofed their mother like dutiful young storks, while they listened to herwhispered account of Father’s state, Mr. Brooke’s promise to stayand nurse him, the delays which the storm occasioned on the homeward journey,and the unspeakable comfort Laurie’s hopeful face had given her when shearrived, worn out with fatigue, anxiety, and cold.What a strange yet pleasant day that was. So brilliant and gay without, for allthe world seemed abroad to welcome the first snow. So quiet and reposefulwithin, for everyone slept, spent with watching, and a Sabbath stillnessreigned through the house, while nodding Hannah mounted guard at the door. Witha blissful sense of burdens lifted off, Meg and Jo closed their weary eyes, andlay at rest, like storm-beaten boats safe at anchor in a quiet harbor. Mrs.March would not leave Beth’s side, but rested in the big chair, wakingoften to look at, touch, and brood over her child, like a miser over somerecovered treasure.Laurie meanwhile posted off to comfort Amy, and told his story so well thatAunt March actually ‘sniffed’ herself, and never once said “Itold you so”. Amy came out so strong on this occasion that I think thegood thoughts in the little chapel really began to bear fruit. She dried hertears quickly, restrained her impatience to see her mother, and never eventhought of the turquoise ring, when the old lady heartily agreed inLaurie’s opinion, that she behaved ‘like a capital littlewoman’. Even Polly seemed impressed, for he called her a good girl,blessed her buttons, and begged her to “come and take a walk,dear”, in his most affable tone. She would very gladly have gone out toenjoy the bright wintry weather, but discovering that Laurie was dropping withsleep in spite of manful efforts to conceal the fact, she persuaded him to reston the sofa, while she wrote a note to her mother. She was a long time aboutit, and when she returned, he was stretched out with both arms under his head,sound asleep, while Aunt March had pulled down the curtains and sat doingnothing in an unusual fit of benignity.After a while, they began to think he was not going to wake up till night, andI’m not sure that he would, had he not been effectually roused byAmy’s cry of joy at sight of her mother. There probably were a good manyhappy little girls in and about the city that day, but it is my private opinionthat Amy was the happiest of all, when she sat in her mother’s lap andtold her trials, receiving consolation and compensation in the shape ofapproving smiles and fond caresses. They were alone together in the chapel, towhich her mother did not object when its purpose was explained to her.“On the contrary, I like it very much, dear,” looking from thedusty rosary to the well-worn little book, and the lovely picture with itsgarland of evergreen. “It is an excellent plan to have some place wherewe can go to be quiet, when things vex or grieve us. There are a good many hardtimes in this life of ours, but we can always bear them if we ask help in theright way. I think my little girl is learning this.”“Yes, Mother, and when I go home I mean to have a corner in the bigcloset to put my books and the copy of that picture which I’ve tried tomake. The woman’s face is not good, it’s too beautiful for me todraw, but the baby is done better, and I love it very much. I like to think Hewas a little child once, for then I don’t seem so far away, and thathelps me.”As Amy pointed to the smiling Christ child on his Mother’s knee, Mrs.March saw something on the lifted hand that made her smile. She said nothing,but Amy understood the look, and after a minute’s pause, she addedgravely, “I wanted to speak to you about this, but I forgot it. Aunt gaveme the ring today. She called me to her and kissed me, and put it on my finger,and said I was a credit to her, and she’d like to keep me always. Shegave that funny guard to keep the turquoise on, as it’s too big.I’d like to wear them Mother, can I?”“They are very pretty, but I think you’re rather too young for suchornaments, Amy,” said Mrs. March, looking at the plump little hand, withthe band of sky-blue stones on the forefinger, and the quaint guard formed oftwo tiny golden hands clasped together.“I’ll try not to be vain,” said Amy. “I don’tthink I like it only because it’s so pretty, but I want to wear it as thegirl in the story wore her bracelet, to remind me of something.”“Do you mean Aunt March?” asked her mother, laughing.“No, to remind me not to be selfish.” Amy looked so earnest andsincere about it that her mother stopped laughing, and listened respectfully tothe little plan.“I’ve thought a great deal lately about my ‘bundle ofnaughties’, and being selfish is the largest one in it, so I’mgoing to try hard to cure it, if I can. Beth isn’t selfish, andthat’s the reason everyone loves her and feels so bad at the thoughts oflosing her. People wouldn’t feel so bad about me if I was sick, and Idon’t deserve to have them, but I’d like to be loved and missed bya great many friends, so I’m going to try and be like Beth all I can.I’m apt to forget my resolutions, but if I had something always about meto remind me, I guess I should do better. May we try this way?”“Yes, but I have more faith in the corner of the big closet. Wear yourring, dear, and do your best. I think you will prosper, for the sincere wish tobe good is half the battle. Now I must go back to Beth. Keep up your heart,little daughter, and we will soon have you home again.”That evening while Meg was writing to her father to report the traveler’ssafe arrival, Jo slipped upstairs into Beth’s room, and finding hermother in her usual place, stood a minute twisting her fingers in her hair,with a worried gesture and an undecided look.“What is it, deary?” asked Mrs. March, holding out her hand, with aface which invited confidence.“I want to tell you something, Mother.”“About Meg?”“How quickly you guessed! Yes, it’s about her, and thoughit’s a little thing, it fidgets me.”“Beth is asleep. Speak low, and tell me all about it. That Moffathasn’t been here, I hope?” asked Mrs. March rather sharply.“No. I should have shut the door in his face if he had,” said Jo,settling herself on the floor at her mother’s feet. “Last summerMeg left a pair of gloves over at the Laurences’ and only one wasreturned. We forgot about it, till Teddy told me that Mr. Brooke owned that heliked Meg but didn’t dare say so, she was so young and he so poor. Now,isn’t it a dreadful state of things?”“Do you think Meg cares for him?” asked Mrs. March, with an anxiouslook.“Mercy me! I don’t know anything about love and suchnonsense!” cried Jo, with a funny mixture of interest and contempt.“In novels, the girls show it by starting and blushing, fainting away,growing thin, and acting like fools. Now Meg does not do anything of the sort.She eats and drinks and sleeps like a sensible creature, she looks straight inmy face when I talk about that man, and only blushes a little bit when Teddyjokes about lovers. I forbid him to do it, but he doesn’t mind me as heought.”“Then you fancy that Meg is not interested in John?”“Who?” cried Jo, staring.“Mr. Brooke. I call him ‘John’ now. We fell into the way ofdoing so at the hospital, and he likes it.”“Oh, dear! I know you’ll take his part. He’s been good toFather, and you won’t send him away, but let Meg marry him, if she wantsto. Mean thing! To go petting Papa and helping you, just to wheedle you intoliking him.” And Jo pulled her hair again with a wrathful tweak.“My dear, don’t get angry about it, and I will tell you how ithappened. John went with me at Mr. Laurence’s request, and was so devotedto poor Father that we couldn’t help getting fond of him. He wasperfectly open and honorable about Meg, for he told us he loved her, but wouldearn a comfortable home before he asked her to marry him. He only wanted ourleave to love her and work for her, and the right to make her love him if hecould. He is a truly excellent young man, and we could not refuse to listen tohim, but I will not consent to Meg’s engaging herself so young.”“Of course not. It would be idiotic! I knew there was mischief brewing. Ifelt it, and now it’s worse than I imagined. I just wish I could marryMeg myself, and keep her safe in the family.”This odd arrangement made Mrs. March smile, but she said gravely, “Jo, Iconfide in you and don’t wish you to say anything to Meg yet. When Johncomes back, and I see them together, I can judge better of her feelings towardhim.”“She’ll see those handsome eyes that she talks about, and then itwill be all up with her. She’s got such a soft heart, it will melt likebutter in the sun if anyone looks sentimentlly at her. She read the shortreports he sent more than she did your letters, and pinched me when I spoke ofit, and likes brown eyes, and doesn’t think John an ugly name, andshe’ll go and fall in love, and there’s an end of peace and fun,and cozy times together. I see it all! They’ll go lovering around thehouse, and we shall have to dodge. Meg will be absorbed and no good to me anymore. Brooke will scratch up a fortune somehow, carry her off, and make a holein the family, and I shall break my heart, and everything will be abominablyuncomfortable. Oh, dear me! Why weren’t we all boys, then therewouldn’t be any bother.”Jo leaned her chin on her knees in a disconsolate attitude and shook her fistat the reprehensible John. Mrs. March sighed, and Jo looked up with an air ofrelief.“You don’t like it, Mother? I’m glad of it. Let’s sendhim about his business, and not tell Meg a word of it, but all be happytogether as we always have been.”“I did wrong to sigh, Jo. It is natural and right you should all go tohomes of your own in time, but I do want to keep my girls as long as I can, andI am sorry that this happened so soon, for Meg is only seventeen and it will besome years before John can make a home for her. Your father and I have agreedthat she shall not bind herself in any way, nor be married, before twenty. Ifshe and John love one another, they can wait, and test the love by doing so.She is conscientious, and I have no fear of her treating him unkindly. Mypretty, tender hearted girl! I hope things will go happily with her.”“Hadn’t you rather have her marry a rich man?” asked Jo, asher mother’s voice faltered a little over the last words.“Money is a good and useful thing, Jo, and I hope my girls will neverfeel the need of it too bitterly, nor be tempted by too much. I should like toknow that John was firmly established in some good business, which gave him anincome large enough to keep free from debt and make Meg comfortable. I’mnot ambitious for a splendid fortune, a fashionable position, or a great namefor my girls. If rank and money come with love and virtue, also, I shouldaccept them gratefully, and enjoy your good fortune, but I know, by experience,how much genuine happiness can be had in a plain little house, where the dailybread is earned, and some privations give sweetness to the few pleasures. I amcontent to see Meg begin humbly, for if I am not mistaken, she will be rich inthe possession of a good man’s heart, and that is better than afortune.”“I understand, Mother, and quite agree, but I’m disappointed aboutMeg, for I’d planned to have her marry Teddy by-and-by and sit in the lapof luxury all her days. Wouldn’t it be nice?” asked Jo, looking upwith a brighter face.“He is younger than she, you know,” began Mrs. March, but Jo brokein...“Only a little, he’s old for his age, and tall, and can be quitegrown-up in his manners if he likes. Then he’s rich and generous andgood, and loves us all, and I say it’s a pity my plan is spoiled.”“I’m afraid Laurie is hardly grown-up enough for Meg, andaltogether too much of a weathercock just now for anyone to depend on.Don’t make plans, Jo, but let time and their own hearts mate yourfriends. We can’t meddle safely in such matters, and had better not get‘romantic rubbish’ as you call it, into our heads, lest it spoilour friendship.”“Well, I won’t, but I hate to see things going all crisscross andgetting snarled up, when a pull here and a snip there would straighten it out.I wish wearing flatirons on our heads would keep us from growing up. But budswill be roses, and kittens cats, more’s the pity!”“What’s that about flatirons and cats?” asked Meg, as shecrept into the room with the finished letter in her hand.“Only one of my stupid speeches. I’m going to bed. Come,Peggy,” said Jo, unfolding herself like an animated puzzle.“Quite right, and beautifully written. Please add that I send my love toJohn,” said Mrs. March, as she glanced over the letter and gave it back.“Do you call him ‘John’?” asked Meg, smiling, with herinnocent eyes looking down into her mother’s.“Yes, he has been like a son to us, and we are very fond of him,”replied Mrs. March, returning the look with a keen one.“I’m glad of that, he is so lonely. Good night, Mother, dear. It isso inexpressibly comfortable to have you here,” was Meg’s answer.The kiss her mother gave her was a very tender one, and as she went away, Mrs.March said, with a mixture of satisfaction and regret, “She does not loveJohn yet, but will soon learn to.”CHAPTER TWENTY-ONELAURIE MAKES MISCHIEF, AND JO MAKES PEACEJo’s face was a study next day, for the secret rather weighed upon her,and she found it hard not to look mysterious and important. Meg observed it,but did not trouble herself to make inquiries, for she had learned that thebest way to manage Jo was by the law of contraries, so she felt sure of beingtold everything if she did not ask. She was rather surprised, therefore, whenthe silence remained unbroken, and Jo assumed a patronizing air, whichdecidedly aggravated Meg, who in turn assumed an air of dignified reserve anddevoted herself to her mother. This left Jo to her own devices, for Mrs. Marchhad taken her place as nurse, and bade her rest, exercise, and amuse herselfafter her long confinement. Amy being gone, Laurie was her only refuge, andmuch as she enjoyed his society, she rather dreaded him just then, for he wasan incorrigible tease, and she feared he would coax the secret from her.She was quite right, for the mischief-loving lad no sooner suspected a mysterythan he set himself to find it out, and led Jo a trying life of it. Hewheedled, bribed, ridiculed, threatened, and scolded; affected indifference,that he might surprise the truth from her; declared he knew, then that hedidn’t care; and at last, by dint of perseverance, he satisfied himselfthat it concerned Meg and Mr. Brooke. Feeling indignant that he was not takeninto his tutor’s confidence, he set his wits to work to devise someproper retaliation for the slight.Meg meanwhile had apparently forgotten the matter and was absorbed inpreparations for her father’s return, but all of a sudden a change seemedto come over her, and, for a day or two, she was quite unlike herself. Shestarted when spoken to, blushed when looked at, was very quiet, and sat overher sewing, with a timid, troubled look on her face. To her mother’sinquiries she answered that she was quite well, and Jo’s she silenced bybegging to be let alone.“She feels it in the air—love, I mean—and she’s goingvery fast. She’s got most of the symptoms—is twittery and cross,doesn’t eat, lies awake, and mopes in corners. I caught her singing thatsong he gave her, and once she said ‘John’, as you do, and thenturned as red as a poppy. Whatever shall we do?” said Jo, looking readyfor any measures, however violent.“Nothing but wait. Let her alone, be kind and patient, and Father’scoming will settle everything,” replied her mother.“Here’s a note to you, Meg, all sealed up. How odd! Teddy neverseals mine,” said Jo next day, as she distributed the contents of thelittle post office.Mrs. March and Jo were deep in their own affairs, when a sound from Meg madethem look up to see her staring at her note with a frightened face.“My child, what is it?” cried her mother, running to her, while Jotried to take the paper which had done the mischief.“It’s all a mistake, he didn’t send it. Oh, Jo, how could youdo it?” and Meg hid her face in her hands, crying as if her heart werequite broken.“Me! I’ve done nothing! What’s she talking about?”cried Jo, bewildered.Meg’s mild eyes kindled with anger as she pulled a crumpled note from herpocket and threw it at Jo, saying reproachfully, “You wrote it, and thatbad boy helped you. How could you be so rude, so mean, and cruel to usboth?”Jo hardly heard her, for she and her mother were reading the note, which waswritten in a peculiar hand.“My Dearest Margaret,“I can no longer restrain my passion, and must know my fate before Ireturn. I dare not tell your parents yet, but I think they would consent ifthey knew that we adored one another. Mr. Laurence will help me to some goodplace, and then, my sweet girl, you will make me happy. I implore you to saynothing to your family yet, but to send one word of hope through Laurie to,“Your devoted John.”“Oh, the little villain! That’s the way he meant to pay me forkeeping my word to Mother. I’ll give him a hearty scolding and bring himover to beg pardon,” cried Jo, burning to execute immediate justice. Buther mother held her back, saying, with a look she seldom wore...“Stop, Jo, you must clear yourself first. You have played so many pranksthat I am afraid you have had a hand in this.”“On my word, Mother, I haven’t! I never saw that note before, anddon’t know anything about it, as true as I live!” said Jo, soearnestly that they believed her. “If I had taken part in it I’dhave done it better than this, and have written a sensible note. I should thinkyou’d have known Mr. Brooke wouldn’t write such stuff asthat,” she added, scornfully tossing down the paper.“It’s like his writing,” faltered Meg, comparing it with thenote in her hand.“Oh, Meg, you didn’t answer it?” cried Mrs. March quickly.“Yes, I did!” and Meg hid her face again, overcome with shame.“Here’s a scrape! Do let me bring that wicked boy over to explainand be lectured. I can’t rest till I get hold of him.” And Jo madefor the door again.“Hush! Let me handle this, for it is worse than I thought. Margaret, tellme the whole story,” commanded Mrs. March, sitting down by Meg, yetkeeping hold of Jo, lest she should fly off.“I received the first letter from Laurie, who didn’t look as if heknew anything about it,” began Meg, without looking up. “I wasworried at first and meant to tell you, then I remembered how you liked Mr.Brooke, so I thought you wouldn’t mind if I kept my little secret for afew days. I’m so silly that I liked to think no one knew, and while I wasdeciding what to say, I felt like the girls in books, who have such things todo. Forgive me, Mother, I’m paid for my silliness now. I never can lookhim in the face again.”“What did you say to him?” asked Mrs. March.“I only said I was too young to do anything about it yet, that Ididn’t wish to have secrets from you, and he must speak to father. I wasvery grateful for his kindness, and would be his friend, but nothing more, fora long while.”Mrs. March smiled, as if well pleased, and Jo clapped her hands, exclaiming,with a laugh, “You are almost equal to Caroline Percy, who was a patternof prudence! Tell on, Meg. What did he say to that?”“He writes in a different way entirely, telling me that he never sent anylove letter at all, and is very sorry that my roguish sister, Jo, should takeliberties with our names. It’s very kind and respectful, but think howdreadful for me!”Meg leaned against her mother, looking the image of despair, and Jo trampedabout the room, calling Laurie names. All of a sudden she stopped, caught upthe two notes, and after looking at them closely, said decidedly, “Idon’t believe Brooke ever saw either of these letters. Teddy wrote both,and keeps yours to crow over me with because I wouldn’t tell him mysecret.”“Don’t have any secrets, Jo. Tell it to Mother and keep out oftrouble, as I should have done,” said Meg warningly.“Bless you, child! Mother told me.”“That will do, Jo. I’ll comfort Meg while you go and get Laurie. Ishall sift the matter to the bottom, and put a stop to such pranks atonce.”Away ran Jo, and Mrs. March gently told Meg Mr. Brooke’s real feelings.“Now, dear, what are your own? Do you love him enough to wait till he canmake a home for you, or will you keep yourself quite free for thepresent?”“I’ve been so scared and worried, I don’t want to haveanything to do with lovers for a long while, perhaps never,” answered Megpetulantly. “If John doesn’t know anything about this nonsense,don’t tell him, and make Jo and Laurie hold their tongues. I won’tbe deceived and plagued and made a fool of. It’s a shame!”Seeing Meg’s usually gentle temper was roused and her pride hurt by thismischievous joke, Mrs. March soothed her by promises of entire silence andgreat discretion for the future. The instant Laurie’s step was heard inthe hall, Meg fled into the study, and Mrs. March received the culprit alone.Jo had not told him why he was wanted, fearing he wouldn’t come, but heknew the minute he saw Mrs. March’s face, and stood twirling his hat witha guilty air which convicted him at once. Jo was dismissed, but chose to marchup and down the hall like a sentinel, having some fear that the prisoner mightbolt. The sound of voices in the parlor rose and fell for half an hour, butwhat happened during that interview the girls never knew.When they were called in, Laurie was standing by their mother with such apenitent face that Jo forgave him on the spot, but did not think it wise tobetray the fact. Meg received his humble apology, and was much comforted by theassurance that Brooke knew nothing of the joke.“I’ll never tell him to my dying day, wild horses shan’t dragit out of me, so you’ll forgive me, Meg, and I’ll do anything toshow how out-and-out sorry I am,” he added, looking very much ashamed ofhimself.“I’ll try, but it was a very ungentlemanly thing to do, Ididn’t think you could be so sly and malicious, Laurie,” repliedMeg, trying to hide her maidenly confusion under a gravely reproachful air.“It was altogether abominable, and I don’t deserve to be spoken tofor a month, but you will, though, won’t you?” And Laurie foldedhis hands together with such and imploring gesture, as he spoke in hisirresistibly persuasive tone, that it was impossible to frown upon him in spiteof his scandalous behavior.Meg pardoned him, and Mrs. March’s grave face relaxed, in spite of herefforts to keep sober, when she heard him declare that he would atone for hissins by all sorts of penances, and abase himself like a worm before the injureddamsel.Jo stood aloof, meanwhile, trying to harden her heart against him, andsucceeding only in primming up her face into an expression of entiredisapprobation. Laurie looked at her once or twice, but as she showed no signof relenting, he felt injured, and turned his back on her till the others weredone with him, when he made her a low bow and walked off without a word.As soon as he had gone, she wished she had been more forgiving, and when Megand her mother went upstairs, she felt lonely and longed for Teddy. Afterresisting for some time, she yielded to the impulse, and armed with a book toreturn, went over to the big house.“Is Mr. Laurence in?” asked Jo, of a housemaid, who was comingdownstairs.“Yes, Miss, but I don’t believe he’s seeable just yet.”“Why not? Is he ill?”“La, no Miss, but he’s had a scene with Mr. Laurie, who is in oneof his tantrums about something, which vexes the old gentleman, so Idursn’t go nigh him.”“Where is Laurie?”“Shut up in his room, and he won’t answer, though I’ve beena-tapping. I don’t know what’s to become of the dinner, forit’s ready, and there’s no one to eat it.”“I’ll go and see what the matter is. I’m not afraid of eitherof them.”Up went Jo, and knocked smartly on the door of Laurie’s little study.“Stop that, or I’ll open the door and make you!” called outthe young gentleman in a threatening tone.Jo immediately knocked again. The door flew open, and in she bounced beforeLaurie could recover from his surprise. Seeing that he really was out oftemper, Jo, who knew how to manage him, assumed a contrite expression, andgoing artistically down upon her knees, said meekly, “Please forgive mefor being so cross. I came to make it up, and can’t go away till Ihave.”“It’s all right. Get up, and don’t be a goose, Jo,” wasthe cavalier reply to her petition.“Thank you, I will. Could I ask what’s the matter? You don’tlook exactly easy in your mind.”“I’ve been shaken, and I won’t bear it!” growled Laurieindignantly.“Who did it?” demanded Jo.“Grandfather. If it had been anyone else I’d have...” And theinjured youth finished his sentence by an energetic gesture of the right arm.“That’s nothing. I often shake you, and you don’tmind,” said Jo soothingly.“Pooh! You’re a girl, and it’s fun, but I’ll allow noman to shake me!”“I don’t think anyone would care to try it, if you looked as muchlike a thundercloud as you do now. Why were you treated so?”“Just because I wouldn’t say what your mother wanted me for.I’d promised not to tell, and of course I wasn’t going to break myword.”“Couldn’t you satisfy your grandpa in any other way?”“No, he would have the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.I’d have told my part of the scrape, if I could without bringing Meg in.As I couldn’t, I held my tongue, and bore the scolding till the oldgentleman collared me. Then I bolted, for fear I should forget myself.”“It wasn’t nice, but he’s sorry, I know, so go down and makeup. I’ll help you.”“Hanged if I do! I’m not going to be lectured and pummelled byeveryone, just for a bit of a frolic. I was sorry about Meg, and begged pardonlike a man, but I won’t do it again, when I wasn’t in thewrong.”“He didn’t know that.”“He ought to trust me, and not act as if I was a baby. It’s no use,Jo, he’s got to learn that I’m able to take care of myself, anddon’t need anyone’s apron string to hold on by.”“What pepper pots you are!” sighed Jo. “How do you mean tosettle this affair?”“Well, he ought to beg pardon, and believe me when I say I can’ttell him what the fuss’s about.”“Bless you! He won’t do that.”“I won’t go down till he does.”“Now, Teddy, be sensible. Let it pass, and I’ll explain what I can.You can’t stay here, so what’s the use of beingmelodramatic?”“I don’t intend to stay here long, anyway. I’ll slip off andtake a journey somewhere, and when Grandpa misses me he’ll come roundfast enough.”“I dare say, but you ought not to go and worry him.”“Don’t preach. I’ll go to Washington and see Brooke.It’s gay there, and I’ll enjoy myself after the troubles.”“What fun you’d have! I wish I could run off too,” said Jo,forgetting her part of mentor in lively visions of martial life at the capital.“Come on, then! Why not? You go and surprise your father, and I’llstir up old Brooke. It would be a glorious joke. Let’s do it, Jo.We’ll leave a letter saying we are all right, and trot off at once.I’ve got money enough. It will do you good, and no harm, as you go toyour father.”For a moment Jo looked as if she would agree, for wild as the plan was, it justsuited her. She was tired of care and confinement, longed for change, andthoughts of her father blended temptingly with the novel charms of camps andhospitals, liberty and fun. Her eyes kindled as they turned wistfully towardthe window, but they fell on the old house opposite, and she shook her headwith sorrowful decision.“If I was a boy, we’d run away together, and have a capital time,but as I’m a miserable girl, I must be proper and stop at home.Don’t tempt me, Teddy, it’s a crazy plan.”“That’s the fun of it,” began Laurie, who had got a willfulfit on him and was possessed to break out of bounds in some way.“Hold your tongue!” cried Jo, covering her ears.“‘Prunes and prisms’ are my doom, and I may as well make upmy mind to it. I came here to moralize, not to hear things that make me skip tothink of.”“I know Meg would wet-blanket such a proposal, but I thought you had morespirit,” began Laurie insinuatingly.“Bad boy, be quiet! Sit down and think of your own sins, don’t gomaking me add to mine. If I get your grandpa to apologize for the shaking, willyou give up running away?” asked Jo seriously.“Yes, but you won’t do it,” answered Laurie, who wished tomake up, but felt that his outraged dignity must be appeased first.“If I can manage the young one, I can the old one,” muttered Jo, asshe walked away, leaving Laurie bent over a railroad map with his head proppedup on both hands.“Come in!” and Mr. Laurence’s gruff voice sounded grufferthan ever, as Jo tapped at his door.“It’s only me, Sir, come to return a book,” she said blandly,as she entered.“Want any more?” asked the old gentleman, looking grim and vexed,but trying not to show it.“Yes, please. I like old Sam so well, I think I’ll try the secondvolume,” returned Jo, hoping to propitiate him by accepting a second doseof Boswell’s Johnson, as he had recommended that lively work.The shaggy eyebrows unbent a little as he rolled the steps toward the shelfwhere the Johnsonian literature was placed. Jo skipped up, and sitting on thetop step, affected to be searching for her book, but was really wondering howbest to introduce the dangerous object of her visit. Mr. Laurence seemed tosuspect that something was brewing in her mind, for after taking several briskturns about the room, he faced round on her, speaking so abruptly that Rasselastumbled face downward on the floor.“What has that boy been about? Don’t try to shield him. I know hehas been in mischief by the way he acted when he came home. I can’t get aword from him, and when I threatened to shake the truth out of him he boltedupstairs and locked himself into his room.”“He did wrong, but we forgave him, and all promised not to say a word toanyone,” began Jo reluctantly.“That won’t do. He shall not shelter himself behind a promise fromyou softhearted girls. If he’s done anything amiss, he shall confess, begpardon, and be punished. Out with it, Jo. I won’t be kept in thedark.”Mr. Laurence looked so alarming and spoke so sharply that Jo would have gladlyrun away, if she could, but she was perched aloft on the steps, and he stood atthe foot, a lion in the path, so she had to stay and brave it out.“Indeed, Sir, I cannot tell. Mother forbade it. Laurie has confessed,asked pardon, and been punished quite enough. We don’t keep silence toshield him, but someone else, and it will make more trouble if you interfere.Please don’t. It was partly my fault, but it’s all right now. Solet’s forget it, and talk about the Rambler or somethingpleasant.”“Hang the Rambler! Come down and give me your word that thisharum-scarum boy of mine hasn’t done anything ungrateful or impertinent.If he has, after all your kindness to him, I’ll thrash him with my ownhands.”The threat sounded awful, but did not alarm Jo, for she knew the irascible oldgentleman would never lift a finger against his grandson, whatever he might sayto the contrary. She obediently descended, and made as light of the prank asshe could without betraying Meg or forgetting the truth.“Hum... ha... well, if the boy held his tongue because he promised, andnot from obstinacy, I’ll forgive him. He’s a stubborn fellow andhard to manage,” said Mr. Laurence, rubbing up his hair till it looked asif he had been out in a gale, and smoothing the frown from his brow with an airof relief.“So am I, but a kind word will govern me when all the king’s horsesand all the king’s men couldn’t,” said Jo, trying to say akind word for her friend, who seemed to get out of one scrape only to fall intoanother.“You think I’m not kind to him, hey?” was the sharp answer.“Oh, dear no, Sir. You are rather too kind sometimes, and then just atrifle hasty when he tries your patience. Don’t you think you are?”Jo was determined to have it out now, and tried to look quite placid, thoughshe quaked a little after her bold speech. To her great relief and surprise,the old gentleman only threw his spectacles onto the table with a rattle andexclaimed frankly, “You’re right, girl, I am! I love the boy, buthe tries my patience past bearing, and I know how it will end, if we go onso.”“I’ll tell you, he’ll run away.” Jo was sorry for thatspeech the minute it was made. She meant to warn him that Laurie would not bearmuch restraint, and hoped he would be more forebearing with the lad.Mr. Laurence’s ruddy face changed suddenly, and he sat down, with atroubled glance at the picture of a handsome man, which hung over his table. Itwas Laurie’s father, who had run away in his youth, and married againstthe imperious old man’s will. Jo fancied he remembered and regretted thepast, and she wished she had held her tongue.“He won’t do it unless he is very much worried, and only threatensit sometimes, when he gets tired of studying. I often think I should like to,especially since my hair was cut, so if you ever miss us, you may advertise fortwo boys and look among the ships bound for India.”She laughed as she spoke, and Mr. Laurence looked relieved, evidently takingthe whole as a joke.“You hussy, how dare you talk in that way? Where’s your respect forme, and your proper bringing up? Bless the boys and girls! What torments theyare, yet we can’t do without them,” he said, pinching her cheeksgood-humoredly. “Go and bring that boy down to his dinner, tell himit’s all right, and advise him not to put on tragedy airs with hisgrandfather. I won’t bear it.”“He won’t come, Sir. He feels badly because you didn’tbelieve him when he said he couldn’t tell. I think the shaking hurt hisfeelings very much.”Jo tried to look pathetic but must have failed, for Mr. Laurence began tolaugh, and she knew the day was won.“I’m sorry for that, and ought to thank him for not shaking me, Isuppose. What the dickens does the fellow expect?” and the old gentlemanlooked a trifle ashamed of his own testiness.“If I were you, I’d write him an apology, Sir. He says hewon’t come down till he has one, and talks about Washington, and goes onin an absurd way. A formal apology will make him see how foolish he is, andbring him down quite amiable. Try it. He likes fun, and this way is better thantalking. I’ll carry it up, and teach him his duty.”Mr. Laurence gave her a sharp look, and put on his spectacles, saying slowly,“You’re a sly puss, but I don’t mind being managed by you andBeth. Here, give me a bit of paper, and let us have done with thisnonsense.”The note was written in the terms which one gentleman would use to anotherafter offering some deep insult. Jo dropped a kiss on the top of Mr.Laurence’s bald head, and ran up to slip the apology under Laurie’sdoor, advising him through the keyhole to be submissive, decorous, and a fewother agreeable impossibilities. Finding the door locked again, she left thenote to do its work, and was going quietly away, when the young gentleman sliddown the banisters, and waited for her at the bottom, saying, with his mostvirtuous expression of countenance, “What a good fellow you are, Jo! Didyou get blown up?” he added, laughing.“No, he was pretty mild, on the whole.”“Ah! I got it all round. Even you cast me off over there, and I felt justready to go to the deuce,” he began apologetically.“Don’t talk that way, turn over a new leaf and begin again, Teddy,my son.”“I keep turning over new leaves, and spoiling them, as I used to spoil mycopybooks, and I make so many beginnings there never will be an end,” hesaid dolefully.“Go and eat your dinner, you’ll feel better after it. Men alwayscroak when they are hungry,” and Jo whisked out at the front door afterthat.“That’s a ‘label’ on my ‘sect’,”answered Laurie, quoting Amy, as he went to partake of humble pie dutifullywith his grandfather, who was quite saintly in temper and overwhelminglyrespectful in manner all the rest of the day.Everyone thought the matter ended and the little cloud blown over, but themischief was done, for though others forgot it, Meg remembered. She neveralluded to a certain person, but she thought of him a good deal, dreamed dreamsmore than ever, and once Jo, rummaging her sister’s desk for stamps,found a bit of paper scribbled over with the words, ‘Mrs. JohnBrooke’, whereat she groaned tragically and cast it into the fire,feeling that Laurie’s prank had hastened the evil day for her.CHAPTER TWENTY-TWOPLEASANT MEADOWSLike sunshine after a storm were the peaceful weeks which followed. Theinvalids improved rapidly, and Mr. March began to talk of returning early inthe new year. Beth was soon able to lie on the study sofa all day, amusingherself with the well-beloved cats at first, and in time with doll’ssewing, which had fallen sadly behind-hand. Her once active limbs were so stiffand feeble that Jo took her for a daily airing about the house in her strongarms. Meg cheerfully blackened and burned her white hands cooking delicatemesses for ‘the dear’, while Amy, a loyal slave of the ring,celebrated her return by giving away as many of her treasures as she couldprevail on her sisters to accept.As Christmas approached, the usual mysteries began to haunt the house, and Jofrequently convulsed the family by proposing utterly impossible ormagnificently absurd ceremonies, in honor of this unusually merry Christmas.Laurie was equally impracticable, and would have had bonfires, skyrockets, andtriumphal arches, if he had had his own way. After many skirmishes andsnubbings, the ambitious pair were considered effectually quenched and wentabout with forlorn faces, which were rather belied by explosions of laughterwhen the two got together.Several days of unusually mild weather fitly ushered in a splendid ChristmasDay. Hannah ‘felt in her bones’ that it was going to be anunusually fine day, and she proved herself a true prophetess, for everybody andeverything seemed bound to produce a grand success. To begin with, Mr. Marchwrote that he should soon be with them, then Beth felt uncommonly well thatmorning, and, being dressed in her mother’s gift, a soft crimson merinowrapper, was borne in high triumph to the window to behold the offering of Joand Laurie. The Unquenchables had done their best to be worthy of the name, forlike elves they had worked by night and conjured up a comical surprise. Out inthe garden stood a stately snow maiden, crowned with holly, bearing a basket offruit and flowers in one hand, a great roll of music in the other, a perfectrainbow of an Afghan round her chilly shoulders, and a Christmas carol issuingfrom her lips on a pink paper streamer.THE JUNGFRAU TO BETHGod bless you, dear Queen Bess!May nothing you dismay,But health and peace and happinessBe yours, this Christmas day.Here’s fruit to feed our busy bee,And flowers for her nose.Here’s music for her pianee,An afghan for her toes,A portrait of Joanna, see,By Raphael No. 2,Who laboured with great industryTo make it fair and true.Accept a ribbon red, I beg,For Madam Purrer’s tail,And ice cream made by lovely Peg,A Mont Blanc in a pail.Their dearest love my makers laidWithin my breast of snow.Accept it, and the Alpine maid,From Laurie and from Jo.How Beth laughed when she saw it, how Laurie ran up and down to bring in thegifts, and what ridiculous speeches Jo made as she presented them.“I’m so full of happiness, that if Father was only here, Icouldn’t hold one drop more,” said Beth, quite sighing withcontentment as Jo carried her off to the study to rest after the excitement,and to refresh herself with some of the delicious grapes the‘Jungfrau’ had sent her.“So am I,” added Jo, slapping the pocket wherein reposed thelong-desired Undine and Sintram.“I’m sure I am,” echoed Amy, poring over the engraved copy ofthe Madonna and Child, which her mother had given her in a pretty frame.“Of course I am!” cried Meg, smoothing the silvery folds of herfirst silk dress, for Mr. Laurence had insisted on giving it. “How can Ibe otherwise?” said Mrs. March gratefully, as her eyes went from herhusband’s letter to Beth’s smiling face, and her hand caressed thebrooch made of gray and golden, chestnut and dark brown hair, which the girlshad just fastened on her breast.Now and then, in this workaday world, things do happen in the delightfulstorybook fashion, and what a comfort it is. Half an hour after everyone hadsaid they were so happy they could only hold one drop more, the drop came.Laurie opened the parlor door and popped his head in very quietly. He mightjust as well have turned a somersault and uttered an Indian war whoop, for hisface was so full of suppressed excitement and his voice so treacherously joyfulthat everyone jumped up, though he only said, in a queer, breathless voice,“Here’s another Christmas present for the March family.”Before the words were well out of his mouth, he was whisked away somehow, andin his place appeared a tall man, muffled up to the eyes, leaning on the arm ofanother tall man, who tried to say something and couldn’t. Of coursethere was a general stampede, and for several minutes everybody seemed to losetheir wits, for the strangest things were done, and no one said a word.Mr. March became invisible in the embrace of four pairs of loving arms. Jodisgraced herself by nearly fainting away, and had to be doctored by Laurie inthe china closet. Mr. Brooke kissed Meg entirely by mistake, as he somewhatincoherently explained. And Amy, the dignified, tumbled over a stool, and neverstopping to get up, hugged and cried over her father’s boots in the mosttouching manner. Mrs. March was the first to recover herself, and held up herhand with a warning, “Hush! Remember Beth.”But it was too late. The study door flew open, the little red wrapper appearedon the threshold, joy put strength into the feeble limbs, and Beth ran straightinto her father’s arms. Never mind what happened just after that, for thefull hearts overflowed, washing away the bitterness of the past and leavingonly the sweetness of the present.It was not at all romantic, but a hearty laugh set everybody straight again,for Hannah was discovered behind the door, sobbing over the fat turkey, whichshe had forgotten to put down when she rushed up from the kitchen. As the laughsubsided, Mrs. March began to thank Mr. Brooke for his faithful care of herhusband, at which Mr. Brooke suddenly remembered that Mr. March needed rest,and seizing Laurie, he precipitately retired. Then the two invalids wereordered to repose, which they did, by both sitting in one big chair and talkinghard.Mr. March told how he had longed to surprise them, and how, when the fineweather came, he had been allowed by his doctor to take advantage of it, howdevoted Brooke had been, and how he was altogether a most estimable and uprightyoung man. Why Mr. March paused a minute just there, and after a glance at Meg,who was violently poking the fire, looked at his wife with an inquiring lift ofthe eyebrows, I leave you to imagine. Also why Mrs. March gently nodded herhead and asked, rather abruptly, if he wouldn’t like to have something toeat. Jo saw and understood the look, and she stalked grimly away to get wineand beef tea, muttering to herself as she slammed the door, “I hateestimable young men with brown eyes!”There never was such a Christmas dinner as they had that day. The fat turkeywas a sight to behold, when Hannah sent him up, stuffed, browned, anddecorated. So was the plum pudding, which melted in one’s mouth, likewisethe jellies, in which Amy reveled like a fly in a honeypot. Everything turnedout well, which was a mercy, Hannah said, “For my mind was thatflustered, Mum, that it’s a merrycle I didn’t roast the pudding,and stuff the turkey with raisins, let alone bilin’ of it in acloth.”Mr. Laurence and his grandson dined with them, also Mr. Brooke, at whom Joglowered darkly, to Laurie’s infinite amusement. Two easy chairs stoodside by side at the head of the table, in which sat Beth and her father,feasting modestly on chicken and a little fruit. They drank healths, toldstories, sang songs, ‘reminisced’, as the old folks say, and had athoroughly good time. A sleigh ride had been planned, but the girls would notleave their father, so the guests departed early, and as twilight gathered, thehappy family sat together round the fire.“Just a year ago we were groaning over the dismal Christmas we expectedto have. Do you remember?” asked Jo, breaking a short pause which hadfollowed a long conversation about many things.“Rather a pleasant year on the whole!” said Meg, smiling at thefire, and congratulating herself on having treated Mr. Brooke with dignity.“I think it’s been a pretty hard one,” observed Amy, watchingthe light shine on her ring with thoughtful eyes.“I’m glad it’s over, because we’ve got you back,”whispered Beth, who sat on her father’s knee.“Rather a rough road for you to travel, my little pilgrims, especiallythe latter part of it. But you have got on bravely, and I think the burdens arein a fair way to tumble off very soon,” said Mr. March, looking withfatherly satisfaction at the four young faces gathered round him.“How do you know? Did Mother tell you?” asked Jo.“Not much. Straws show which way the wind blows, and I’ve madeseveral discoveries today.”“Oh, tell us what they are!” cried Meg, who sat beside him.“Here is one.” And taking up the hand which lay on the arm of hischair, he pointed to the roughened forefinger, a burn on the back, and two orthree little hard spots on the palm. “I remember a time when this handwas white and smooth, and your first care was to keep it so. It was very prettythen, but to me it is much prettier now, for in this seeming blemishes I read alittle history. A burnt offering has been made to vanity, this hardened palmhas earned something better than blisters, and I’m sure the sewing doneby these pricked fingers will last a long time, so much good will went into thestitches. Meg, my dear, I value the womanly skill which keeps home happy morethan white hands or fashionable accomplishments. I’m proud to shake thisgood, industrious little hand, and hope I shall not soon be asked to give itaway.”If Meg had wanted a reward for hours of patient labor, she received it in thehearty pressure of her father’s hand and the approving smile he gave her.“What about Jo? Please say something nice, for she has tried so hard andbeen so very, very good to me,” said Beth in her father’s ear.He laughed and looked across at the tall girl who sat opposite, with anunusually mild expression in her face.“In spite of the curly crop, I don’t see the ‘son Jo’whom I left a year ago,” said Mr. March. “I see a young lady whopins her collar straight, laces her boots neatly, and neither whistles, talksslang, nor lies on the rug as she used to do. Her face is rather thin and palejust now, with watching and anxiety, but I like to look at it, for it has growngentler, and her voice is lower. She doesn’t bounce, but moves quietly,and takes care of a certain little person in a motherly way which delights me.I rather miss my wild girl, but if I get a strong, helpful, tenderhearted womanin her place, I shall feel quite satisfied. I don’t know whether theshearing sobered our black sheep, but I do know that in all Washington Icouldn’t find anything beautiful enough to be bought with thefive-and-twenty dollars my good girl sent me.”Jo’s keen eyes were rather dim for a minute, and her thin face grew rosyin the firelight as she received her father’s praise, feeling that shedid deserve a portion of it.“Now, Beth,” said Amy, longing for her turn, but ready to wait.“There’s so little of her, I’m afraid to say much, for fearshe will slip away altogether, though she is not so shy as she used tobe,” began their father cheerfully. But recollecting how nearly he hadlost her, he held her close, saying tenderly, with her cheek against his own,“I’ve got you safe, my Beth, and I’ll keep you so, pleaseGod.”After a minute’s silence, he looked down at Amy, who sat on the cricketat his feet, and said, with a caress of the shining hair...“I observed that Amy took drumsticks at dinner, ran errands for hermother all the afternoon, gave Meg her place tonight, and has waited on everyone with patience and good humor. I also observe that she does not fret muchnor look in the glass, and has not even mentioned a very pretty ring which shewears, so I conclude that she has learned to think of other people more and ofherself less, and has decided to try and mold her character as carefully as shemolds her little clay figures. I am glad of this, for though I should be veryproud of a graceful statue made by her, I shall be infinitely prouder of alovable daughter with a talent for making life beautiful to herself andothers.”“What are you thinking of, Beth?” asked Jo, when Amy had thankedher father and told about her ring.“I read in Pilgrim’s Progress today how, after manytroubles, Christian and Hopeful came to a pleasant green meadow where liliesbloomed all year round, and there they rested happily, as we do now, beforethey went on to their journey’s end,” answered Beth, adding, as sheslipped out of her father’s arms and went to the instrument,“It’s singing time now, and I want to be in my old place.I’ll try to sing the song of the shepherd boy which the Pilgrims heard. Imade the music for Father, because he likes the verses.”So, sitting at the dear little piano, Beth softly touched the keys, and in thesweet voice they had never thought to hear again, sang to her own accompanimentthe quaint hymn, which was a singularly fitting song for her.He that is down need fear no fall,He that is low no pride.He that is humble ever shallHave God to be his guide.I am content with what I have,Little be it, or much.And, Lord! Contentment still I crave,Because Thou savest such.Fulness to them a burden is,That go on pilgrimage.Here little, and hereafter bliss,Is best from age to age!CHAPTER TWENTY-THREEAUNT MARCH SETTLES THE QUESTIONLike bees swarming after their queen, mother and daughters hovered about Mr.March the next day, neglecting everything to look at, wait upon, and listen tothe new invalid, who was in a fair way to be killed by kindness. As he satpropped up in a big chair by Beth’s sofa, with the other three close by,and Hannah popping in her head now and then ‘to peek at the dearman’, nothing seemed needed to complete their happiness. But somethingwas needed, and the elder ones felt it, though none confessed the fact. Mr. andMrs. March looked at one another with an anxious expression, as their eyesfollowed Meg. Jo had sudden fits of sobriety, and was seen to shake her fist atMr. Brooke’s umbrella, which had been left in the hall. Meg wasabsent-minded, shy, and silent, started when the bell rang, and colored whenJohn’s name was mentioned. Amy said, “Everyone seemed waiting forsomething, and couldn’t settle down, which was queer, since Father wassafe at home,” and Beth innocently wondered why their neighborsdidn’t run over as usual.Laurie went by in the afternoon, and seeing Meg at the window, seemed suddenlypossessed with a melodramatic fit, for he fell down on one knee in the snow,beat his breast, tore his hair, and clasped his hands imploringly, as ifbegging some boon. And when Meg told him to behave himself and go away, hewrung imaginary tears out of his handkerchief, and staggered round the corneras if in utter despair.“What does the goose mean?” said Meg, laughing and trying to lookunconscious.“He’s showing you how your John will go on by-and-by. Touching,isn’t it?” answered Jo scornfully.“Don’t say my John, it isn’t proper or true,” butMeg’s voice lingered over the words as if they sounded pleasant to her.“Please don’t plague me, Jo, I’ve told you I don’t caremuch about him, and there isn’t to be anything said, but we are all to befriendly, and go on as before.”“We can’t, for something has been said, and Laurie’s mischiefhas spoiled you for me. I see it, and so does Mother. You are not like your oldself a bit, and seem ever so far away from me. I don’t mean to plague youand will bear it like a man, but I do wish it was all settled. I hate to wait,so if you mean ever to do it, make haste and have it over quickly,” saidJo pettishly.“I can’t say anything till he speaks, and he won’t, becauseFather said I was too young,” began Meg, bending over her work with aqueer little smile, which suggested that she did not quite agree with herfather on that point.“If he did speak, you wouldn’t know what to say, but would cry orblush, or let him have his own way, instead of giving a good, decidedno.”“I’m not so silly and weak as you think. I know just what I shouldsay, for I’ve planned it all, so I needn’t be taken unawares.There’s no knowing what may happen, and I wished to be prepared.”Jo couldn’t help smiling at the important air which Meg had unconsciouslyassumed and which was as becoming as the pretty color varying in her cheeks.“Would you mind telling me what you’d say?” asked Jo morerespectfully.“Not at all. You are sixteen now, quite old enough to be my confidant,and my experience will be useful to you by-and-by, perhaps, in your own affairsof this sort.”“Don’t mean to have any. It’s fun to watch other peoplephilander, but I should feel like a fool doing it myself,” said Jo,looking alarmed at the thought.“I think not, if you liked anyone very much, and he liked you.” Megspoke as if to herself, and glanced out at the lane where she had often seenlovers walking together in the summer twilight.“I thought you were going to tell your speech to that man,” saidJo, rudely shortening her sister’s little reverie.“Oh, I should merely say, quite calmly and decidedly, ‘Thank you,Mr. Brooke, you are very kind, but I agree with Father that I am too young toenter into any engagement at present, so please say no more, but let us befriends as we were.’”“Hum, that’s stiff and cool enough! I don’t believeyou’ll ever say it, and I know he won’t be satisfied if you do. Ifhe goes on like the rejected lovers in books, you’ll give in, rather thanhurt his feelings.”“No, I won’t. I shall tell him I’ve made up my mind, andshall walk out of the room with dignity.”Meg rose as she spoke, and was just going to rehearse the dignified exit, whena step in the hall made her fly into her seat and begin to sew as fast as ifher life depended on finishing that particular seam in a given time. Josmothered a laugh at the sudden change, and when someone gave a modest tap,opened the door with a grim aspect which was anything but hospitable.“Good afternoon. I came to get my umbrella, that is, to see how yourfather finds himself today,” said Mr. Brooke, getting a trifle confusedas his eyes went from one telltale face to the other.“It’s very well, he’s in the rack. I’ll get him, andtell it you are here.” And having jumbled her father and the umbrellawell together in her reply, Jo slipped out of the room to give Meg a chance tomake her speech and air her dignity. But the instant she vanished, Meg began tosidle toward the door, murmuring...“Mother will like to see you. Pray sit down, I’ll call her.”“Don’t go. Are you afraid of me, Margaret?” and Mr. Brookelooked so hurt that Meg thought she must have done something very rude. Sheblushed up to the little curls on her forehead, for he had never called herMargaret before, and she was surprised to find how natural and sweet it seemedto hear him say it. Anxious to appear friendly and at her ease, she put out herhand with a confiding gesture, and said gratefully...“How can I be afraid when you have been so kind to Father? I only wish Icould thank you for it.”“Shall I tell you how?” asked Mr. Brooke, holding the small handfast in both his own, and looking down at Meg with so much love in the browneyes that her heart began to flutter, and she both longed to run away and tostop and listen.“Oh no, please don’t, I’d rather not,” she said, tryingto withdraw her hand, and looking frightened in spite of her denial.“I won’t trouble you. I only want to know if you care for me alittle, Meg. I love you so much, dear,” added Mr. Brooke tenderly.This was the moment for the calm, proper speech, but Meg didn’t make it.She forgot every word of it, hung her head, and answered, “I don’tknow,” so softly that John had to stoop down to catch the foolish littlereply.He seemed to think it was worth the trouble, for he smiled to himself as ifquite satisfied, pressed the plump hand gratefully, and said in his mostpersuasive tone, “Will you try and find out? I want to know so much, forI can’t go to work with any heart until I learn whether I am to have myreward in the end or not.”“I’m too young,” faltered Meg, wondering why she was sofluttered, yet rather enjoying it.“I’ll wait, and in the meantime, you could be learning to like me.Would it be a very hard lesson, dear?”“Not if I chose to learn it, but. . .”“Please choose to learn, Meg. I love to teach, and this is easier thanGerman,” broke in John, getting possession of the other hand, so that shehad no way of hiding her face as he bent to look into it.His tone was properly beseeching, but stealing a shy look at him, Meg saw thathis eyes were merry as well as tender, and that he wore the satisfied smile ofone who had no doubt of his success. This nettled her. Annie Moffat’sfoolish lessons in coquetry came into her mind, and the love of power, whichsleeps in the bosoms of the best of little women, woke up all of a sudden andtook possession of her. She felt excited and strange, and not knowing what elseto do, followed a capricious impulse, and, withdrawing her hands, saidpetulantly, “I don’t choose. Please go away and let me be!”Poor Mr. Brooke looked as if his lovely castle in the air was tumbling abouthis ears, for he had never seen Meg in such a mood before, and it ratherbewildered him.“Do you really mean that?” he asked anxiously, following her as shewalked away.“Yes, I do. I don’t want to be worried about such things. Fathersays I needn’t, it’s too soon and I’d rather not.”“Mayn’t I hope you’ll change your mind by-and-by? I’llwait and say nothing till you have had more time. Don’t play with me,Meg. I didn’t think that of you.”“Don’t think of me at all. I’d rather youwouldn’t,” said Meg, taking a naughty satisfaction in trying herlover’s patience and her own power.He was grave and pale now, and looked decidedly more like the novel heroes whomshe admired, but he neither slapped his forehead nor tramped about the room asthey did. He just stood looking at her so wistfully, so tenderly, that shefound her heart relenting in spite of herself. What would have happened next Icannot say, if Aunt March had not come hobbling in at this interesting minute.The old lady couldn’t resist her longing to see her nephew, for she hadmet Laurie as she took her airing, and hearing of Mr. March’s arrival,drove straight out to see him. The family were all busy in the back part of thehouse, and she had made her way quietly in, hoping to surprise them. She didsurprise two of them so much that Meg started as if she had seen a ghost, andMr. Brooke vanished into the study.“Bless me, what’s all this?” cried the old lady with a rap ofher cane as she glanced from the pale young gentleman to the scarlet younglady.“It’s Father’s friend. I’m so surprised to seeyou!” stammered Meg, feeling that she was in for a lecture now.“That’s evident,” returned Aunt March, sitting down.“But what is Father’s friend saying to make you look like a peony?There’s mischief going on, and I insist upon knowing what it is,”with another rap.“We were only talking. Mr. Brooke came for his umbrella,” beganMeg, wishing that Mr. Brooke and the umbrella were safely out of the house.“Brooke? That boy’s tutor? Ah! I understand now. I know all aboutit. Jo blundered into a wrong message in one of your Father’s letters,and I made her tell me. You haven’t gone and accepted him, child?”cried Aunt March, looking scandalized.“Hush! He’ll hear. Shan’t I call Mother?” said Meg,much troubled.“Not yet. I’ve something to say to you, and I must free my mind atonce. Tell me, do you mean to marry this Cook? If you do, not one penny of mymoney ever goes to you. Remember that, and be a sensible girl,” said theold lady impressively.Now Aunt March possessed in perfection the art of rousing the spirit ofopposition in the gentlest people, and enjoyed doing it. The best of us have aspice of perversity in us, especially when we are young and in love. If AuntMarch had begged Meg to accept John Brooke, she would probably have declaredshe couldn’t think of it, but as she was preemptorily ordered not to likehim, she immediately made up her mind that she would. Inclination as well asperversity made the decision easy, and being already much excited, Meg opposedthe old lady with unusual spirit.“I shall marry whom I please, Aunt March, and you can leave your money toanyone you like,” she said, nodding her head with a resolute air.“Highty-tighty! Is that the way you take my advice, Miss? You’ll besorry for it by-and-by, when you’ve tried love in a cottage and found ita failure.”“It can’t be a worse one than some people find in bighouses,” retorted Meg.Aunt March put on her glasses and took a look at the girl, for she did not knowher in this new mood. Meg hardly knew herself, she felt so brave andindependent, so glad to defend John and assert her right to love him, if sheliked. Aunt March saw that she had begun wrong, and after a little pause, madea fresh start, saying as mildly as she could, “Now, Meg, my dear, bereasonable and take my advice. I mean it kindly, and don’t want you tospoil your whole life by making a mistake at the beginning. You ought to marrywell and help your family. It’s your duty to make a rich match and itought to be impressed upon you.”“Father and Mother don’t think so. They like John though he ispoor.”“Your parents, my dear, have no more worldly wisdom than a pair ofbabies.”“I’m glad of it,” cried Meg stoutly.Aunt March took no notice, but went on with her lecture. “This Rook ispoor and hasn’t got any rich relations, has he?”“No, but he has many warm friends.”“You can’t live on friends, try it and see how cool they’llgrow. He hasn’t any business, has he?”“Not yet. Mr. Laurence is going to help him.”“That won’t last long. James Laurence is a crotchety old fellow andnot to be depended on. So you intend to marry a man without money, position, orbusiness, and go on working harder than you do now, when you might becomfortable all your days by minding me and doing better? I thought you hadmore sense, Meg.”“I couldn’t do better if I waited half my life! John is good andwise, he’s got heaps of talent, he’s willing to work and sure toget on, he’s so energetic and brave. Everyone likes and respects him, andI’m proud to think he cares for me, though I’m so poor and youngand silly,” said Meg, looking prettier than ever in her earnestness.“He knows you have got rich relations, child. That’s the secret ofhis liking, I suspect.”“Aunt March, how dare you say such a thing? John is above such meanness,and I won’t listen to you a minute if you talk so,” cried Megindignantly, forgetting everything but the injustice of the old lady’ssuspicions. “My John wouldn’t marry for money, any more than Iwould. We are willing to work and we mean to wait. I’m not afraid ofbeing poor, for I’ve been happy so far, and I know I shall be with himbecause he loves me, and I...”Meg stopped there, remembering all of a sudden that she hadn’t made upher mind, that she had told ‘her John’ to go away, and that hemight be overhearing her inconsistent remarks.Aunt March was very angry, for she had set her heart on having her pretty niecemake a fine match, and something in the girl’s happy young face made thelonely old woman feel both sad and sour.“Well, I wash my hands of the whole affair! You are a willful child, andyou’ve lost more than you know by this piece of folly. No, I won’tstop. I’m disappointed in you, and haven’t spirits to see yourfather now. Don’t expect anything from me when you are married. Your Mr.Brooke’s friends must take care of you. I’m done with youforever.”And slamming the door in Meg’s face, Aunt March drove off in highdudgeon. She seemed to take all the girl’s courage with her, for whenleft alone, Meg stood for a moment, undecided whether to laugh or cry. Beforeshe could make up her mind, she was taken possession of by Mr. Brooke, who saidall in one breath, “I couldn’t help hearing, Meg. Thank you fordefending me, and Aunt March for proving that you do care for me a littlebit.”“I didn’t know how much till she abused you,” began Meg.“And I needn’t go away, but may stay and be happy, may I,dear?”Here was another fine chance to make the crushing speech and the stately exit,but Meg never thought of doing either, and disgraced herself forever inJo’s eyes by meekly whispering, “Yes, John,” and hiding herface on Mr. Brooke’s waistcoat.Fifteen minutes after Aunt March’s departure, Jo came softly downstairs,paused an instant at the parlor door, and hearing no sound within, nodded andsmiled with a satisfied expression, saying to herself, “She has seen himaway as we planned, and that affair is settled. I’ll go and hear the fun,and have a good laugh over it.”But poor Jo never got her laugh, for she was transfixed upon the threshold by aspectacle which held her there, staring with her mouth nearly as wide open asher eyes. Going in to exult over a fallen enemy and to praise a strong-mindedsister for the banishment of an objectionable lover, it certainly was a shockto behold the aforesaid enemy serenely sitting on the sofa, with thestrongminded sister enthroned upon his knee and wearing an expression of themost abject submission. Jo gave a sort of gasp, as if a cold shower bath hadsuddenly fallen upon her, for such an unexpected turning of the tables actuallytook her breath away. At the odd sound the lovers turned and saw her. Megjumped up, looking both proud and shy, but ‘that man’, as Jo calledhim, actually laughed and said coolly, as he kissed the astonished newcomer,“Sister Jo, congratulate us!”That was adding insult to injury, it was altogether too much, and making somewild demonstration with her hands, Jo vanished without a word. Rushingupstairs, she startled the invalids by exclaiming tragically as she burst intothe room, “Oh, do somebody go down quick! John Brooke is actingdreadfully, and Meg likes it!”Mr. and Mrs. March left the room with speed, and casting herself upon the bed,Jo cried and scolded tempestuously as she told the awful news to Beth and Amy.The little girls, however, considered it a most agreeable and interestingevent, and Jo got little comfort from them, so she went up to her refuge in thegarret, and confided her troubles to the rats.Nobody ever knew what went on in the parlor that afternoon, but a great deal oftalking was done, and quiet Mr. Brooke astonished his friends by the eloquenceand spirit with which he pleaded his suit, told his plans, and persuaded themto arrange everything just as he wanted it.The tea bell rang before he had finished describing the paradise which he meantto earn for Meg, and he proudly took her in to supper, both looking so happythat Jo hadn’t the heart to be jealous or dismal. Amy was very muchimpressed by John’s devotion and Meg’s dignity, Beth beamed at themfrom a distance, while Mr. and Mrs. March surveyed the young couple with suchtender satisfaction that it was perfectly evident Aunt March was right incalling them as ‘unworldly as a pair of babies’. No one ate much,but everyone looked very happy, and the old room seemed to brighten upamazingly when the first romance of the family began there.“You can’t say nothing pleasant ever happens now, can you,Meg?” said Amy, trying to decide how she would group the lovers in asketch she was planning to make.“No, I’m sure I can’t. How much has happened since I saidthat! It seems a year ago,” answered Meg, who was in a blissful dreamlifted far above such common things as bread and butter.“The joys come close upon the sorrows this time, and I rather think thechanges have begun,” said Mrs. March. “In most families therecomes, now and then, a year full of events. This has been such a one, but itends well, after all.”“Hope the next will end better,” muttered Jo, who found it veryhard to see Meg absorbed in a stranger before her face, for Jo loved a fewpersons very dearly and dreaded to have their affection lost or lessened in anyway.“I hope the third year from this will end better. I mean it shall, if Ilive to work out my plans,” said Mr. Brooke, smiling at Meg, as ifeverything had become possible to him now.“Doesn’t it seem very long to wait?” asked Amy, who was in ahurry for the wedding.“I’ve got so much to learn before I shall be ready, it seems ashort time to me,” answered Meg, with a sweet gravity in her face neverseen there before.“You have only to wait, I am to do the work,” said John beginninghis labors by picking up Meg’s napkin, with an expression which caused Joto shake her head, and then say to herself with an air of relief as the frontdoor banged, “Here comes Laurie. Now we shall have some sensibleconversation.”But Jo was mistaken, for Laurie came prancing in, overflowing with goodspirits, bearing a great bridal-looking bouquet for ‘Mrs. JohnBrooke’, and evidently laboring under the delusion that the whole affairhad been brought about by his excellent management.“I knew Brooke would have it all his own way, he always does, for when hemakes up his mind to accomplish anything, it’s done though the skyfalls,” said Laurie, when he had presented his offering and hiscongratulations.“Much obliged for that recommendation. I take it as a good omen for thefuture and invite you to my wedding on the spot,” answered Mr. Brooke,who felt at peace with all mankind, even his mischievous pupil.“I’ll come if I’m at the ends of the earth, for the sight ofJo’s face alone on that occasion would be worth a long journey. Youdon’t look festive, ma’am, what’s the matter?” askedLaurie, following her into a corner of the parlor, whither all had adjourned togreet Mr. Laurence.“I don’t approve of the match, but I’ve made up my mind tobear it, and shall not say a word against it,” said Jo solemnly.“You can’t know how hard it is for me to give up Meg,” shecontinued with a little quiver in her voice.“You don’t give her up. You only go halves,” said Laurieconsolingly.“It can never be the same again. I’ve lost my dearestfriend,” sighed Jo.“You’ve got me, anyhow. I’m not good for much, I know, butI’ll stand by you, Jo, all the days of my life. Upon my word Iwill!” and Laurie meant what he said.“I know you will, and I’m ever so much obliged. You are always agreat comfort to me, Teddy,” returned Jo, gratefully shaking hands.“Well, now, don’t be dismal, there’s a good fellow.It’s all right you see. Meg is happy, Brooke will fly round and getsettled immediately, Grandpa will attend to him, and it will be very jolly tosee Meg in her own little house. We’ll have capital times after she isgone, for I shall be through college before long, and then we’ll goabroad on some nice trip or other. Wouldn’t that console you?”“I rather think it would, but there’s no knowing what may happen inthree years,” said Jo thoughtfully.“That’s true. Don’t you wish you could take a look forwardand see where we shall all be then? I do,” returned Laurie.“I think not, for I might see something sad, and everyone looks so happynow, I don’t believe they could be much improved.” And Jo’seyes went slowly round the room, brightening as they looked, for the prospectwas a pleasant one.Father and Mother sat together, quietly reliving the first chapter of theromance which for them began some twenty years ago. Amy was drawing the lovers,who sat apart in a beautiful world of their own, the light of which touchedtheir faces with a grace the little artist could not copy. Beth lay on hersofa, talking cheerily with her old friend, who held her little hand as if hefelt that it possessed the power to lead him along the peaceful way she walked.Jo lounged in her favorite low seat, with the grave quiet look which bestbecame her, and Laurie, leaning on the back of her chair, his chin on a levelwith her curly head, smiled with his friendliest aspect, and nodded at her inthe long glass which reflected them both.So the curtain falls upon Meg, Jo, Beth, and Amy. Whether it ever rises again,depends upon the reception given the first act of the domestic drama calledLittle Women.PART 2In order that we may start afresh and go to Meg’s wedding...CHAPTER TWENTY-FOURGOSSIPIn order that we may start afresh and go to Meg’s wedding with freeminds, it will be well to begin with a little gossip about the Marches. Andhere let me premise that if any of the elders think there is too much‘lovering’ in the story, as I fear they may (I’m not afraidthe young folks will make that objection), I can only say with Mrs. March,“What can you expect when I have four gay girls in the house, and adashing young neighbor over the way?”The three years that have passed have brought but few changes to the quietfamily. The war is over, and Mr. March safely at home, busy with his books andthe small parish which found in him a minister by nature as by grace, a quiet,studious man, rich in the wisdom that is better than learning, the charitywhich calls all mankind ‘brother’, the piety that blossoms intocharacter, making it august and lovely.These attributes, in spite of poverty and the strict integrity which shut himout from the more worldly successes, attracted to him many admirable persons,as naturally as sweet herbs draw bees, and as naturally he gave them the honeyinto which fifty years of hard experience had distilled no bitter drop. Earnestyoung men found the gray-headed scholar as young at heart as they; thoughtfulor troubled women instinctively brought their doubts to him, sure of findingthe gentlest sympathy, the wisest counsel. Sinners told their sins to thepure-hearted old man and were both rebuked and saved. Gifted men found acompanion in him. Ambitious men caught glimpses of nobler ambitions than theirown, and even worldlings confessed that his beliefs were beautiful and true,although ‘they wouldn’t pay’.To outsiders the five energetic women seemed to rule the house, and so they didin many things, but the quiet scholar, sitting among his books, was still thehead of the family, the household conscience, anchor, and comforter, for to himthe busy, anxious women always turned in troublous times, finding him, in thetruest sense of those sacred words, husband and father.The girls gave their hearts into their mother’s keeping, their souls intotheir father’s, and to both parents, who lived and labored so faithfullyfor them, they gave a love that grew with their growth and bound them tenderlytogether by the sweetest tie which blesses life and outlives death.Mrs. March is as brisk and cheery, though rather grayer, than when we saw herlast, and just now so absorbed in Meg’s affairs that the hospitals andhomes still full of wounded ‘boys’ and soldiers’ widows,decidedly miss the motherly missionary’s visits.John Brooke did his duty manfully for a year, got wounded, was sent home, andnot allowed to return. He received no stars or bars, but he deserved them, forhe cheerfully risked all he had, and life and love are very precious when bothare in full bloom. Perfectly resigned to his discharge, he devoted himself togetting well, preparing for business, and earning a home for Meg. With the goodsense and sturdy independence that characterized him, he refused Mr.Laurence’s more generous offers, and accepted the place of bookkeeper,feeling better satisfied to begin with an honestly earned salary than byrunning any risks with borrowed money.Meg had spent the time in working as well as waiting, growing womanly incharacter, wise in housewifely arts, and prettier than ever, for love is agreat beautifier. She had her girlish ambitions and hopes, and felt somedisappointment at the humble way in which the new life must begin. Ned Moffathad just married Sallie Gardiner, and Meg couldn’t help contrasting theirfine house and carriage, many gifts, and splendid outfit with her own, andsecretly wishing she could have the same. But somehow envy and discontent soonvanished when she thought of all the patient love and labor John had put intothe little home awaiting her, and when they sat together in the twilight,talking over their small plans, the future always grew so beautiful and brightthat she forgot Sallie’s splendor and felt herself the richest, happiestgirl in Christendom.Jo never went back to Aunt March, for the old lady took such a fancy to Amythat she bribed her with the offer of drawing lessons from one of the bestteachers going, and for the sake of this advantage, Amy would have served a farharder mistress. So she gave her mornings to duty, her afternoons to pleasure,and prospered finely. Jo meantime devoted herself to literature and Beth, whoremained delicate long after the fever was a thing of the past. Not an invalidexactly, but never again the rosy, healthy creature she had been, yet alwayshopeful, happy, and serene, and busy with the quiet duties she loved,everyone’s friend, and an angel in the house, long before those who lovedher most had learned to know it.As long as The Spread Eagle paid her a dollar a column for her‘rubbish’, as she called it, Jo felt herself a woman of means, andspun her little romances diligently. But great plans fermented in her busybrain and ambitious mind, and the old tin kitchen in the garret held a slowlyincreasing pile of blotted manuscript, which was one day to place the name ofMarch upon the roll of fame.Laurie, having dutifully gone to college to please his grandfather, was nowgetting through it in the easiest possible manner to please himself. Auniversal favorite, thanks to money, manners, much talent, and the kindestheart that ever got its owner into scrapes by trying to get other people out ofthem, he stood in great danger of being spoiled, and probably would have been,like many another promising boy, if he had not possessed a talisman againstevil in the memory of the kind old man who was bound up in his success, themotherly friend who watched over him as if he were her son, and last, but notleast by any means, the knowledge that four innocent girls loved, admired, andbelieved in him with all their hearts.Being only ‘a glorious human boy’, of course he frolicked andflirted, grew dandified, aquatic, sentimental, or gymnastic, as collegefashions ordained, hazed and was hazed, talked slang, and more than once cameperilously near suspension and expulsion. But as high spirits and the love offun were the causes of these pranks, he always managed to save himself by frankconfession, honorable atonement, or the irresistible power of persuasion whichhe possessed in perfection. In fact, he rather prided himself on his narrowescapes, and liked to thrill the girls with graphic accounts of his triumphsover wrathful tutors, dignified professors, and vanquished enemies. The‘men of my class’, were heroes in the eyes of the girls, who neverwearied of the exploits of ‘our fellows’, and were frequentlyallowed to bask in the smiles of these great creatures, when Laurie broughtthem home with him.Amy especially enjoyed this high honor, and became quite a belle among them,for her ladyship early felt and learned to use the gift of fascination withwhich she was endowed. Meg was too much absorbed in her private and particularJohn to care for any other lords of creation, and Beth too shy to do more thanpeep at them and wonder how Amy dared to order them about so, but Jo felt quitein her own element, and found it very difficult to refrain from imitating thegentlemanly attitudes, phrases, and feats, which seemed more natural to herthan the decorums prescribed for young ladies. They all liked Jo immensely, butnever fell in love with her, though very few escaped without paying the tributeof a sentimental sigh or two at Amy’s shrine. And speaking of sentimentbrings us very naturally to the ‘Dovecote’.That was the name of the little brown house Mr. Brooke had prepared forMeg’s first home. Laurie had christened it, saying it was highlyappropriate to the gentle lovers who ‘went on together like a pair ofturtledoves, with first a bill and then a coo’. It was a tiny house, witha little garden behind and a lawn about as big as a pocket handkerchief in thefront. Here Meg meant to have a fountain, shrubbery, and a profusion of lovelyflowers, though just at present the fountain was represented by aweather-beaten urn, very like a dilapidated slopbowl, the shrubbery consistedof several young larches, undecided whether to live or die, and the profusionof flowers was merely hinted by regiments of sticks to show where seeds wereplanted. But inside, it was altogether charming, and the happy bride saw nofault from garret to cellar. To be sure, the hall was so narrow it wasfortunate that they had no piano, for one never could have been got in whole,the dining room was so small that six people were a tight fit, and the kitchenstairs seemed built for the express purpose of precipitating both servants andchina pell-mell into the coalbin. But once get used to these slight blemishesand nothing could be more complete, for good sense and good taste had presidedover the furnishing, and the result was highly satisfactory. There were nomarble-topped tables, long mirrors, or lace curtains in the little parlor, butsimple furniture, plenty of books, a fine picture or two, a stand of flowers inthe bay window, and, scattered all about, the pretty gifts which came fromfriendly hands and were the fairer for the loving messages they brought.I don’t think the Parian Psyche Laurie gave lost any of its beautybecause John put up the bracket it stood upon, that any upholsterer could havedraped the plain muslin curtains more gracefully than Amy’s artistichand, or that any store-room was ever better provided with good wishes, merrywords, and happy hopes than that in which Jo and her mother put awayMeg’s few boxes, barrels, and bundles, and I am morally certain that thespandy new kitchen never could have looked so cozy and neat if Hannah had notarranged every pot and pan a dozen times over, and laid the fire all ready forlighting the minute ‘Mis. Brooke came home’. I also doubt if anyyoung matron ever began life with so rich a supply of dusters, holders, andpiece bags, for Beth made enough to last till the silver wedding came round,and invented three different kinds of dishcloths for the express service of thebridal china.People who hire all these things done for them never know what they lose, forthe homeliest tasks get beautified if loving hands do them, and Meg found somany proofs of this that everything in her small nest, from the kitchen rollerto the silver vase on her parlor table, was eloquent of home love and tenderforethought.What happy times they had planning together, what solemn shopping excursions,what funny mistakes they made, and what shouts of laughter arose overLaurie’s ridiculous bargains. In his love of jokes, this young gentleman,though nearly through college, was a much of a boy as ever. His last whim hadbeen to bring with him on his weekly visits some new, useful, and ingeniousarticle for the young housekeeper. Now a bag of remarkable clothespins, next, awonderful nutmeg grater which fell to pieces at the first trial, a knifecleaner that spoiled all the knives, or a sweeper that picked the nap neatlyoff the carpet and left the dirt, labor-saving soap that took the skin offone’s hands, infallible cements which stuck firmly to nothing but thefingers of the deluded buyer, and every kind of tinware, from a toy savingsbank for odd pennies, to a wonderful boiler which would wash articles in itsown steam with every prospect of exploding in the process.In vain Meg begged him to stop. John laughed at him, and Jo called him‘Mr. Toodles’. He was possessed with a mania for patronizing Yankeeingenuity, and seeing his friends fitly furnished forth. So each week beheldsome fresh absurdity.Everything was done at last, even to Amy’s arranging different coloredsoaps to match the different colored rooms, and Beth’s setting the tablefor the first meal.“Are you satisfied? Does it seem like home, and do you feel as if youshould be happy here?” asked Mrs. March, as she and her daughter wentthrough the new kingdom arm in arm, for just then they seemed to cling togethermore tenderly than ever.“Yes, Mother, perfectly satisfied, thanks to you all, and so happy that Ican’t talk about it,” with a look that was far better than words.“If she only had a servant or two it would be all right,” said Amy,coming out of the parlor, where she had been trying to decide whether thebronze Mercury looked best on the whatnot or the mantlepiece.“Mother and I have talked that over, and I have made up my mind to tryher way first. There will be so little to do that with Lotty to run my errandsand help me here and there, I shall only have enough work to keep me fromgetting lazy or homesick,” answered Meg tranquilly.“Sallie Moffat has four,” began Amy.“If Meg had four, the house wouldn’t hold them, and master andmissis would have to camp in the garden,” broke in Jo, who, enveloped ina big blue pinafore, was giving the last polish to the door handles.“Sallie isn’t a poor man’s wife, and many maids are inkeeping with her fine establishment. Meg and John begin humbly, but I have afeeling that there will be quite as much happiness in the little house as inthe big one. It’s a great mistake for young girls like Meg to leavethemselves nothing to do but dress, give orders, and gossip. When I was firstmarried, I used to long for my new clothes to wear out or get torn, so that Imight have the pleasure of mending them, for I got heartily sick of doingfancywork and tending my pocket handkerchief.”“Why didn’t you go into the kitchen and make messes, as Sallie saysshe does to amuse herself, though they never turn out well and the servantslaugh at her,” said Meg.“I did after a while, not to ‘mess’ but to learn of Hannahhow things should be done, that my servants need not laugh at me. It was playthen, but there came a time when I was truly grateful that I not only possessedthe will but the power to cook wholesome food for my little girls, and helpmyself when I could no longer afford to hire help. You begin at the other end,Meg, dear, but the lessons you learn now will be of use to you by-and-by whenJohn is a richer man, for the mistress of a house, however splendid, shouldknow how work ought to be done, if she wishes to be well and honestlyserved.”“Yes, Mother, I’m sure of that,” said Meg, listeningrespectfully to the little lecture, for the best of women will hold forth uponthe all absorbing subject of house keeping. “Do you know I like this roommost of all in my baby house,” added Meg, a minute after, as they wentupstairs and she looked into her well-stored linen closet.Beth was there, laying the snowy piles smoothly on the shelves and exultingover the goodly array. All three laughed as Meg spoke, for that linen closetwas a joke. You see, having said that if Meg married ‘that Brooke’she shouldn’t have a cent of her money, Aunt March was rather in aquandary when time had appeased her wrath and made her repent her vow. Shenever broke her word, and was much exercised in her mind how to get round it,and at last devised a plan whereby she could satisfy herself. Mrs. Carrol,Florence’s mamma, was ordered to buy, have made, and marked a generoussupply of house and table linen, and send it as her present, all of which wasfaithfully done, but the secret leaked out, and was greatly enjoyed by thefamily, for Aunt March tried to look utterly unconscious, and insisted that shecould give nothing but the old-fashioned pearls long promised to the firstbride.“That’s a housewifely taste which I am glad to see. I had a youngfriend who set up housekeeping with six sheets, but she had finger bowls forcompany and that satisfied her,” said Mrs. March, patting the damasktablecloths, with a truly feminine appreciation of their fineness.“I haven’t a single finger bowl, but this is a setout that willlast me all my days, Hannah says.” And Meg looked quite contented, aswell she might.A tall, broad-shouldered young fellow, with a cropped head, a felt basin of ahat, and a flyaway coat, came tramping down the road at a great pace, walkedover the low fence without stopping to open the gate, straight up to Mrs.March, with both hands out and a hearty...“Here I am, Mother! Yes, it’s all right.”The last words were in answer to the look the elder lady gave him, a kindlyquestioning look which the handsome eyes met so frankly that the littleceremony closed, as usual, with a motherly kiss.“For Mrs. John Brooke, with the maker’s congratulations andcompliments. Bless you, Beth! What a refreshing spectacle you are, Jo. Amy, youare getting altogether too handsome for a single lady.”As Laurie spoke, he delivered a brown paper parcel to Meg, pulled Beth’shair ribbon, stared at Jo’s big pinafore, and fell into an attitude ofmock rapture before Amy, then shook hands all round, and everyone began totalk.“Where is John?” asked Meg anxiously.“Stopped to get the license for tomorrow, ma’am.”“Which side won the last match, Teddy?” inquired Jo, who persistedin feeling an interest in manly sports despite her nineteen years.“Ours, of course. Wish you’d been there to see.”“How is the lovely Miss Randal?” asked Amy with a significantsmile.“More cruel than ever. Don’t you see how I’m piningaway?” and Laurie gave his broad chest a sounding slap and heaved amelodramatic sigh.“What’s the last joke? Undo the bundle and see, Meg,” saidBeth, eying the knobby parcel with curiosity.“It’s a useful thing to have in the house in case of fire orthieves,” observed Laurie, as a watchman’s rattle appeared, amidthe laughter of the girls.“Any time when John is away and you get frightened, Mrs. Meg, just swingthat out of the front window, and it will rouse the neighborhood in a jiffy.Nice thing, isn’t it?” and Laurie gave them a sample of its powersthat made them cover up their ears.“There’s gratitude for you! And speaking of gratitude reminds me tomention that you may thank Hannah for saving your wedding cake fromdestruction. I saw it going into your house as I came by, and if shehadn’t defended it manfully I’d have had a pick at it, for itlooked like a remarkably plummy one.”“I wonder if you will ever grow up, Laurie,” said Meg in a matronlytone.“I’m doing my best, ma’am, but can’t get much higher,I’m afraid, as six feet is about all men can do in these degeneratedays,” responded the young gentleman, whose head was about level with thelittle chandelier.“I suppose it would be profanation to eat anything in this spick-and-spanbower, so as I’m tremendously hungry, I propose an adjournment,” headded presently.“Mother and I are going to wait for John. There are some last things tosettle,” said Meg, bustling away.“Beth and I are going over to Kitty Bryant’s to get more flowersfor tomorrow,” added Amy, tying a picturesque hat over her picturesquecurls, and enjoying the effect as much as anybody.“Come, Jo, don’t desert a fellow. I’m in such a state ofexhaustion I can’t get home without help. Don’t take off yourapron, whatever you do, it’s peculiarly becoming,” said Laurie, asJo bestowed his especial aversion in her capacious pocket and offered her armto support his feeble steps.“Now, Teddy, I want to talk seriously to you about tomorrow,” beganJo, as they strolled away together. “You must promise to behave well, andnot cut up any pranks, and spoil our plans.”“Not a prank.”“And don’t say funny things when we ought to be sober.”“I never do. You are the one for that.”“And I implore you not to look at me during the ceremony. I shallcertainly laugh if you do.”“You won’t see me, you’ll be crying so hard that the thickfog round you will obscure the prospect.”“I never cry unless for some great affliction.”“Such as fellows going to college, hey?” cut in Laurie, withsuggestive laugh.“Don’t be a peacock. I only moaned a trifle to keep the girlscompany.”“Exactly. I say, Jo, how is Grandpa this week? Pretty amiable?”“Very. Why, have you got into a scrape and want to know how he’lltake it?” asked Jo rather sharply.“Now, Jo, do you think I’d look your mother in the face and say‘All right’, if it wasn’t?” and Laurie stopped short,with an injured air.“No, I don’t.”“Then don’t go and be suspicious. I only want some money,”said Laurie, walking on again, appeased by her hearty tone.“You spend a great deal, Teddy.”“Bless you, I don’t spend it, it spends itself somehow, and is gonebefore I know it.”“You are so generous and kind-hearted that you let people borrow, andcan’t say ‘No’ to anyone. We heard about Henshaw and all youdid for him. If you always spent money in that way, no one would blameyou,” said Jo warmly.“Oh, he made a mountain out of a molehill. You wouldn’t have me letthat fine fellow work himself to death just for want of a little help, when heis worth a dozen of us lazy chaps, would you?”“Of course not, but I don’t see the use of your having seventeenwaistcoats, endless neckties, and a new hat every time you come home. I thoughtyou’d got over the dandy period, but every now and then it breaks out ina new spot. Just now it’s the fashion to be hideous, to make your headlook like a scrubbing brush, wear a strait jacket, orange gloves, and clumpingsquare-toed boots. If it was cheap ugliness, I’d say nothing, but itcosts as much as the other, and I don’t get any satisfaction out ofit.”Laurie threw back his head, and laughed so heartily at this attack, that thefelt hat fell off, and Jo walked on it, which insult only afforded him anopportunity for expatiating on the advantages of a rough-and-ready costume, ashe folded up the maltreated hat, and stuffed it into his pocket.“Don’t lecture any more, there’s a good soul! I have enoughall through the week, and like to enjoy myself when I come home. I’ll getmyself up regardless of expense tomorrow and be a satisfaction to myfriends.”“I’ll leave you in peace if you’ll only let your hair grow.I’m not aristocratic, but I do object to being seen with a person wholooks like a young prize fighter,” observed Jo severely.“This unassuming style promotes study, that’s why we adoptit,” returned Laurie, who certainly could not be accused of vanity,having voluntarily sacrificed a handsome curly crop to the demand forquarter-inch-long stubble.“By the way, Jo, I think that little Parker is really getting desperateabout Amy. He talks of her constantly, writes poetry, and moons about in a mostsuspicious manner. He’d better nip his little passion in the bud,hadn’t he?” added Laurie, in a confidential, elder brotherly tone,after a minute’s silence.“Of course he had. We don’t want any more marrying in this familyfor years to come. Mercy on us, what are the children thinking of?” andJo looked as much scandalized as if Amy and little Parker were not yet in theirteens.“It’s a fast age, and I don’t know what we are coming to,ma’am. You are a mere infant, but you’ll go next, Jo, andwe’ll be left lamenting,” said Laurie, shaking his head over thedegeneracy of the times.“Don’t be alarmed. I’m not one of the agreeable sort. Nobodywill want me, and it’s a mercy, for there should always be one old maidin a family.”“You won’t give anyone a chance,” said Laurie, with asidelong glance and a little more color than before in his sunburned face.“You won’t show the soft side of your character, and if a fellowgets a peep at it by accident and can’t help showing that he likes it,you treat him as Mrs. Gummidge did her sweetheart, throw cold water over him,and get so thorny no one dares touch or look at you.”“I don’t like that sort of thing. I’m too busy to be worriedwith nonsense, and I think it’s dreadful to break up families so. Nowdon’t say any more about it. Meg’s wedding has turned all ourheads, and we talk of nothing but lovers and such absurdities. I don’twish to get cross, so let’s change the subject;” and Jo lookedquite ready to fling cold water on the slightest provocation.Whatever his feelings might have been, Laurie found a vent for them in a longlow whistle and the fearful prediction as they parted at the gate, “Markmy words, Jo, you’ll go next.”CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVETHE FIRST WEDDINGThe June roses over the porch were awake bright and early on that morning,rejoicing with all their hearts in the cloudless sunshine, like friendly littleneighbors, as they were. Quite flushed with excitement were their ruddy faces,as they swung in the wind, whispering to one another what they had seen, forsome peeped in at the dining room windows where the feast was spread, someclimbed up to nod and smile at the sisters as they dressed the bride, otherswaved a welcome to those who came and went on various errands in garden, porch,and hall, and all, from the rosiest full-blown flower to the palest baby bud,offered their tribute of beauty and fragrance to the gentle mistress who hadloved and tended them so long.Meg looked very like a rose herself, for all that was best and sweetest inheart and soul seemed to bloom into her face that day, making it fair andtender, with a charm more beautiful than beauty. Neither silk, lace, nor orangeflowers would she have. “I don’t want a fashionable wedding, butonly those about me whom I love, and to them I wish to look and be my familiarself.”So she made her wedding gown herself, sewing into it the tender hopes andinnocent romances of a girlish heart. Her sisters braided up her pretty hair,and the only ornaments she wore were the lilies of the valley, which ‘herJohn’ liked best of all the flowers that grew.“You do look just like our own dear Meg, only so very sweet and lovelythat I should hug you if it wouldn’t crumple your dress,” criedAmy, surveying her with delight when all was done.“Then I am satisfied. But please hug and kiss me, everyone, anddon’t mind my dress. I want a great many crumples of this sort put intoit today,” and Meg opened her arms to her sisters, who clung about herwith April faces for a minute, feeling that the new love had not changed theold.“Now I’m going to tie John’s cravat for him, and then to staya few minutes with Father quietly in the study,” and Meg ran down toperform these little ceremonies, and then to follow her mother wherever shewent, conscious that in spite of the smiles on the motherly face, there was asecret sorrow hid in the motherly heart at the flight of the first bird fromthe nest.As the younger girls stand together, giving the last touches to their simpletoilet, it may be a good time to tell of a few changes which three years havewrought in their appearance, for all are looking their best just now.Jo’s angles are much softened, she has learned to carry herself withease, if not grace. The curly crop has lengthened into a thick coil, morebecoming to the small head atop of the tall figure. There is a fresh color inher brown cheeks, a soft shine in her eyes, and only gentle words fall from hersharp tongue today.Beth has grown slender, pale, and more quiet than ever. The beautiful, kindeyes are larger, and in them lies an expression that saddens one, although itis not sad itself. It is the shadow of pain which touches the young face withsuch pathetic patience, but Beth seldom complains and always speaks hopefullyof ‘being better soon’.Amy is with truth considered ‘the flower of the family’, for atsixteen she has the air and bearing of a full-grown woman, not beautiful, butpossessed of that indescribable charm called grace. One saw it in the lines ofher figure, the make and motion of her hands, the flow of her dress, the droopof her hair, unconscious yet harmonious, and as attractive to many as beautyitself. Amy’s nose still afflicted her, for it never would grow Grecian,so did her mouth, being too wide, and having a decided chin. These offendingfeatures gave character to her whole face, but she never could see it, andconsoled herself with her wonderfully fair complexion, keen blue eyes, andcurls more golden and abundant than ever.All three wore suits of thin silver gray (their best gowns for the summer),with blush roses in hair and bosom, and all three looked just what they were,fresh-faced, happy-hearted girls, pausing a moment in their busy lives to readwith wistful eyes the sweetest chapter in the romance of womanhood.There were to be no ceremonious performances, everything was to be as naturaland homelike as possible, so when Aunt March arrived, she was scandalized tosee the bride come running to welcome and lead her in, to find the bridegroomfastening up a garland that had fallen down, and to catch a glimpse of thepaternal minister marching upstairs with a grave countenance and a wine bottleunder each arm.“Upon my word, here’s a state of things!” cried the old lady,taking the seat of honor prepared for her, and settling the folds of herlavender moire with a great rustle. “You oughtn’t to be seen tillthe last minute, child.”“I’m not a show, Aunty, and no one is coming to stare at me, tocriticize my dress, or count the cost of my luncheon. I’m too happy tocare what anyone says or thinks, and I’m going to have my little weddingjust as I like it. John, dear, here’s your hammer.” And away wentMeg to help ‘that man’ in his highly improper employment.Mr. Brooke didn’t even say, “Thank you,” but as he stoopedfor the unromantic tool, he kissed his little bride behind the folding door,with a look that made Aunt March whisk out her pocket handkerchief with asudden dew in her sharp old eyes.A crash, a cry, and a laugh from Laurie, accompanied by the indecorousexclamation, “Jupiter Ammon! Jo’s upset the cake again!”caused a momentary flurry, which was hardly over when a flock of cousinsarrived, and ‘the party came in’, as Beth used to say when a child.“Don’t let that young giant come near me, he worries me worse thanmosquitoes,” whispered the old lady to Amy, as the rooms filled andLaurie’s black head towered above the rest.“He has promised to be very good today, and he can be perfectly elegantif he likes,” returned Amy, and gliding away to warn Hercules to bewareof the dragon, which warning caused him to haunt the old lady with a devotionthat nearly distracted her.There was no bridal procession, but a sudden silence fell upon the room as Mr.March and the young couple took their places under the green arch. Mother andsisters gathered close, as if loath to give Meg up. The fatherly voice brokemore than once, which only seemed to make the service more beautiful andsolemn. The bridegroom’s hand trembled visibly, and no one heard hisreplies. But Meg looked straight up in her husband’s eyes, and said,“I will!” with such tender trust in her own face and voice that hermother’s heart rejoiced and Aunt March sniffed audibly.Jo did not cry, though she was very near it once, and was only saved from ademonstration by the consciousness that Laurie was staring fixedly at her, witha comical mixture of merriment and emotion in his wicked black eyes. Beth kepther face hidden on her mother’s shoulder, but Amy stood like a gracefulstatue, with a most becoming ray of sunshine touching her white forehead andthe flower in her hair.It wasn’t at all the thing, I’m afraid, but the minute she wasfairly married, Meg cried, “The first kiss for Marmee!” andturning, gave it with her heart on her lips. During the next fifteen minutesshe looked more like a rose than ever, for everyone availed themselves of theirprivileges to the fullest extent, from Mr. Laurence to old Hannah, who, adornedwith a headdress fearfully and wonderfully made, fell upon her in the hall,crying with a sob and a chuckle, “Bless you, deary, a hundred times! Thecake ain’t hurt a mite, and everything looks lovely.”Everybody cleared up after that, and said something brilliant, or tried to,which did just as well, for laughter is ready when hearts are light. There wasno display of gifts, for they were already in the little house, nor was therean elaborate breakfast, but a plentiful lunch of cake and fruit, dressed withflowers. Mr. Laurence and Aunt March shrugged and smiled at one another whenwater, lemonade, and coffee were found to be to only sorts of nectar which thethree Hebes carried round. No one said anything, till Laurie, who insisted onserving the bride, appeared before her, with a loaded salver in his hand and apuzzled expression on his face.“Has Jo smashed all the bottles by accident?” he whispered,“or am I merely laboring under a delusion that I saw some lying aboutloose this morning?”“No, your grandfather kindly offered us his best, and Aunt March actuallysent some, but Father put away a little for Beth, and dispatched the rest tothe Soldier’s Home. You know he thinks that wine should be used only inillness, and Mother says that neither she nor her daughters will ever offer itto any young man under her roof.”Meg spoke seriously and expected to see Laurie frown or laugh, but he didneither, for after a quick look at her, he said, in his impetuous way, “Ilike that! For I’ve seen enough harm done to wish other women would thinkas you do.”“You are not made wise by experience, I hope?” and there was ananxious accent in Meg’s voice.“No. I give you my word for it. Don’t think too well of me, either,this is not one of my temptations. Being brought up where wine is as common aswater and almost as harmless, I don’t care for it, but when a pretty girloffers it, one doesn’t like to refuse, you see.”“But you will, for the sake of others, if not for your own. Come, Laurie,promise, and give me one more reason to call this the happiest day of mylife.”A demand so sudden and so serious made the young man hesitate a moment, forridicule is often harder to bear than self-denial. Meg knew that if he gave thepromise he would keep it at all costs, and feeling her power, used it as awoman may for her friend’s good. She did not speak, but she looked up athim with a face made very eloquent by happiness, and a smile which said,“No one can refuse me anything today.”Laurie certainly could not, and with an answering smile, he gave her his hand,saying heartily, “I promise, Mrs. Brooke!”“I thank you, very, very much.”“And I drink ‘long life to your resolution’, Teddy,”cried Jo, baptizing him with a splash of lemonade, as she waved her glass andbeamed approvingly upon him.So the toast was drunk, the pledge made and loyally kept in spite of manytemptations, for with instinctive wisdom, the girls seized a happy moment to dotheir friend a service, for which he thanked them all his life.After lunch, people strolled about, by twos and threes, through the house andgarden, enjoying the sunshine without and within. Meg and John happened to bestanding together in the middle of the grass plot, when Laurie was seized withan inspiration which put the finishing touch to this unfashionable wedding.“All the married people take hands and dance round the new-made husbandand wife, as the Germans do, while we bachelors and spinsters prance in couplesoutside!” cried Laurie, promenading down the path with Amy, with suchinfectious spirit and skill that everyone else followed their example without amurmur. Mr. and Mrs. March, Aunt and Uncle Carrol began it, others rapidlyjoined in, even Sallie Moffat, after a moment’s hesitation, threw hertrain over her arm and whisked Ned into the ring. But the crowning joke was Mr.Laurence and Aunt March, for when the stately old gentleman chasseed solemnlyup to the old lady, she just tucked her cane under her arm, and hopped brisklyaway to join hands with the rest and dance about the bridal pair, while theyoung folks pervaded the garden like butterflies on a midsummer day.Want of breath brought the impromptu ball to a close, and then people began togo.“I wish you well, my dear, I heartily wish you well, but I thinkyou’ll be sorry for it,” said Aunt March to Meg, adding to thebridegroom, as he led her to the carriage, “You’ve got a treasure,young man, see that you deserve it.”“That is the prettiest wedding I’ve been to for an age, Ned, and Idon’t see why, for there wasn’t a bit of style about it,”observed Mrs. Moffat to her husband, as they drove away.“Laurie, my lad, if you ever want to indulge in this sort of thing, getone of those little girls to help you, and I shall be perfectlysatisfied,” said Mr. Laurence, settling himself in his easy chair to restafter the excitement of the morning.“I’ll do my best to gratify you, Sir,” was Laurie’sunusually dutiful reply, as he carefully unpinned the posy Jo had put in hisbuttonhole.The little house was not far away, and the only bridal journey Meg had was thequiet walk with John from the old home to the new. When she came down, lookinglike a pretty Quakeress in her dove-colored suit and straw bonnet tied withwhite, they all gathered about her to say ‘good-by’, as tenderly asif she had been going to make the grand tour.“Don’t feel that I am separated from you, Marmee dear, or that Ilove you any the less for loving John so much,” she said, clinging to hermother, with full eyes for a moment. “I shall come every day, Father, andexpect to keep my old place in all your hearts, though I am married. Beth isgoing to be with me a great deal, and the other girls will drop in now and thento laugh at my housekeeping struggles. Thank you all for my happy wedding day.Good-by, good-by!”They stood watching her, with faces full of love and hope and tender pride asshe walked away, leaning on her husband’s arm, with her hands full offlowers and the June sunshine brightening her happy face—and soMeg’s married life began.CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXARTISTIC ATTEMPTSIt takes people a long time to learn the difference between talent and genius,especially ambitious young men and women. Amy was learning this distinctionthrough much tribulation, for mistaking enthusiasm for inspiration, sheattempted every branch of art with youthful audacity. For a long time there wasa lull in the ‘mud-pie’ business, and she devoted herself to thefinest pen-and-ink drawing, in which she showed such taste and skill that hergraceful handiwork proved both pleasant and profitable. But over-strained eyescaused pen and ink to be laid aside for a bold attempt at poker-sketching.While this attack lasted, the family lived in constant fear of a conflagration,for the odor of burning wood pervaded the house at all hours, smoke issued fromattic and shed with alarming frequency, red-hot pokers lay about promiscuously,and Hannah never went to bed without a pail of water and the dinner bell at herdoor in case of fire. Raphael’s face was found boldly executed on theunderside of the moulding board, and Bacchus on the head of a beer barrel. Achanting cherub adorned the cover of the sugar bucket, and attempts to portrayRomeo and Juliet supplied kindling for some time.From fire to oil was a natural transition for burned fingers, and Amy fell topainting with undiminished ardor. An artist friend fitted her out with hiscastoff palettes, brushes, and colors, and she daubed away, producing pastoraland marine views such as were never seen on land or sea. Her monstrosities inthe way of cattle would have taken prizes at an agricultural fair, and theperilous pitching of her vessels would have produced seasickness in the mostnautical observer, if the utter disregard to all known rules of shipbuildingand rigging had not convulsed him with laughter at the first glance. Swarthyboys and dark-eyed Madonnas, staring at you from one corner of the studio,suggested Murillo; oily brown shadows of faces with a lurid streak in the wrongplace, meant Rembrandt; buxom ladies and dropiscal infants, Rubens; and Turnerappeared in tempests of blue thunder, orange lightning, brown rain, and purpleclouds, with a tomato-colored splash in the middle, which might be the sun or abouy, a sailor’s shirt or a king’s robe, as the spectator pleased.Charcoal portraits came next, and the entire family hung in a row, looking aswild and crocky as if just evoked from a coalbin. Softened into crayonsketches, they did better, for the likenesses were good, and Amy’s hair,Jo’s nose, Meg’s mouth, and Laurie’s eyes were pronounced‘wonderfully fine’. A return to clay and plaster followed, andghostly casts of her acquaintances haunted corners of the house, or tumbled offcloset shelves onto people’s heads. Children were enticed in as models,till their incoherent accounts of her mysterious doings caused Miss Amy to beregarded in the light of a young ogress. Her efforts in this line, however,were brought to an abrupt close by an untoward accident, which quenched herardor. Other models failing her for a time, she undertook to cast her ownpretty foot, and the family were one day alarmed by an unearthly bumping andscreaming and running to the rescue, found the young enthusiast hopping wildlyabout the shed with her foot held fast in a pan full of plaster, which hadhardened with unexpected rapidity. With much difficulty and some danger she wasdug out, for Jo was so overcome with laughter while she excavated that herknife went too far, cut the poor foot, and left a lasting memorial of oneartistic attempt, at least.After this Amy subsided, till a mania for sketching from nature set her tohaunting river, field, and wood, for picturesque studies, and sighing for ruinsto copy. She caught endless colds sitting on damp grass to book ‘adelicious bit’, composed of a stone, a stump, one mushroom, and a brokenmullein stalk, or ‘a heavenly mass of clouds’, that looked like achoice display of featherbeds when done. She sacrificed her complexion floatingon the river in the midsummer sun to study light and shade, and got a wrinkleover her nose trying after ‘points of sight’, or whatever thesquint-and-string performance is called.If ‘genius is eternal patience’, as Michelangelo affirms, Amy hadsome claim to the divine attribute, for she persevered in spite of allobstacles, failures, and discouragements, firmly believing that in time sheshould do something worthy to be called ‘high art’.She was learning, doing, and enjoying other things, meanwhile, for she hadresolved to be an attractive and accomplished woman, even if she never became agreat artist. Here she succeeded better, for she was one of those happilycreated beings who please without effort, make friends everywhere, and takelife so gracefully and easily that less fortunate souls are tempted to believethat such are born under a lucky star. Everybody liked her, for among her goodgifts was tact. She had an instinctive sense of what was pleasing and proper,always said the right thing to the right person, did just what suited the timeand place, and was so self-possessed that her sisters used to say, “IfAmy went to court without any rehearsal beforehand, she’d know exactlywhat to do.”One of her weaknesses was a desire to move in ‘our best society’,without being quite sure what the best really was. Money, position, fashionableaccomplishments, and elegant manners were most desirable things in her eyes,and she liked to associate with those who possessed them, often mistaking thefalse for the true, and admiring what was not admirable. Never forgetting thatby birth she was a gentlewoman, she cultivated her aristocratic tastes andfeelings, so that when the opportunity came she might be ready to take theplace from which poverty now excluded her.“My lady,” as her friends called her, sincerely desired to be agenuine lady, and was so at heart, but had yet to learn that money cannot buyrefinement of nature, that rank does not always confer nobility, and that truebreeding makes itself felt in spite of external drawbacks.“I want to ask a favor of you, Mamma,” Amy said, coming in with animportant air one day.“Well, little girl, what is it?” replied her mother, in whose eyesthe stately young lady still remained ‘the baby’.“Our drawing class breaks up next week, and before the girls separate forthe summer, I want to ask them out here for a day. They are wild to see theriver, sketch the broken bridge, and copy some of the things they admire in mybook. They have been very kind to me in many ways, and I am grateful, for theyare all rich and I know I am poor, yet they never made any difference.”“Why should they?” and Mrs. March put the question with what thegirls called her ‘Maria Theresa air’.“You know as well as I that it does make a difference with nearlyeveryone, so don’t ruffle up like a dear, motherly hen, when yourchickens get pecked by smarter birds. The ugly duckling turned out a swan, youknow.” and Amy smiled without bitterness, for she possessed a happytemper and hopeful spirit.Mrs. March laughed, and smoothed down her maternal pride as she asked,“Well, my swan, what is your plan?”“I should like to ask the girls out to lunch next week, to take them fora drive to the places they want to see, a row on the river, perhaps, and make alittle artistic fete for them.”“That looks feasible. What do you want for lunch? Cake, sandwiches,fruit, and coffee will be all that is necessary, I suppose?”“Oh, dear, no! We must have cold tongue and chicken, French chocolate andice cream, besides. The girls are used to such things, and I want my lunch tobe proper and elegant, though I do work for my living.”“How many young ladies are there?” asked her mother, beginning tolook sober.“Twelve or fourteen in the class, but I dare say they won’t allcome.”“Bless me, child, you will have to charter an omnibus to carry themabout.”“Why, Mother, how can you think of such a thing? Not more than six oreight will probably come, so I shall hire a beach wagon and borrow Mr.Laurence’s cherry-bounce.” (Hannah’s pronunciation ofchar-a-banc.)“All of this will be expensive, Amy.”“Not very. I’ve calculated the cost, and I’ll pay for itmyself.”“Don’t you think, dear, that as these girls are used to suchthings, and the best we can do will be nothing new, that some simpler planwould be pleasanter to them, as a change if nothing more, and much better forus than buying or borrowing what we don’t need, and attempting a stylenot in keeping with our circumstances?”“If I can’t have it as I like, I don’t care to have it atall. I know that I can carry it out perfectly well, if you and the girls willhelp a little, and I don’t see why I can’t if I’m willing topay for it,” said Amy, with the decision which opposition was apt tochange into obstinacy.Mrs. March knew that experience was an excellent teacher, and when it waspossible she left her children to learn alone the lessons which she wouldgladly have made easier, if they had not objected to taking advice as much asthey did salts and senna.“Very well, Amy, if your heart is set upon it, and you see your waythrough without too great an outlay of money, time, and temper, I’ll sayno more. Talk it over with the girls, and whichever way you decide, I’lldo my best to help you.”“Thanks, Mother, you are always so kind.” and away went Amy to layher plan before her sisters.Meg agreed at once, and promised her aid, gladly offering anything shepossessed, from her little house itself to her very best saltspoons. But Jofrowned upon the whole project and would have nothing to do with it at first.“Why in the world should you spend your money, worry your family, andturn the house upside down for a parcel of girls who don’t care asixpence for you? I thought you had too much pride and sense to truckle to anymortal woman just because she wears French boots and rides in a coupe,”said Jo, who, being called from the tragic climax of her novel, was not in thebest mood for social enterprises.“I don’t truckle, and I hate being patronized as much as youdo!” returned Amy indignantly, for the two still jangled when suchquestions arose. “The girls do care for me, and I for them, andthere’s a great deal of kindness and sense and talent among them, inspite of what you call fashionable nonsense. You don’t care to makepeople like you, to go into good society, and cultivate your manners andtastes. I do, and I mean to make the most of every chance that comes. You cango through the world with your elbows out and your nose in the air, and call itindependence, if you like. That’s not my way.”When Amy had whetted her tongue and freed her mind she usually got the best ofit, for she seldom failed to have common sense on her side, while Jo carriedher love of liberty and hate of conventionalities to such an unlimited extentthat she naturally found herself worsted in an argument. Amy’s definitionof Jo’s idea of independence was such a good hit that both burst outlaughing, and the discussion took a more amiable turn. Much against her will,Jo at length consented to sacrifice a day to Mrs. Grundy, and help her sisterthrough what she regarded as ‘a nonsensical business’.The invitations were sent, nearly all accepted, and the following Monday wasset apart for the grand event. Hannah was out of humor because her week’swork was deranged, and prophesied that “ef the washin’ andironin’ warn’t done reg’lar, nothin’ would go wellanywheres”. This hitch in the mainspring of the domestic machinery had abad effect upon the whole concern, but Amy’s motto was ‘Nildesperandum’, and having made up her mind what to do, she proceeded to doit in spite of all obstacles. To begin with, Hannah’s cookingdidn’t turn out well. The chicken was tough, the tongue too salty, andthe chocolate wouldn’t froth properly. Then the cake and ice cost morethan Amy expected, so did the wagon, and various other expenses, which seemedtrifling at the outset, counted up rather alarmingly afterward. Beth got a coldand took to her bed. Meg had an unusual number of callers to keep her at home,and Jo was in such a divided state of mind that her breakages, accidents, andmistakes were uncommonly numerous, serious, and trying.If it was not fair on Monday, the young ladies were to come on Tuesday, anarrangement which aggravated Jo and Hannah to the last degree. On Mondaymorning the weather was in that undecided state which is more exasperating thana steady pour. It drizzled a little, shone a little, blew a little, anddidn’t make up its mind till it was too late for anyone else to make uptheirs. Amy was up at dawn, hustling people out of their beds and through theirbreakfasts, that the house might be got in order. The parlor struck her aslooking uncommonly shabby, but without stopping to sigh for what she had not,she skillfully made the best of what she had, arranging chairs over the wornplaces in the carpet, covering stains on the walls with homemade statuary,which gave an artistic air to the room, as did the lovely vases of flowers Joscattered about.The lunch looked charming, and as she surveyed it, she sincerely hoped it wouldtaste well, and that the borrowed glass, china, and silver would get safelyhome again. The carriages were promised, Meg and Mother were all ready to dothe honors, Beth was able to help Hannah behind the scenes, Jo had engaged tobe as lively and amiable as an absent mind, and aching head, and a very decideddisapproval of everybody and everything would allow, and as she wearilydressed, Amy cheered herself with anticipations of the happy moment when, lunchsafely over, she should drive away with her friends for an afternoon ofartistic delights, for the ‘cherry bounce’ and the broken bridgewere her strong points.Then came the hours of suspense, during which she vibrated from parlor toporch, while public opinion varied like the weathercock. A smart shower ateleven had evidently quenched the enthusiasm of the young ladies who were toarrive at twelve, for nobody came, and at two the exhausted family sat down ina blaze of sunshine to consume the perishable portions of the feast, thatnothing might be lost.“No doubt about the weather today, they will certainly come, so we mustfly round and be ready for them,” said Amy, as the sun woke her nextmorning. She spoke briskly, but in her secret soul she wished she had saidnothing about Tuesday, for her interest like her cake was getting a littlestale.“I can’t get any lobsters, so you will have to do without saladtoday,” said Mr. March, coming in half an hour later, with an expressionof placid despair.“Use the chicken then, the toughness won’t matter in asalad,” advised his wife.“Hannah left it on the kitchen table a minute, and the kittens got at it.I’m very sorry, Amy,” added Beth, who was still a patroness ofcats.“Then I must have a lobster, for tongue alone won’t do,” saidAmy decidedly.“Shall I rush into town and demand one?” asked Jo, with themagnanimity of a martyr.“You’d come bringing it home under your arm without any paper, justto try me. I’ll go myself,” answered Amy, whose temper wasbeginning to fail.Shrouded in a thick veil and armed with a genteel traveling basket, shedeparted, feeling that a cool drive would soothe her ruffled spirit and fit herfor the labors of the day. After some delay, the object of her desire wasprocured, likewise a bottle of dressing to prevent further loss of time athome, and off she drove again, well pleased with her own forethought.As the omnibus contained only one other passenger, a sleepy old lady, Amypocketed her veil and beguiled the tedium of the way by trying to find outwhere all her money had gone to. So busy was she with her card full ofrefractory figures that she did not observe a newcomer, who entered withoutstopping the vehicle, till a masculine voice said, “Good morning, MissMarch,” and, looking up, she beheld one of Laurie’s most elegantcollege friends. Fervently hoping that he would get out before she did, Amyutterly ignored the basket at her feet, and congratulating herself that she hadon her new traveling dress, returned the young man’s greeting with herusual suavity and spirit.They got on excellently, for Amy’s chief care was soon set at rest bylearning that the gentleman would leave first, and she was chatting away in apeculiarly lofty strain, when the old lady got out. In stumbling to the door,she upset the basket, and—oh horror!—the lobster, in all its vulgarsize and brilliancy, was revealed to the highborn eyes of a Tudor!“By Jove, she’s forgotten her dinner!” cried the unconsciousyouth, poking the scarlet monster into its place with his cane, and preparingto hand out the basket after the old lady.“Please don’t—it’s—it’s mine,”murmured Amy, with a face nearly as red as her fish.“Oh, really, I beg pardon. It’s an uncommonly fine one, isn’tit?” said Tudor, with great presence of mind, and an air of soberinterest that did credit to his breeding.Amy recovered herself in a breath, set her basket boldly on the seat, and said,laughing, “Don’t you wish you were to have some of the saladhe’s going to make, and to see the charming young ladies who are to eatit?”Now that was tact, for two of the ruling foibles of the masculine mind weretouched. The lobster was instantly surrounded by a halo of pleasingreminiscences, and curiosity about ‘the charming young ladies’diverted his mind from the comical mishap.“I suppose he’ll laugh and joke over it with Laurie, but Ishan’t see them, that’s a comfort,” thought Amy, as Tudorbowed and departed.She did not mention this meeting at home (though she discovered that, thanks tothe upset, her new dress was much damaged by the rivulets of dressing thatmeandered down the skirt), but went through with the preparations which nowseemed more irksome than before, and at twelve o’clock all was readyagain. Feeling that the neighbors were interested in her movements, she wishedto efface the memory of yesterday’s failure by a grand success today, soshe ordered the ‘cherry bounce’, and drove away in state to meetand escort her guests to the banquet.“There’s the rumble, they’re coming! I’ll go onto theporch and meet them. It looks hospitable, and I want the poor child to have agood time after all her trouble,” said Mrs. March, suiting the action tothe word. But after one glance, she retired, with an indescribable expression,for looking quite lost in the big carriage, sat Amy and one young lady.“Run, Beth, and help Hannah clear half the things off the table. It willbe too absurd to put a luncheon for twelve before a single girl,” criedJo, hurrying away to the lower regions, too excited to stop even for a laugh.In came Amy, quite calm and delightfully cordial to the one guest who had kepther promise. The rest of the family, being of a dramatic turn, played theirparts equally well, and Miss Eliott found them a most hilarious set, for it wasimpossible to control entirely the merriment which possessed them. Theremodeled lunch being gaily partaken of, the studio and garden visited, and artdiscussed with enthusiasm, Amy ordered a buggy (alas for the elegantcherry-bounce), and drove her friend quietly about the neighborhood tillsunset, when ‘the party went out’.As she came walking in, looking very tired but as composed as ever, sheobserved that every vestige of the unfortunate fete had disappeared, except asuspicious pucker about the corners of Jo’s mouth.“You’ve had a loverly afternoon for your drive, dear,” saidher mother, as respectfully as if the whole twelve had come.“Miss Eliott is a very sweet girl, and seemed to enjoy herself, Ithought,” observed Beth, with unusual warmth.“Could you spare me some of your cake? I really need some, I have so muchcompany, and I can’t make such delicious stuff as yours,” asked Megsoberly.“Take it all. I’m the only one here who likes sweet things, and itwill mold before I can dispose of it,” answered Amy, thinking with a sighof the generous store she had laid in for such an end as this.“It’s a pity Laurie isn’t here to help us,” began Jo,as they sat down to ice cream and salad for the second time in two days.A warning look from her mother checked any further remarks, and the wholefamily ate in heroic silence, till Mr. March mildly observed, “salad wasone of the favorite dishes of the ancients, and Evelyn...” Here a generalexplosion of laughter cut short the ‘history of salads’, to thegreat surprise of the learned gentleman.“Bundle everything into a basket and send it to the Hummels. Germans likemesses. I’m sick of the sight of this, and there’s no reason youshould all die of a surfeit because I’ve been a fool,” cried Amy,wiping her eyes.“I thought I should have died when I saw you two girls rattling about inthe what-you-call-it, like two little kernels in a very big nutshell, andMother waiting in state to receive the throng,” sighed Jo, quite spentwith laughter.“I’m very sorry you were disappointed, dear, but we all did ourbest to satisfy you,” said Mrs. March, in a tone full of motherly regret.“I am satisfied. I’ve done what I undertook, and it’s not myfault that it failed. I comfort myself with that,” said Amy with a littlequiver in her voice. “I thank you all very much for helping me, andI’ll thank you still more if you won’t allude to it for a month, atleast.”No one did for several months, but the word ‘fete’ always produceda general smile, and Laurie’s birthday gift to Amy was a tiny corallobster in the shape of a charm for her watch guard.CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVENLITERARY LESSONSFortune suddenly smiled upon Jo, and dropped a good luck penny in her path. Nota golden penny, exactly, but I doubt if half a million would have given morereal happiness then did the little sum that came to her in this wise.Every few weeks she would shut herself up in her room, put on her scribblingsuit, and ‘fall into a vortex’, as she expressed it, writing awayat her novel with all her heart and soul, for till that was finished she couldfind no peace. Her ‘scribbling suit’ consisted of a black woolenpinafore on which she could wipe her pen at will, and a cap of the samematerial, adorned with a cheerful red bow, into which she bundled her hair whenthe decks were cleared for action. This cap was a beacon to the inquiring eyesof her family, who during these periods kept their distance, merely popping intheir heads semi-occasionally to ask, with interest, “Does genius burn,Jo?” They did not always venture even to ask this question, but took anobservation of the cap, and judged accordingly. If this expressive article ofdress was drawn low upon the forehead, it was a sign that hard work was goingon, in exciting moments it was pushed rakishly askew, and when despair seizedthe author it was plucked wholly off, and cast upon the floor. At such timesthe intruder silently withdrew, and not until the red bow was seen gaily erectupon the gifted brow, did anyone dare address Jo.She did not think herself a genius by any means, but when the writing fit cameon, she gave herself up to it with entire abandon, and led a blissful life,unconscious of want, care, or bad weather, while she sat safe and happy in animaginary world, full of friends almost as real and dear to her as any in theflesh. Sleep forsook her eyes, meals stood untasted, day and night were all tooshort to enjoy the happiness which blessed her only at such times, and madethese hours worth living, even if they bore no other fruit. The divine afflatususually lasted a week or two, and then she emerged from her‘vortex’, hungry, sleepy, cross, or despondent.She was just recovering from one of these attacks when she was prevailed uponto escort Miss Crocker to a lecture, and in return for her virtue was rewardedwith a new idea. It was a People’s Course, the lecture on the Pyramids,and Jo rather wondered at the choice of such a subject for such an audience,but took it for granted that some great social evil would be remedied or somegreat want supplied by unfolding the glories of the Pharaohs to an audiencewhose thoughts were busy with the price of coal and flour, and whose lives werespent in trying to solve harder riddles than that of the Sphinx.They were early, and while Miss Crocker set the heel of her stocking, Jo amusedherself by examining the faces of the people who occupied the seat with them.On her left were two matrons, with massive foreheads and bonnets to match,discussing Women’s Rights and making tatting. Beyond sat a pair of humblelovers, artlessly holding each other by the hand, a somber spinster eatingpeppermints out of a paper bag, and an old gentleman taking his preparatory napbehind a yellow bandanna. On her right, her only neighbor was a studiouslooking lad absorbed in a newspaper.It was a pictorial sheet, and Jo examined the work of art nearest her, idlywondering what fortuitous concatenation of circumstances needed themelodramatic illustration of an Indian in full war costume, tumbling over aprecipice with a wolf at his throat, while two infuriated young gentlemen, withunnaturally small feet and big eyes, were stabbing each other close by, and adisheveled female was flying away in the background with her mouth wide open.Pausing to turn a page, the lad saw her looking and, with boyish good natureoffered half his paper, saying bluntly, “want to read it? That’s afirst-rate story.”Jo accepted it with a smile, for she had never outgrown her liking for lads,and soon found herself involved in the usual labyrinth of love, mystery, andmurder, for the story belonged to that class of light literature in which thepassions have a holiday, and when the author’s invention fails, a grandcatastrophe clears the stage of one half the dramatis personae, leaving theother half to exult over their downfall.“Prime, isn’t it?” asked the boy, as her eye went down thelast paragraph of her portion.“I think you and I could do as well as that if we tried,” returnedJo, amused at his admiration of the trash.“I should think I was a pretty lucky chap if I could. She makes a goodliving out of such stories, they say.” and he pointed to the name of Mrs.S.L.A.N.G. Northbury, under the title of the tale.“Do you know her?” asked Jo, with sudden interest.“No, but I read all her pieces, and I know a fellow who works in theoffice where this paper is printed.”“Do you say she makes a good living out of stories like this?” andJo looked more respectfully at the agitated group and thickly sprinkledexclamation points that adorned the page.“Guess she does! She knows just what folks like, and gets paid well forwriting it.”Here the lecture began, but Jo heard very little of it, for while ProfessorSands was prosing away about Belzoni, Cheops, scarabei, and hieroglyphics, shewas covertly taking down the address of the paper, and boldly resolving to tryfor the hundred-dollar prize offered in its columns for a sensational story. Bythe time the lecture ended and the audience awoke, she had built up a splendidfortune for herself (not the first founded on paper), and was already deep inthe concoction of her story, being unable to decide whether the duel shouldcome before the elopement or after the murder.She said nothing of her plan at home, but fell to work next day, much to thedisquiet of her mother, who always looked a little anxious when ‘geniustook to burning’. Jo had never tried this style before, contentingherself with very mild romances for The Spread Eagle. Her experience andmiscellaneous reading were of service now, for they gave her some idea ofdramatic effect, and supplied plot, language, and costumes. Her story was asfull of desperation and despair as her limited acquaintance with thoseuncomfortable emotions enabled her to make it, and having located it in Lisbon,she wound up with an earthquake, as a striking and appropriate denouement. Themanuscript was privately dispatched, accompanied by a note, modestly sayingthat if the tale didn’t get the prize, which the writer hardly daredexpect, she would be very glad to receive any sum it might be considered worth.Six weeks is a long time to wait, and a still longer time for a girl to keep asecret, but Jo did both, and was just beginning to give up all hope of everseeing her manuscript again, when a letter arrived which almost took her breathaway, for on opening it, a check for a hundred dollars fell into her lap. For aminute she stared at it as if it had been a snake, then she read her letter andbegan to cry. If the amiable gentleman who wrote that kindly note could haveknown what intense happiness he was giving a fellow creature, I think he woulddevote his leisure hours, if he has any, to that amusement, for Jo valued theletter more than the money, because it was encouraging, and after years ofeffort it was so pleasant to find that she had learned to do something, thoughit was only to write a sensation story.A prouder young woman was seldom seen than she, when, having composed herself,she electrified the family by appearing before them with the letter in onehand, the check in the other, announcing that she had won the prize. Of coursethere was a great jubilee, and when the story came everyone read and praisedit, though after her father had told her that the language was good, theromance fresh and hearty, and the tragedy quite thrilling, he shook his head,and said in his unworldly way...“You can do better than this, Jo. Aim at the highest, and never mind themoney.”“I think the money is the best part of it. What will you do with such afortune?” asked Amy, regarding the magic slip of paper with a reverentialeye.“Send Beth and Mother to the seaside for a month or two,” answeredJo promptly.To the seaside they went, after much discussion, and though Beth didn’tcome home as plump and rosy as could be desired, she was much better, whileMrs. March declared she felt ten years younger. So Jo was satisfied with theinvestment of her prize money, and fell to work with a cheery spirit, bent onearning more of those delightful checks. She did earn several that year, andbegan to feel herself a power in the house, for by the magic of a pen, her‘rubbish’ turned into comforts for them all. The Duke’sDaughter paid the butcher’s bill, A Phantom Hand put down a new carpet,and the Curse of the Coventrys proved the blessing of the Marches in the way ofgroceries and gowns.Wealth is certainly a most desirable thing, but poverty has its sunny side, andone of the sweet uses of adversity is the genuine satisfaction which comes fromhearty work of head or hand, and to the inspiration of necessity, we owe halfthe wise, beautiful, and useful blessings of the world. Jo enjoyed a taste ofthis satisfaction, and ceased to envy richer girls, taking great comfort in theknowledge that she could supply her own wants, and need ask no one for a penny.Little notice was taken of her stories, but they found a market, and encouragedby this fact, she resolved to make a bold stroke for fame and fortune. Havingcopied her novel for the fourth time, read it to all her confidential friends,and submitted it with fear and trembling to three publishers, she at lastdisposed of it, on condition that she would cut it down one third, and omit allthe parts which she particularly admired.“Now I must either bundle it back in to my tin kitchen to mold, pay forprinting it myself, or chop it up to suit purchasers and get what I can for it.Fame is a very good thing to have in the house, but cash is more convenient, soI wish to take the sense of the meeting on this important subject,” saidJo, calling a family council.“Don’t spoil your book, my girl, for there is more in it than youknow, and the idea is well worked out. Let it wait and ripen,” was herfather’s advice, and he practiced what he preached, having waitedpatiently thirty years for fruit of his own to ripen, and being in no haste togather it even now when it was sweet and mellow.“It seems to me that Jo will profit more by taking the trial than bywaiting,” said Mrs. March. “Criticism is the best test of suchwork, for it will show her both unsuspected merits and faults, and help her todo better next time. We are too partial, but the praise and blame of outsiderswill prove useful, even if she gets but little money.”“Yes,” said Jo, knitting her brows, “that’s just it.I’ve been fussing over the thing so long, I really don’t knowwhether it’s good, bad, or indifferent. It will be a great help to havecool, impartial persons take a look at it, and tell me what they think ofit.”“I wouldn’t leave a word out of it. You’ll spoil it if youdo, for the interest of the story is more in the minds than in the actions ofthe people, and it will be all a muddle if you don’t explain as you goon,” said Meg, who firmly believed that this book was the most remarkablenovel ever written.“But Mr. Allen says, ‘Leave out the explanations, make it brief anddramatic, and let the characters tell the story’,” interrupted Jo,turning to the publisher’s note.“Do as he tells you. He knows what will sell, and we don’t. Make agood, popular book, and get as much money as you can. By-and-by, whenyou’ve got a name, you can afford to digress, and have philosophical andmetaphysical people in your novels,” said Amy, who took a strictlypractical view of the subject.“Well,” said Jo, laughing, “if my people are‘philosophical and metaphysical’, it isn’t my fault, for Iknow nothing about such things, except what I hear father say, sometimes. IfI’ve got some of his wise ideas jumbled up with my romance, so much thebetter for me. Now, Beth, what do you say?”“I should so like to see it printed soon,” was all Beth said, andsmiled in saying it. But there was an unconscious emphasis on the last word,and a wistful look in the eyes that never lost their childlike candor, whichchilled Jo’s heart for a minute with a forboding fear, and decided her tomake her little venture ‘soon’.So, with Spartan firmness, the young authoress laid her first-born on hertable, and chopped it up as ruthlessly as any ogre. In the hope of pleasingeveryone, she took everyone’s advice, and like the old man and his donkeyin the fable suited nobody.Her father liked the metaphysical streak which had unconsciously got into it,so that was allowed to remain though she had her doubts about it. Her motherthought that there was a trifle too much description. Out, therefore it came,and with it many necessary links in the story. Meg admired the tragedy, so Jopiled up the agony to suit her, while Amy objected to the fun, and, with thebest intentions in life, Jo quenched the spritly scenes which relieved thesomber character of the story. Then, to complicate the ruin, she cut it downone third, and confidingly sent the poor little romance, like a picked robin,out into the big, busy world to try its fate.Well, it was printed, and she got three hundred dollars for it, likewise plentyof praise and blame, both so much greater than she expected that she was throwninto a state of bewilderment from which it took her some time to recover.“You said, Mother, that criticism would help me. But how can it, whenit’s so contradictory that I don’t know whether I’ve writtena promising book or broken all the ten commandments?” cried poor Jo,turning over a heap of notices, the perusal of which filled her with pride andjoy one minute, wrath and dismay the next. “This man says, ‘Anexquisite book, full of truth, beauty, and earnestness.’ ‘All issweet, pure, and healthy.’” continued the perplexed authoress.“The next, ‘The theory of the book is bad, full of morbid fancies,spiritualistic ideas, and unnatural characters.’ Now, as I had no theoryof any kind, don’t believe in Spiritualism, and copied my characters fromlife, I don’t see how this critic can be right. Another says,‘It’s one of the best American novels which has appeared foryears.’ (I know better than that), and the next asserts that‘Though it is original, and written with great force and feeling, it is adangerous book.’ ’Tisn’t! Some make fun of it, someoverpraise, and nearly all insist that I had a deep theory to expound, when Ionly wrote it for the pleasure and the money. I wish I’d printed thewhole or not at all, for I do hate to be so misjudged.”Her family and friends administered comfort and commendation liberally. Yet itwas a hard time for sensitive, high-spirited Jo, who meant so well and hadapparently done so ill. But it did her good, for those whose opinion had realvalue gave her the criticism which is an author’s best education, andwhen the first soreness was over, she could laugh at her poor little book, yetbelieve in it still, and feel herself the wiser and stronger for the buffetingshe had received.“Not being a genius, like Keats, it won’t kill me,” she saidstoutly, “and I’ve got the joke on my side, after all, for theparts that were taken straight out of real life are denounced as impossible andabsurd, and the scenes that I made up out of my own silly head are pronounced‘charmingly natural, tender, and true’. So I’ll comfortmyself with that, and when I’m ready, I’ll up again and takeanother.”CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHTDOMESTIC EXPERIENCESLike most other young matrons, Meg began her married life with thedetermination to be a model housekeeper. John should find home a paradise, heshould always see a smiling face, should fare sumptuously every day, and neverknow the loss of a button. She brought so much love, energy, and cheerfulnessto the work that she could not but succeed, in spite of some obstacles. Herparadise was not a tranquil one, for the little woman fussed, was over-anxiousto please, and bustled about like a true Martha, cumbered with many cares. Shewas too tired, sometimes, even to smile, John grew dyspeptic after a course ofdainty dishes and ungratefully demanded plain fare. As for buttons, she soonlearned to wonder where they went, to shake her head over the carelessness ofmen, and to threaten to make him sew them on himself, and see if his work wouldstand impatient and clumsy fingers any better than hers.They were very happy, even after they discovered that they couldn’t liveon love alone. John did not find Meg’s beauty diminished, though shebeamed at him from behind the familiar coffee pot. Nor did Meg miss any of theromance from the daily parting, when her husband followed up his kiss with thetender inquiry, “Shall I send some veal or mutton for dinner,darling?” The little house ceased to be a glorified bower, but it becamea home, and the young couple soon felt that it was a change for the better. Atfirst they played keep-house, and frolicked over it like children. Then Johntook steadily to business, feeling the cares of the head of a family upon hisshoulders, and Meg laid by her cambric wrappers, put on a big apron, and fellto work, as before said, with more energy than discretion.While the cooking mania lasted she went through Mrs. Cornelius’s ReceiptBook as if it were a mathematical exercise, working out the problems withpatience and care. Sometimes her family were invited in to help eat up a toobounteous feast of successes, or Lotty would be privately dispatched with abatch of failures, which were to be concealed from all eyes in the convenientstomachs of the little Hummels. An evening with John over the account booksusually produced a temporary lull in the culinary enthusiasm, and a frugal fitwould ensue, during which the poor man was put through a course of breadpudding, hash, and warmed-over coffee, which tried his soul, although he boreit with praiseworthy fortitude. Before the golden mean was found, however, Megadded to her domestic possessions what young couples seldom get on longwithout, a family jar.Fired with a housewifely wish to see her storeroom stocked with homemadepreserves, she undertook to put up her own currant jelly. John was requested toorder home a dozen or so of little pots and an extra quantity of sugar, fortheir own currants were ripe and were to be attended to at once. As John firmlybelieved that ‘my wife’ was equal to anything, and took a naturalpride in her skill, he resolved that she should be gratified, and their onlycrop of fruit laid by in a most pleasing form for winter use. Home came fourdozen delightful little pots, half a barrel of sugar, and a small boy to pickthe currants for her. With her pretty hair tucked into a little cap, arms baredto the elbow, and a checked apron which had a coquettish look in spite of thebib, the young housewife fell to work, feeling no doubts about her success, forhadn’t she seen Hannah do it hundreds of times? The array of pots ratheramazed her at first, but John was so fond of jelly, and the nice little jarswould look so well on the top shelf, that Meg resolved to fill them all, andspent a long day picking, boiling, straining, and fussing over her jelly. Shedid her best, she asked advice of Mrs. Cornelius, she racked her brain toremember what Hannah did that she left undone, she reboiled, resugared, andrestrained, but that dreadful stuff wouldn’t ‘jell’.She longed to run home, bib and all, and ask Mother to lend her a hand, butJohn and she had agreed that they would never annoy anyone with their privateworries, experiments, or quarrels. They had laughed over that last word as ifthe idea it suggested was a most preposterous one, but they had held to theirresolve, and whenever they could get on without help they did so, and no oneinterfered, for Mrs. March had advised the plan. So Meg wrestled alone with therefractory sweetmeats all that hot summer day, and at five o’clock satdown in her topsy-turvey kitchen, wrung her bedaubed hands, lifted up her voiceand wept.Now, in the first flush of the new life, she had often said, “My husbandshall always feel free to bring a friend home whenever he likes. I shall alwaysbe prepared. There shall be no flurry, no scolding, no discomfort, but a neathouse, a cheerful wife, and a good dinner. John, dear, never stop to ask myleave, invite whom you please, and be sure of a welcome from me.”How charming that was, to be sure! John quite glowed with pride to hear her sayit, and felt what a blessed thing it was to have a superior wife. But, althoughthey had had company from time to time, it never happened to be unexpected, andMeg had never had an opportunity to distinguish herself till now. It alwayshappens so in this vale of tears, there is an inevitability about such thingswhich we can only wonder at, deplore, and bear as we best can.If John had not forgotten all about the jelly, it really would have beenunpardonable in him to choose that day, of all the days in the year, to bring afriend home to dinner unexpectedly. Congratulating himself that a handsomerepast had been ordered that morning, feeling sure that it would be ready tothe minute, and indulging in pleasant anticipations of the charming effect itwould produce, when his pretty wife came running out to meet him, he escortedhis friend to his mansion, with the irrepressible satisfaction of a young hostand husband.It is a world of disappointments, as John discovered when he reached theDovecote. The front door usually stood hospitably open. Now it was not onlyshut, but locked, and yesterday’s mud still adorned the steps. The parlorwindows were closed and curtained, no picture of the pretty wife sewing on thepiazza, in white, with a distracting little bow in her hair, or a bright-eyedhostess, smiling a shy welcome as she greeted her guest. Nothing of the sort,for not a soul appeared but a sanginary-looking boy asleep under the currentbushes.“I’m afraid something has happened. Step into the garden, Scott,while I look up Mrs. Brooke,” said John, alarmed at the silence andsolitude.Round the house he hurried, led by a pungent smell of burned sugar, and Mr.Scott strolled after him, with a queer look on his face. He paused discreetlyat a distance when Brooke disappeared, but he could both see and hear, andbeing a bachelor, enjoyed the prospect mightily.In the kitchen reigned confusion and despair. One edition of jelly was trickledfrom pot to pot, another lay upon the floor, and a third was burning gaily onthe stove. Lotty, with Teutonic phlegm, was calmly eating bread and currantwine, for the jelly was still in a hopelessly liquid state, while Mrs. Brooke,with her apron over her head, sat sobbing dismally.“My dearest girl, what is the matter?” cried John, rushing in, withawful visions of scalded hands, sudden news of affliction, and secretconsternation at the thought of the guest in the garden.“Oh, John, I am so tired and hot and cross and worried! I’ve beenat it till I’m all worn out. Do come and help me or I shall die!”and the exhausted housewife cast herself upon his breast, giving him a sweetwelcome in every sense of the word, for her pinafore had been baptized at thesame time as the floor.“What worries you dear? Has anything dreadful happened?” asked theanxious John, tenderly kissing the crown of the little cap, which was allaskew.“Yes,” sobbed Meg despairingly.“Tell me quick, then. Don’t cry. I can bear anything better thanthat. Out with it, love.”“The... The jelly won’t jell and I don’t know what todo!”John Brooke laughed then as he never dared to laugh afterward, and the derisiveScott smiled involuntarily as he heard the hearty peal, which put the finishingstroke to poor Meg’s woe.“Is that all? Fling it out of the window, and don’t bother any moreabout it. I’ll buy you quarts if you want it, but for heaven’s sakedon’t have hysterics, for I’ve brought Jack Scott home to dinner,and...”John got no further, for Meg cast him off, and clasped her hands with a tragicgesture as she fell into a chair, exclaiming in a tone of mingled indignation,reproach, and dismay...“A man to dinner, and everything in a mess! John Brooke, how could you dosuch a thing?”“Hush, he’s in the garden! I forgot the confounded jelly, but itcan’t be helped now,” said John, surveying the prospect with ananxious eye.“You ought to have sent word, or told me this morning, and you ought tohave remembered how busy I was,” continued Meg petulantly, for eventurtledoves will peck when ruffled.“I didn’t know it this morning, and there was no time to send word,for I met him on the way out. I never thought of asking leave, when you havealways told me to do as I liked. I never tried it before, and hang me if I everdo again!” added John, with an aggrieved air.“I should hope not! Take him away at once. I can’t see him, andthere isn’t any dinner.”“Well, I like that! Where’s the beef and vegetables I sent home,and the pudding you promised?” cried John, rushing to the larder.“I hadn’t time to cook anything. I meant to dine at Mother’s.I’m sorry, but I was so busy,” and Meg’s tears began again.John was a mild man, but he was human, and after a long day’s work tocome home tired, hungry, and hopeful, to find a chaotic house, an empty table,and a cross wife was not exactly conducive to repose of mind or manner. Herestrained himself however, and the little squall would have blown over, butfor one unlucky word.“It’s a scrape, I acknowledge, but if you will lend a hand,we’ll pull through and have a good time yet. Don’t cry, dear, butjust exert yourself a bit, and fix us up something to eat. We’re both ashungry as hunters, so we shan’t mind what it is. Give us the cold meat,and bread and cheese. We won’t ask for jelly.”He meant it to be a good-natured joke, but that one word sealed his fate. Megthought it was too cruel to hint about her sad failure, and the last atom ofpatience vanished as he spoke.“You must get yourself out of the scrape as you can. I’m too usedup to ‘exert’ myself for anyone. It’s like a man to propose abone and vulgar bread and cheese for company. I won’t have anything ofthe sort in my house. Take that Scott up to Mother’s, and tell himI’m away, sick, dead, anything. I won’t see him, and you two canlaugh at me and my jelly as much as you like. You won’t have anythingelse here.” and having delivered her defiance all on one breath, Meg castaway her pinafore and precipitately left the field to bemoan herself in her ownroom.What those two creatures did in her absence, she never knew, but Mr. Scott wasnot taken ‘up to Mother’s’, and when Meg descended, afterthey had strolled away together, she found traces of a promiscuous lunch whichfilled her with horror. Lotty reported that they had eaten “a much, andgreatly laughed, and the master bid her throw away all the sweet stuff, andhide the pots.”Meg longed to go and tell Mother, but a sense of shame at her ownshort-comings, of loyalty to John, “who might be cruel, but nobody shouldknow it,” restrained her, and after a summary cleaning up, she dressedherself prettily, and sat down to wait for John to come and be forgiven.Unfortunately, John didn’t come, not seeing the matter in that light. Hehad carried it off as a good joke with Scott, excused his little wife as wellas he could, and played the host so hospitably that his friend enjoyed theimpromptu dinner, and promised to come again, but John was angry, though he didnot show it, he felt that Meg had deserted him in his hour of need. “Itwasn’t fair to tell a man to bring folks home any time, with perfectfreedom, and when he took you at your word, to flame up and blame him, andleave him in the lurch, to be laughed at or pitied. No, by George, itwasn’t! And Meg must know it.”He had fumed inwardly during the feast, but when the flurry was over and hestrolled home after seeing Scott off, a milder mood came over him. “Poorlittle thing! It was hard upon her when she tried so heartily to please me. Shewas wrong, of course, but then she was young. I must be patient and teachher.” He hoped she had not gone home—he hated gossip andinterference. For a minute he was ruffled again at the mere thought of it, andthen the fear that Meg would cry herself sick softened his heart, and sent himon at a quicker pace, resolving to be calm and kind, but firm, quite firm, andshow her where she had failed in her duty to her spouse.Meg likewise resolved to be ‘calm and kind, but firm’, and show himhis duty. She longed to run to meet him, and beg pardon, and be kissed andcomforted, as she was sure of being, but, of course, she did nothing of thesort, and when she saw John coming, began to hum quite naturally, as she rockedand sewed, like a lady of leisure in her best parlor.John was a little disappointed not to find a tender Niobe, but feeling that hisdignity demanded the first apology, he made none, only came leisurely in andlaid himself upon the sofa with the singularly relevant remark, “We aregoing to have a new moon, my dear.”“I’ve no objection,” was Meg’s equally soothing remark.A few other topics of general interest were introduced by Mr. Brooke andwet-blanketed by Mrs. Brooke, and conversation languished. John went to onewindow, unfolded his paper, and wrapped himself in it, figuratively speaking.Meg went to the other window, and sewed as if new rosettes for slippers wereamong the necessaries of life. Neither spoke. Both looked quite ‘calm andfirm’, and both felt desperately uncomfortable.“Oh, dear,” thought Meg, “married life is very trying, anddoes need infinite patience as well as love, as Mother says.” The word‘Mother’ suggested other maternal counsels given long ago, andreceived with unbelieving protests.“John is a good man, but he has his faults, and you must learn to see andbear with them, remembering your own. He is very decided, but never will beobstinate, if you reason kindly, not oppose impatiently. He is very accurate,and particular about the truth—a good trait, though you call him‘fussy’. Never deceive him by look or word, Meg, and he will giveyou the confidence you deserve, the support you need. He has a temper, not likeours—one flash and then all over—but the white, still anger that isseldom stirred, but once kindled is hard to quench. Be careful, be verycareful, not to wake his anger against yourself, for peace and happiness dependon keeping his respect. Watch yourself, be the first to ask pardon if you botherr, and guard against the little piques, misunderstandings, and hasty wordsthat often pave the way for bitter sorrow and regret.”These words came back to Meg, as she sat sewing in the sunset, especially thelast. This was the first serious disagreement, her own hasty speeches soundedboth silly and unkind, as she recalled them, her own anger looked childish now,and thoughts of poor John coming home to such a scene quite melted her heart.She glanced at him with tears in her eyes, but he did not see them. She putdown her work and got up, thinking, “I will be the first to say,‘Forgive me’”, but he did not seem to hear her. She went veryslowly across the room, for pride was hard to swallow, and stood by him, but hedid not turn his head. For a minute she felt as if she really couldn’t doit, then came the thought, “This is the beginning. I’ll do my part,and have nothing to reproach myself with,” and stooping down, she softlykissed her husband on the forehead. Of course that settled it. The penitentkiss was better than a world of words, and John had her on his knee in aminute, saying tenderly...“It was too bad to laugh at the poor little jelly pots. Forgive me, dear.I never will again!”But he did, oh bless you, yes, hundreds of times, and so did Meg, bothdeclaring that it was the sweetest jelly they ever made, for family peace waspreserved in that little family jar.After this, Meg had Mr. Scott to dinner by special invitation, and served himup a pleasant feast without a cooked wife for the first course, on whichoccasion she was so gay and gracious, and made everything go off so charmingly,that Mr. Scott told John he was a lucky fellow, and shook his head over thehardships of bachelorhood all the way home.In the autumn, new trials and experiences came to Meg. Sallie Moffat renewedher friendship, was always running out for a dish of gossip at the littlehouse, or inviting ‘that poor dear’ to come in and spend the day atthe big house. It was pleasant, for in dull weather Meg often felt lonely. Allwere busy at home, John absent till night, and nothing to do but sew, or read,or potter about. So it naturally fell out that Meg got into the way of gaddingand gossiping with her friend. Seeing Sallie’s pretty things made herlong for such, and pity herself because she had not got them. Sallie was verykind, and often offered her the coveted trifles, but Meg declined them, knowingthat John wouldn’t like it, and then this foolish little woman went anddid what John disliked even worse.She knew her husband’s income, and she loved to feel that he trusted her,not only with his happiness, but what some men seem to value more—hismoney. She knew where it was, was free to take what she liked, and all he askedwas that she should keep account of every penny, pay bills once a month, andremember that she was a poor man’s wife. Till now she had done well, beenprudent and exact, kept her little account books neatly, and showed them to himmonthly without fear. But that autumn the serpent got into Meg’sparadise, and tempted her like many a modern Eve, not with apples, but withdress. Meg didn’t like to be pitied and made to feel poor. It irritatedher, but she was ashamed to confess it, and now and then she tried to consoleherself by buying something pretty, so that Sallie needn’t think she hadto economize. She always felt wicked after it, for the pretty things wereseldom necessaries, but then they cost so little, it wasn’t worthworrying about, so the trifles increased unconsciously, and in the shoppingexcursions she was no longer a passive looker-on.But the trifles cost more than one would imagine, and when she cast up heraccounts at the end of the month the sum total rather scared her. John was busythat month and left the bills to her, the next month he was absent, but thethird he had a grand quarterly settling up, and Meg never forgot it. A few daysbefore she had done a dreadful thing, and it weighed upon her conscience.Sallie had been buying silks, and Meg longed for a new one, just a handsomelight one for parties, her black silk was so common, and thin things forevening wear were only proper for girls. Aunt March usually gave the sisters apresent of twenty-five dollars apiece at New Year’s. That was only amonth to wait, and here was a lovely violet silk going at a bargain, and shehad the money, if she only dared to take it. John always said what was his washers, but would he think it right to spend not only the prospectivefive-and-twenty, but another five-and-twenty out of the household fund? Thatwas the question. Sallie had urged her to do it, had offered to lend the money,and with the best intentions in life had tempted Meg beyond her strength. In anevil moment the shopman held up the lovely, shimmering folds, and said,“A bargain, I assure, you, ma’am.” She answered,“I’ll take it,” and it was cut off and paid for, and Salliehad exulted, and she had laughed as if it were a thing of no consequence, anddriven away, feeling as if she had stolen something, and the police were afterher.When she got home, she tried to assuage the pangs of remorse by spreading forththe lovely silk, but it looked less silvery now, didn’t become her, afterall, and the words ‘fifty dollars’ seemed stamped like a patterndown each breadth. She put it away, but it haunted her, not delightfully as anew dress should, but dreadfully like the ghost of a folly that was not easilylaid. When John got out his books that night, Meg’s heart sank, and forthe first time in her married life, she was afraid of her husband. The kind,brown eyes looked as if they could be stern, and though he was unusually merry,she fancied he had found her out, but didn’t mean to let her know it. Thehouse bills were all paid, the books all in order. John had praised her, andwas undoing the old pocketbook which they called the ‘bank’, whenMeg, knowing that it was quite empty, stopped his hand, saying nervously...“You haven’t seen my private expense book yet.”John never asked to see it, but she always insisted on his doing so, and usedto enjoy his masculine amazement at the queer things women wanted, and made himguess what piping was, demand fiercely the meaning of a hug-me-tight, or wonderhow a little thing composed of three rosebuds, a bit of velvet, and a pair ofstrings, could possibly be a bonnet, and cost six dollars. That night he lookedas if he would like the fun of quizzing her figures and pretending to behorrified at her extravagance, as he often did, being particularly proud of hisprudent wife.The little book was brought slowly out and laid down before him. Meg got behindhis chair under pretense of smoothing the wrinkles out of his tired forehead,and standing there, she said, with her panic increasing with every word...“John, dear, I’m ashamed to show you my book, for I’ve reallybeen dreadfully extravagant lately. I go about so much I must have things, youknow, and Sallie advised my getting it, so I did, and my New Year’s moneywill partly pay for it, but I was sorry after I had done it, for I knewyou’d think it wrong in me.”John laughed, and drew her round beside him, saying goodhumoredly,“Don’t go and hide. I won’t beat you if you have got a pairof killing boots. I’m rather proud of my wife’s feet, anddon’t mind if she does pay eight or nine dollars for her boots, if theyare good ones.”That had been one of her last ‘trifles’, and John’s eye hadfallen on it as he spoke. “Oh, what will he say when he comes to thatawful fifty dollars!” thought Meg, with a shiver.“It’s worse than boots, it’s a silk dress,” she said,with the calmness of desperation, for she wanted the worst over.“Well, dear, what is the ‘dem’d total’, as Mr.Mantalini says?”That didn’t sound like John, and she knew he was looking up at her withthe straightforward look that she had always been ready to meet and answer withone as frank till now. She turned the page and her head at the same time,pointing to the sum which would have been bad enough without the fifty, butwhich was appalling to her with that added. For a minute the room was verystill, then John said slowly—but she could feel it cost him an effort toexpress no displeasure—. . .“Well, I don’t know that fifty is much for a dress, with all thefurbelows and notions you have to have to finish it off these days.”“It isn’t made or trimmed,” sighed Meg, faintly, for a suddenrecollection of the cost still to be incurred quite overwhelmed her.“Twenty-five yards of silk seems a good deal to cover one small woman,but I’ve no doubt my wife will look as fine as Ned Moffat’s whenshe gets it on,” said John dryly.“I know you are angry, John, but I can’t help it. I don’tmean to waste your money, and I didn’t think those little things wouldcount up so. I can’t resist them when I see Sallie buying all she wants,and pitying me because I don’t. I try to be contented, but it is hard,and I’m tired of being poor.”The last words were spoken so low she thought he did not hear them, but he did,and they wounded him deeply, for he had denied himself many pleasures forMeg’s sake. She could have bitten her tongue out the minute she had saidit, for John pushed the books away and got up, saying with a little quiver inhis voice, “I was afraid of this. I do my best, Meg.” If he hadscolded her, or even shaken her, it would not have broken her heart like thosefew words. She ran to him and held him close, crying, with repentant tears,“Oh, John, my dear, kind, hard-working boy. I didn’t mean it! Itwas so wicked, so untrue and ungrateful, how could I say it! Oh, how could Isay it!”He was very kind, forgave her readily, and did not utter one reproach, but Megknew that she had done and said a thing which would not be forgotten soon,although he might never allude to it again. She had promised to love him forbetter or worse, and then she, his wife, had reproached him with his poverty,after spending his earnings recklessly. It was dreadful, and the worst of itwas John went on so quietly afterward, just as if nothing had happened, exceptthat he stayed in town later, and worked at night when she had gone to cryherself to sleep. A week of remorse nearly made Meg sick, and the discoverythat John had countermanded the order for his new greatcoat reduced her to astate of despair which was pathetic to behold. He had simply said, in answer toher surprised inquiries as to the change, “I can’t afford it, mydear.”Meg said no more, but a few minutes after he found her in the hall with herface buried in the old greatcoat, crying as if her heart would break.They had a long talk that night, and Meg learned to love her husband better forhis poverty, because it seemed to have made a man of him, given him thestrength and courage to fight his own way, and taught him a tender patiencewith which to bear and comfort the natural longings and failures of those heloved.Next day she put her pride in her pocket, went to Sallie, told the truth, andasked her to buy the silk as a favor. The good-natured Mrs. Moffat willinglydid so, and had the delicacy not to make her a present of it immediatelyafterward. Then Meg ordered home the greatcoat, and when John arrived, she putit on, and asked him how he liked her new silk gown. One can imagine whatanswer he made, how he received his present, and what a blissful state ofthings ensued. John came home early, Meg gadded no more, and that greatcoat wasput on in the morning by a very happy husband, and taken off at night by a mostdevoted little wife. So the year rolled round, and at midsummer there came toMeg a new experience, the deepest and tenderest of a woman’s life.Laurie came sneaking into the kitchen of the Dovecote one Saturday, with anexcited face, and was received with the clash of cymbals, for Hannah clappedher hands with a saucepan in one and the cover in the other.“How’s the little mamma? Where is everybody? Why didn’t youtell me before I came home?” began Laurie in a loud whisper.“Happy as a queen, the dear! Every soul of ’em is upstairs aworshipin’. We didn’t want no hurrycanes round. Now you go into theparlor, and I’ll send ’em down to you,” with which somewhatinvolved reply Hannah vanished, chuckling ecstatically.Presently Jo appeared, proudly bearing a flannel bundle laid forth upon a largepillow. Jo’s face was very sober, but her eyes twinkled, and there was anodd sound in her voice of repressed emotion of some sort.“Shut your eyes and hold out your arms,” she said invitingly.Laurie backed precipitately into a corner, and put his hands behind him with animploring gesture. “No, thank you. I’d rather not. I shall drop itor smash it, as sure as fate.”“Then you shan’t see your nevvy,” said Jo decidedly, turningas if to go.“I will, I will! Only you must be responsible for damages.” andobeying orders, Laurie heroically shut his eyes while something was put intohis arms. A peal of laughter from Jo, Amy, Mrs. March, Hannah, and John causedhim to open them the next minute, to find himself invested with two babiesinstead of one.No wonder they laughed, for the expression of his face was droll enough toconvulse a Quaker, as he stood and stared wildly from the unconscious innocentsto the hilarious spectators with such dismay that Jo sat down on the floor andscreamed.“Twins, by Jupiter!” was all he said for a minute, then turning tothe women with an appealing look that was comically piteous, he added,“Take ’em quick, somebody! I’m going to laugh, and I shalldrop ’em.”Jo rescued his babies, and marched up and down, with one on each arm, as ifalready initiated into the mysteries of babytending, while Laurie laughed tillthe tears ran down his cheeks.“It’s the best joke of the season, isn’t it? I wouldn’thave told you, for I set my heart on surprising you, and I flatter myselfI’ve done it,” said Jo, when she got her breath.“I never was more staggered in my life. Isn’t it fun? Are theyboys? What are you going to name them? Let’s have another look. Hold meup, Jo, for upon my life it’s one too many for me,” returnedLaurie, regarding the infants with the air of a big, benevolent Newfoundlandlooking at a pair of infantile kittens.“Boy and girl. Aren’t they beauties?” said the proud papa,beaming upon the little red squirmers as if they were unfledged angels.“Most remarkable children I ever saw. Which is which?” and Lauriebent like a well-sweep to examine the prodigies.“Amy put a blue ribbon on the boy and a pink on the girl, French fashion,so you can always tell. Besides, one has blue eyes and one brown. Kiss them,Uncle Teddy,” said wicked Jo.“I’m afraid they mightn’t like it,” began Laurie, withunusual timidity in such matters.“Of course they will, they are used to it now. Do it this minute,sir!” commanded Jo, fearing he might propose a proxy.Laurie screwed up his face and obeyed with a gingerly peck at each little cheekthat produced another laugh, and made the babies squeal.“There, I knew they didn’t like it! That’s the boy, see himkick, he hits out with his fists like a good one. Now then, young Brooke, pitchinto a man of your own size, will you?” cried Laurie, delighted with apoke in the face from a tiny fist, flapping aimlessly about.“He’s to be named John Laurence, and the girl Margaret, aftermother and grandmother. We shall call her Daisey, so as not to have two Megs,and I suppose the mannie will be Jack, unless we find a better name,”said Amy, with aunt-like interest.“Name him Demijohn, and call him Demi for short,” said Laurie.“Daisy and Demi, just the thing! I knew Teddy would do it,” criedJo clapping her hands.Teddy certainly had done it that time, for the babies were ‘Daisy’and ‘Demi’ to the end of the chapter.CHAPTER TWENTY-NINECALLS“Come, Jo, it’s time.”“For what?”“You don’t mean to say you have forgotten that you promised to makehalf a dozen calls with me today?”“I’ve done a good many rash and foolish things in my life, but Idon’t think I ever was mad enough to say I’d make six calls in oneday, when a single one upsets me for a week.”“Yes, you did, it was a bargain between us. I was to finish the crayon ofBeth for you, and you were to go properly with me, and return ourneighbors’ visits.”“If it was fair, that was in the bond, and I stand to the letter of mybond, Shylock. There is a pile of clouds in the east, it’s not fair, andI don’t go.”“Now, that’s shirking. It’s a lovely day, no prospect ofrain, and you pride yourself on keeping promises, so be honorable, come and doyour duty, and then be at peace for another six months.”At that minute Jo was particularly absorbed in dressmaking, for she wasmantua-maker general to the family, and took especial credit to herself becauseshe could use a needle as well as a pen. It was very provoking to be arrestedin the act of a first trying-on, and ordered out to make calls in her bestarray on a warm July day. She hated calls of the formal sort, and never madeany till Amy compelled her with a bargain, bribe, or promise. In the presentinstance there was no escape, and having clashed her scissors rebelliously,while protesting that she smelled thunder, she gave in, put away her work, andtaking up her hat and gloves with an air of resignation, told Amy the victimwas ready.“Jo March, you are perverse enough to provoke a saint! You don’tintend to make calls in that state, I hope,” cried Amy, surveying herwith amazement.“Why not? I’m neat and cool and comfortable, quite proper for adusty walk on a warm day. If people care more for my clothes than they do forme, I don’t wish to see them. You can dress for both, and be as elegantas you please. It pays for you to be fine. It doesn’t for me, andfurbelows only worry me.”“Oh, dear!” sighed Amy, “now she’s in a contrary fit,and will drive me distracted before I can get her properly ready. I’msure it’s no pleasure to me to go today, but it’s a debt we owesociety, and there’s no one to pay it but you and me. I’ll doanything for you, Jo, if you’ll only dress yourself nicely, and come andhelp me do the civil. You can talk so well, look so aristocratic in your bestthings, and behave so beautifully, if you try, that I’m proud of you.I’m afraid to go alone, do come and take care of me.”“You’re an artful little puss to flatter and wheedle your cross oldsister in that way. The idea of my being aristocratic and well-bred, and yourbeing afraid to go anywhere alone! I don’t know which is the most absurd.Well, I’ll go if I must, and do my best. You shall be commander of theexpedition, and I’ll obey blindly, will that satisfy you?” said Jo,with a sudden change from perversity to lamblike submission.“You’re a perfect cherub! Now put on all your best things, andI’ll tell you how to behave at each place, so that you will make a goodimpression. I want people to like you, and they would if you’d only tryto be a little more agreeable. Do your hair the pretty way, and put the pinkrose in your bonnet. It’s becoming, and you look too sober in your plainsuit. Take your light gloves and the embroidered handkerchief. We’ll stopat Meg’s, and borrow her white sunshade, and then you can have mydove-colored one.”While Amy dressed, she issued her orders, and Jo obeyed them, not withoutentering her protest, however, for she sighed as she rustled into her neworgandie, frowned darkly at herself as she tied her bonnet strings in anirreproachable bow, wrestled viciously with pins as she put on her collar,wrinkled up her features generally as she shook out the handkerchief, whoseembroidery was as irritating to her nose as the present mission was to herfeelings, and when she had squeezed her hands into tight gloves with threebuttons and a tassel, as the last touch of elegance, she turned to Amy with animbecile expression of countenance, saying meekly...“I’m perfectly miserable, but if you consider me presentable, I diehappy.”“You’re highly satisfactory. Turn slowly round, and let me get acareful view.” Jo revolved, and Amy gave a touch here and there, thenfell back, with her head on one side, observing graciously, “Yes,you’ll do. Your head is all I could ask, for that white bonnet with therose is quite ravishing. Hold back your shoulders, and carry your hands easily,no matter if your gloves do pinch. There’s one thing you can do well, Jo,that is, wear a shawl. I can’t, but it’s very nice to see you, andI’m so glad Aunt March gave you that lovely one. It’s simple, buthandsome, and those folds over the arm are really artistic. Is the point of mymantle in the middle, and have I looped my dress evenly? I like to show myboots, for my feet are pretty, though my nose isn’t.”“You are a thing of beauty and a joy forever,” said Jo, lookingthrough her hand with the air of a connoisseur at the blue feather against thegolden hair. “Am I to drag my best dress through the dust, or loop it up,please, ma’am?”“Hold it up when you walk, but drop it in the house. The sweeping stylesuits you best, and you must learn to trail your skirts gracefully. Youhaven’t half buttoned one cuff, do it at once. You’ll never lookfinished if you are not careful about the little details, for they make up thepleasing whole.”Jo sighed, and proceeded to burst the buttons off her glove, in doing up hercuff, but at last both were ready, and sailed away, looking as ‘pretty aspicters’, Hannah said, as she hung out of the upper window to watch them.“Now, Jo dear, the Chesters consider themselves very elegant people, so Iwant you to put on your best deportment. Don’t make any of your abruptremarks, or do anything odd, will you? Just be calm, cool, and quiet,that’s safe and ladylike, and you can easily do it for fifteenminutes,” said Amy, as they approached the first place, having borrowedthe white parasol and been inspected by Meg, with a baby on each arm.“Let me see. ‘Calm, cool, and quiet’, yes, I think I canpromise that. I’ve played the part of a prim young lady on the stage, andI’ll try it off. My powers are great, as you shall see, so be easy inyour mind, my child.”Amy looked relieved, but naughty Jo took her at her word, for during the firstcall she sat with every limb gracefully composed, every fold correctly draped,calm as a summer sea, cool as a snowbank, and as silent as the sphinx. In vainMrs. Chester alluded to her ‘charming novel’, and the MissesChester introduced parties, picnics, the opera, and the fashions. Each and allwere answered by a smile, a bow, and a demure “Yes” or“No” with the chill on. In vain Amy telegraphed the word‘talk’, tried to draw her out, and administered covert pokes withher foot. Jo sat as if blandly unconscious of it all, with deportment likeMaud’s face, ‘icily regular, splendidly null’.“What a haughty, uninteresting creature that oldest Miss March is!”was the unfortunately audible remark of one of the ladies, as the door closedupon their guests. Jo laughed noiselessly all through the hall, but Amy lookeddisgusted at the failure of her instructions, and very naturally laid the blameupon Jo.“How could you mistake me so? I merely meant you to be properly dignifiedand composed, and you made yourself a perfect stock and stone. Try to besociable at the Lambs’. Gossip as other girls do, and be interested indress and flirtations and whatever nonsense comes up. They move in the bestsociety, are valuable persons for us to know, and I wouldn’t fail to makea good impression there for anything.”“I’ll be agreeable. I’ll gossip and giggle, and have horrorsand raptures over any trifle you like. I rather enjoy this, and now I’llimitate what is called ‘a charming girl’. I can do it, for I haveMay Chester as a model, and I’ll improve upon her. See if the Lambsdon’t say, ‘What a lively, nice creature that Jo March is!”Amy felt anxious, as well she might, for when Jo turned freakish there was noknowing where she would stop. Amy’s face was a study when she saw hersister skim into the next drawing room, kiss all the young ladies witheffusion, beam graciously upon the young gentlemen, and join in the chat with aspirit which amazed the beholder. Amy was taken possession of by Mrs. Lamb,with whom she was a favorite, and forced to hear a long account ofLucretia’s last attack, while three delightful young gentlemen hoverednear, waiting for a pause when they might rush in and rescue her. So situated,she was powerless to check Jo, who seemed possessed by a spirit of mischief,and talked away as volubly as the lady. A knot of heads gathered about her, andAmy strained her ears to hear what was going on, for broken sentences filledher with curiosity, and frequent peals of laughter made her wild to share thefun. One may imagine her suffering on overhearing fragments of this sort ofconversation.“She rides splendidly. Who taught her?”“No one. She used to practice mounting, holding the reins, and sittingstraight on an old saddle in a tree. Now she rides anything, for shedoesn’t know what fear is, and the stableman lets her have horses cheapbecause she trains them to carry ladies so well. She has such a passion for it,I often tell her if everything else fails, she can be a horsebreaker, and gether living so.”At this awful speech Amy contained herself with difficulty, for the impressionwas being given that she was rather a fast young lady, which was her especialaversion. But what could she do? For the old lady was in the middle of herstory, and long before it was done, Jo was off again, making more drollrevelations and committing still more fearful blunders.“Yes, Amy was in despair that day, for all the good beasts were gone, andof three left, one was lame, one blind, and the other so balky that you had toput dirt in his mouth before he would start. Nice animal for a pleasure party,wasn’t it?”“Which did she choose?” asked one of the laughing gentlemen, whoenjoyed the subject.“None of them. She heard of a young horse at the farm house over theriver, and though a lady had never ridden him, she resolved to try, because hewas handsome and spirited. Her struggles were really pathetic. There was no oneto bring the horse to the saddle, so she took the saddle to the horse. My dearcreature, she actually rowed it over the river, put it on her head, and marchedup to the barn to the utter amazement of the old man!”“Did she ride the horse?”“Of course she did, and had a capital time. I expected to see her broughthome in fragments, but she managed him perfectly, and was the life of theparty.”“Well, I call that plucky!” and young Mr. Lamb turned an approvingglance upon Amy, wondering what his mother could be saying to make the girllook so red and uncomfortable.She was still redder and more uncomfortable a moment after, when a sudden turnin the conversation introduced the subject of dress. One of the young ladiesasked Jo where she got the pretty drab hat she wore to the picnic and stupidJo, instead of mentioning the place where it was bought two years ago, mustneeds answer with unnecessary frankness, “Oh, Amy painted it. Youcan’t buy those soft shades, so we paint ours any color we like.It’s a great comfort to have an artistic sister.”“Isn’t that an original idea?” cried Miss Lamb, who found Jogreat fun.“That’s nothing compared to some of her brilliant performances.There’s nothing the child can’t do. Why, she wanted a pair of blueboots for Sallie’s party, so she just painted her soiled white ones theloveliest shade of sky blue you ever saw, and they looked exactly likesatin,” added Jo, with an air of pride in her sister’saccomplishments that exasperated Amy till she felt that it would be a relief tothrow her cardcase at her.“We read a story of yours the other day, and enjoyed it very much,”observed the elder Miss Lamb, wishing to compliment the literary lady, who didnot look the character just then, it must be confessed.Any mention of her ‘works’ always had a bad effect upon Jo, whoeither grew rigid and looked offended, or changed the subject with a brusqueremark, as now. “Sorry you could find nothing better to read. I writethat rubbish because it sells, and ordinary people like it. Are you going toNew York this winter?”As Miss Lamb had ‘enjoyed’ the story, this speech was not exactlygrateful or complimentary. The minute it was made Jo saw her mistake, butfearing to make the matter worse, suddenly remembered that it was for her tomake the first move toward departure, and did so with an abruptness that leftthree people with half-finished sentences in their mouths.“Amy, we must go. Good-by, dear, do come and see us. We are pining for avisit. I don’t dare to ask you, Mr. Lamb, but if you should come, Idon’t think I shall have the heart to send you away.”Jo said this with such a droll imitation of May Chester’s gushing stylethat Amy got out of the room as rapidly as possible, feeling a strong desire tolaugh and cry at the same time.“Didn’t I do well?” asked Jo, with a satisfied air as theywalked away.“Nothing could have been worse,” was Amy’s crushing reply.“What possessed you to tell those stories about my saddle, and the hatsand boots, and all the rest of it?”“Why, it’s funny, and amuses people. They know we are poor, soit’s no use pretending that we have grooms, buy three or four hats aseason, and have things as easy and fine as they do.”“You needn’t go and tell them all our little shifts, and expose ourpoverty in that perfectly unnecessary way. You haven’t a bit of properpride, and never will learn when to hold your tongue and when to speak,”said Amy despairingly.Poor Jo looked abashed, and silently chafed the end of her nose with the stiffhandkerchief, as if performing a penance for her misdemeanors.“How shall I behave here?” she asked, as they approached the thirdmansion.“Just as you please. I wash my hands of you,” was Amy’s shortanswer.“Then I’ll enjoy myself. The boys are at home, and we’ll havea comfortable time. Goodness knows I need a little change, for elegance has abad effect upon my constitution,” returned Jo gruffly, being disturbed byher failure to suit.An enthusiastic welcome from three big boys and several pretty childrenspeedily soothed her ruffled feelings, and leaving Amy to entertain the hostessand Mr. Tudor, who happened to be calling likewise, Jo devoted herself to theyoung folks and found the change refreshing. She listened to college storieswith deep interest, caressed pointers and poodles without a murmur, agreedheartily that “Tom Brown was a brick,” regardless of the improperform of praise, and when one lad proposed a visit to his turtle tank, she wentwith an alacrity which caused Mamma to smile upon her, as that motherly ladysettled the cap which was left in a ruinous condition by filial hugs, bearlikebut affectionate, and dearer to her than the most faultless coiffure from thehands of an inspired Frenchwoman.Leaving her sister to her own devices, Amy proceeded to enjoy herself to herheart’s content. Mr. Tudor’s uncle had married an English lady whowas third cousin to a living lord, and Amy regarded the whole family with greatrespect, for in spite of her American birth and breeding, she possessed thatreverence for titles which haunts the best of us—that unacknowledgedloyalty to the early faith in kings which set the most democratic nation underthe sun in ferment at the coming of a royal yellow-haired laddie, some yearsago, and which still has something to do with the love the young country bearsthe old, like that of a big son for an imperious little mother, who held himwhile she could, and let him go with a farewell scolding when he rebelled. Buteven the satisfaction of talking with a distant connection of the Britishnobility did not render Amy forgetful of time, and when the proper number ofminutes had passed, she reluctantly tore herself from this aristocraticsociety, and looked about for Jo, fervently hoping that her incorrigible sisterwould not be found in any position which should bring disgrace upon the name ofMarch.It might have been worse, but Amy considered it bad. For Jo sat on the grass,with an encampment of boys about her, and a dirty-footed dog reposing on theskirt of her state and festival dress, as she related one of Laurie’spranks to her admiring audience. One small child was poking turtles withAmy’s cherished parasol, a second was eating gingerbread over Jo’sbest bonnet, and a third playing ball with her gloves, but all were enjoyingthemselves, and when Jo collected her damaged property to go, her escortaccompanied her, begging her to come again, “It was such fun to hearabout Laurie’s larks.”“Capital boys, aren’t they? I feel quite young and brisk againafter that.” said Jo, strolling along with her hands behind her, partlyfrom habit, partly to conceal the bespattered parasol.“Why do you always avoid Mr. Tudor?” asked Amy, wisely refrainingfrom any comment upon Jo’s dilapidated appearance.“Don’t like him, he puts on airs, snubs his sisters, worries hisfather, and doesn’t speak respectfully of his mother. Laurie says he isfast, and I don’t consider him a desirable acquaintance, so I let himalone.”“You might treat him civilly, at least. You gave him a cool nod, and justnow you bowed and smiled in the politest way to Tommy Chamberlain, whose fatherkeeps a grocery store. If you had just reversed the nod and the bow, it wouldhave been right,” said Amy reprovingly.“No, it wouldn’t,” returned Jo, “I neither like,respect, nor admire Tudor, though his grandfather’s uncle’snephew’s niece was a third cousin to a lord. Tommy is poor and bashfuland good and very clever. I think well of him, and like to show that I do, forhe is a gentleman in spite of the brown paper parcels.”“It’s no use trying to argue with you,” began Amy.“Not the least, my dear,” interrupted Jo, “so let us lookamiable, and drop a card here, as the Kings are evidently out, for whichI’m deeply grateful.”The family cardcase having done its duty the girls walked on, and Jo utteredanother thanksgiving on reaching the fifth house, and being told that the youngladies were engaged.“Now let us go home, and never mind Aunt March today. We can run downthere any time, and it’s really a pity to trail through the dust in ourbest bibs and tuckers, when we are tired and cross.”“Speak for yourself, if you please. Aunt March likes to have us pay herthe compliment of coming in style, and making a formal call. It’s alittle thing to do, but it gives her pleasure, and I don’t believe itwill hurt your things half so much as letting dirty dogs and clumping boysspoil them. Stoop down, and let me take the crumbs off of your bonnet.”“What a good girl you are, Amy!” said Jo, with a repentant glancefrom her own damaged costume to that of her sister, which was fresh andspotless still. “I wish it was as easy for me to do little things toplease people as it is for you. I think of them, but it takes too much time todo them, so I wait for a chance to confer a great favor, and let the small onesslip, but they tell best in the end, I fancy.”Amy smiled and was mollified at once, saying with a maternal air, “Womenshould learn to be agreeable, particularly poor ones, for they have no otherway of repaying the kindnesses they receive. If you’d remember that, andpractice it, you’d be better liked than I am, because there is more ofyou.”“I’m a crotchety old thing, and always shall be, but I’mwilling to own that you are right, only it’s easier for me to risk mylife for a person than to be pleasant to him when I don’t feel like it.It’s a great misfortune to have such strong likes and dislikes,isn’t it?”“It’s a greater not to be able to hide them. I don’t mindsaying that I don’t approve of Tudor any more than you do, but I’mnot called upon to tell him so. Neither are you, and there is no use in makingyourself disagreeable because he is.”“But I think girls ought to show when they disapprove of young men, andhow can they do it except by their manners? Preaching does not do any good, asI know to my sorrow, since I’ve had Teddie to manage. But there are manylittle ways in which I can influence him without a word, and I say we ought todo it to others if we can.”“Teddy is a remarkable boy, and can’t be taken as a sample of otherboys,” said Amy, in a tone of solemn conviction, which would haveconvulsed the ‘remarkable boy’ if he had heard it. “If wewere belles, or women of wealth and position, we might do something, perhaps,but for us to frown at one set of young gentlemen because we don’tapprove of them, and smile upon another set because we do, wouldn’t havea particle of effect, and we should only be considered odd andpuritanical.”“So we are to countenance things and people which we detest, merelybecause we are not belles and millionaires, are we? That’s a nice sort ofmorality.”“I can’t argue about it, I only know that it’s the way of theworld, and people who set themselves against it only get laughed at for theirpains. I don’t like reformers, and I hope you never try to be one.”“I do like them, and I shall be one if I can, for in spite of thelaughing the world would never get on without them. We can’t agree aboutthat, for you belong to the old set, and I to the new. You will get on thebest, but I shall have the liveliest time of it. I should rather enjoy thebrickbats and hooting, I think.”“Well, compose yourself now, and don’t worry Aunt with your newideas.”“I’ll try not to, but I’m always possessed to burst out withsome particularly blunt speech or revolutionary sentiment before her.It’s my doom, and I can’t help it.”They found Aunt Carrol with the old lady, both absorbed in some veryinteresting subject, but they dropped it as the girls came in, with a consciouslook which betrayed that they had been talking about their nieces. Jo was notin a good humor, and the perverse fit returned, but Amy, who had virtuouslydone her duty, kept her temper and pleased everybody, was in a most angelicframe of mind. This amiable spirit was felt at once, and both aunts ‘mydeared’ her affectionately, looking what they afterward saidemphatically, “That child improves every day.”“Are you going to help about the fair, dear?” asked Mrs. Carrol, asAmy sat down beside her with the confiding air elderly people like so well inthe young.“Yes, Aunt. Mrs. Chester asked me if I would, and I offered to tend atable, as I have nothing but my time to give.”“I’m not,” put in Jo decidedly. “I hate to bepatronized, and the Chesters think it’s a great favor to allow us to helpwith their highly connected fair. I wonder you consented, Amy, they only wantyou to work.”“I am willing to work. It’s for the freedmen as well as theChesters, and I think it very kind of them to let me share the labor and thefun. Patronage does not trouble me when it is well meant.”“Quite right and proper. I like your grateful spirit, my dear. It’sa pleasure to help people who appreciate our efforts. Some do not, and that istrying,” observed Aunt March, looking over her spectacles at Jo, who satapart, rocking herself, with a somewhat morose expression.If Jo had only known what a great happiness was wavering in the balance for oneof them, she would have turned dove-like in a minute, but unfortunately, wedon’t have windows in our breasts, and cannot see what goes on in theminds of our friends. Better for us that we cannot as a general thing, but nowand then it would be such a comfort, such a saving of time and temper. By hernext speech, Jo deprived herself of several years of pleasure, and received atimely lesson in the art of holding her tongue.“I don’t like favors, they oppress and make me feel like a slave.I’d rather do everything for myself, and be perfectly independent.”“Ahem!” coughed Aunt Carrol softly, with a look at Aunt March.“I told you so,” said Aunt March, with a decided nod to AuntCarrol.Mercifully unconscious of what she had done, Jo sat with her nose in the air,and a revolutionary aspect which was anything but inviting.“Do you speak French, dear?” asked Mrs. Carrol, laying a hand onAmy’s.“Pretty well, thanks to Aunt March, who lets Esther talk to me as oftenas I like,” replied Amy, with a grateful look, which caused the old ladyto smile affably.“How are you about languages?” asked Mrs. Carrol of Jo.“Don’t know a word. I’m very stupid about studying anything,can’t bear French, it’s such a slippery, silly sort oflanguage,” was the brusque reply.Another look passed between the ladies, and Aunt March said to Amy, “Youare quite strong and well now, dear, I believe? Eyes don’t trouble youany more, do they?”“Not at all, thank you, ma’am. I’m very well, and mean to dogreat things next winter, so that I may be ready for Rome, whenever that joyfultime arrives.”“Good girl! You deserve to go, and I’m sure you will someday,” said Aunt March, with an approving pat on the head, as Amy pickedup her ball for her.Crosspatch, draw the latch,Sit by the fire and spin,squalled Polly, bending down from his perch on the back of her chair to peepinto Jo’s face, with such a comical air of impertinent inquiry that itwas impossible to help laughing.“Most observing bird,” said the old lady.“Come and take a walk, my dear?” cried Polly, hopping toward thechina closet, with a look suggestive of a lump of sugar.“Thank you, I will. Come Amy.” and Jo brought the visit to an end,feeling more strongly than ever that calls did have a bad effect upon herconstitution. She shook hands in a gentlemanly manner, but Amy kissed both theaunts, and the girls departed, leaving behind them the impression of shadow andsunshine, which impression caused Aunt March to say, as they vanished...“You’d better do it, Mary. I’ll supply the money.” andAunt Carrol to reply decidedly, “I certainly will, if her father andmother consent.”CHAPTER THIRTYCONSEQUENCESMrs. Chester’s fair was so very elegant and select that it was considereda great honor by the young ladies of the neighborhood to be invited to take atable, and everyone was much interested in the matter. Amy was asked, but Jowas not, which was fortunate for all parties, as her elbows were decidedlyakimbo at this period of her life, and it took a good many hard knocks to teachher how to get on easily. The ‘haughty, uninteresting creature’ waslet severely alone, but Amy’s talent and taste were duly complimented bythe offer of the art table, and she exerted herself to prepare and secureappropriate and valuable contributions to it.Everything went on smoothly till the day before the fair opened, then thereoccurred one of the little skirmishes which it is almost impossible to avoid,when some five-and-twenty women, old and young, with all their private piquesand prejudices, try to work together.May Chester was rather jealous of Amy because the latter was a greater favoritethan herself, and just at this time several trifling circumstances occurred toincrease the feeling. Amy’s dainty pen-and-ink work entirely eclipsedMay’s painted vases—that was one thorn. Then the all conqueringTudor had danced four times with Amy at a late party and only once withMay—that was thorn number two. But the chief grievance that rankled inher soul, and gave an excuse for her unfriendly conduct, was a rumor which someobliging gossip had whispered to her, that the March girls had made fun of herat the Lambs’. All the blame of this should have fallen upon Jo, for hernaughty imitation had been too lifelike to escape detection, and the frolicsomeLambs had permitted the joke to escape. No hint of this had reached theculprits, however, and Amy’s dismay can be imagined, when, the veryevening before the fair, as she was putting the last touches to her prettytable, Mrs. Chester, who, of course, resented the supposed ridicule of herdaughter, said, in a bland tone, but with a cold look...“I find, dear, that there is some feeling among the young ladies about mygiving this table to anyone but my girls. As this is the most prominent, andsome say the most attractive table of all, and they are the chief getters-up ofthe fair, it is thought best for them to take this place. I’m sorry, butI know you are too sincerely interested in the cause to mind a little personaldisappointment, and you shall have another table if you like.”Mrs. Chester fancied beforehand that it would be easy to deliver this littlespeech, but when the time came, she found it rather difficult to utter itnaturally, with Amy’s unsuspicious eyes looking straight at her full ofsurprise and trouble.Amy felt that there was something behind this, but could not guess what, andsaid quietly, feeling hurt, and showing that she did, “Perhaps you hadrather I took no table at all?”“Now, my dear, don’t have any ill feeling, I beg. It’s merelya matter of expediency, you see, my girls will naturally take the lead, andthis table is considered their proper place. I think it very appropriate toyou, and feel very grateful for your efforts to make it so pretty, but we mustgive up our private wishes, of course, and I will see that you have a goodplace elsewhere. Wouldn’t you like the flower table? The little girlsundertook it, but they are discouraged. You could make a charming thing of it,and the flower table is always attractive you know.”“Especially to gentlemen,” added May, with a look which enlightenedAmy as to one cause of her sudden fall from favor. She colored angrily, buttook no other notice of that girlish sarcasm, and answered with unexpectedamiability...“It shall be as you please, Mrs. Chester. I’ll give up my placehere at once, and attend to the flowers, if you like.”“You can put your own things on your own table, if you prefer,”began May, feeling a little conscience-stricken, as she looked at the prettyracks, the painted shells, and quaint illuminations Amy had so carefully madeand so gracefully arranged. She meant it kindly, but Amy mistook her meaning,and said quickly...“Oh, certainly, if they are in your way,” and sweeping hercontributions into her apron, pell-mell, she walked off, feeling that herselfand her works of art had been insulted past forgiveness.“Now she’s mad. Oh, dear, I wish I hadn’t asked you to speak,Mama,” said May, looking disconsolately at the empty spaces on her table.“Girls’ quarrels are soon over,” returned her mother, feelinga trifle ashamed of her own part in this one, as well she might.The little girls hailed Amy and her treasures with delight, which cordialreception somewhat soothed her perturbed spirit, and she fell to work,determined to succeed florally, if she could not artistically. But everythingseemed against her. It was late, and she was tired. Everyone was too busy withtheir own affairs to help her, and the little girls were only hindrances, forthe dears fussed and chattered like so many magpies, making a great deal ofconfusion in their artless efforts to preserve the most perfect order. Theevergreen arch wouldn’t stay firm after she got it up, but wiggled andthreatened to tumble down on her head when the hanging baskets were filled. Herbest tile got a splash of water, which left a sepia tear on the Cupid’scheek. She bruised her hands with hammering, and got cold working in a draft,which last affliction filled her with apprehensions for the morrow. Any girlreader who has suffered like afflictions will sympathize with poor Amy and wishher well through her task.There was great indignation at home when she told her story that evening. Hermother said it was a shame, but told her she had done right. Beth declared shewouldn’t go to the fair at all, and Jo demanded why she didn’t takeall her pretty things and leave those mean people to get on without her.“Because they are mean is no reason why I should be. I hate such things,and though I think I’ve a right to be hurt, I don’t intend to showit. They will feel that more than angry speeches or huffy actions, won’tthey, Marmee?”“That’s the right spirit, my dear. A kiss for a blow is alwaysbest, though it’s not very easy to give it sometimes,” said hermother, with the air of one who had learned the difference between preachingand practicing.In spite of various very natural temptations to resent and retaliate, Amyadhered to her resolution all the next day, bent on conquering her enemy bykindness. She began well, thanks to a silent reminder that came to herunexpectedly, but most opportunely. As she arranged her table that morning,while the little girls were in the anteroom filling the baskets, she took upher pet production, a little book, the antique cover of which her father hadfound among his treasures, and in which on leaves of vellum she had beautifullyilluminated different texts. As she turned the pages rich in dainty deviceswith very pardonable pride, her eye fell upon one verse that made her stop andthink. Framed in a brilliant scrollwork of scarlet, blue and gold, with littlespirits of good will helping one another up and down among the thorns andflowers, were the words, “Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.”“I ought, but I don’t,” thought Amy, as her eye went from thebright page to May’s discontented face behind the big vases, that couldnot hide the vacancies her pretty work had once filled. Amy stood a minute,turning the leaves in her hand, reading on each some sweet rebuke for allheartburnings and uncharitableness of spirit. Many wise and true sermons arepreached us every day by unconscious ministers in street, school, office, orhome. Even a fair table may become a pulpit, if it can offer the good andhelpful words which are never out of season. Amy’s conscience preachedher a little sermon from that text, then and there, and she did what many of usdo not always do, took the sermon to heart, and straightway put it in practice.A group of girls were standing about May’s table, admiring the prettythings, and talking over the change of saleswomen. They dropped their voices,but Amy knew they were speaking of her, hearing one side of the story andjudging accordingly. It was not pleasant, but a better spirit had come overher, and presently a chance offered for proving it. She heard May saysorrowfully...“It’s too bad, for there is no time to make other things, and Idon’t want to fill up with odds and ends. The table was just completethen. Now it’s spoiled.”“I dare say she’d put them back if you asked her,” suggestedsomeone.“How could I after all the fuss?” began May, but she did notfinish, for Amy’s voice came across the hall, saying pleasantly...“You may have them, and welcome, without asking, if you want them. I wasjust thinking I’d offer to put them back, for they belong to your tablerather than mine. Here they are, please take them, and forgive me if I washasty in carrying them away last night.”As she spoke, Amy returned her contribution, with a nod and a smile, andhurried away again, feeling that it was easier to do a friendly thing than itwas to stay and be thanked for it.“Now, I call that lovely of her, don’t you?” cried one girl.May’s answer was inaudible, but another young lady, whose temper wasevidently a little soured by making lemonade, added, with a disagreeable laugh,“Very lovely, for she knew she wouldn’t sell them at her owntable.”Now, that was hard. When we make little sacrifices we like to have themappreciated, at least, and for a minute Amy was sorry she had done it, feelingthat virtue was not always its own reward. But it is, as she presentlydiscovered, for her spirits began to rise, and her table to blossom under herskillful hands, the girls were very kind, and that one little act seemed tohave cleared the atmosphere amazingly.It was a very long day and a hard one for Amy, as she sat behind her table,often quite alone, for the little girls deserted very soon. Few cared to buyflowers in summer, and her bouquets began to droop long before night.The art table was the most attractive in the room. There was a crowd about itall day long, and the tenders were constantly flying to and fro with importantfaces and rattling money boxes. Amy often looked wistfully across, longing tobe there, where she felt at home and happy, instead of in a corner with nothingto do. It might seem no hardship to some of us, but to a pretty, blithe younggirl, it was not only tedious, but very trying, and the thought of Laurie andhis friends made it a real martyrdom.She did not go home till night, and then she looked so pale and quiet that theyknew the day had been a hard one, though she made no complaint, and did noteven tell what she had done. Her mother gave her an extra cordial cup of tea.Beth helped her dress, and made a charming little wreath for her hair, while Joastonished her family by getting herself up with unusual care, and hintingdarkly that the tables were about to be turned.“Don’t do anything rude, pray Jo; I won’t have any fuss made,so let it all pass and behave yourself,” begged Amy, as she departedearly, hoping to find a reinforcement of flowers to refresh her poor littletable.“I merely intend to make myself entrancingly agreeable to every one Iknow, and to keep them in your corner as long as possible. Teddy and his boyswill lend a hand, and we’ll have a good time yet.” returned Jo,leaning over the gate to watch for Laurie. Presently the familiar tramp washeard in the dusk, and she ran out to meet him.“Is that my boy?”“As sure as this is my girl!” and Laurie tucked her hand under hisarm with the air of a man whose every wish was gratified.“Oh, Teddy, such doings!” and Jo told Amy’s wrongs withsisterly zeal.“A flock of our fellows are going to drive over by-and-by, and I’llbe hanged if I don’t make them buy every flower she’s got, and campdown before her table afterward,” said Laurie, espousing her cause withwarmth.“The flowers are not at all nice, Amy says, and the fresh ones may notarrive in time. I don’t wish to be unjust or suspicious, but Ishouldn’t wonder if they never came at all. When people do one mean thingthey are very likely to do another,” observed Jo in a disgusted tone.“Didn’t Hayes give you the best out of our gardens? I told himto.”“I didn’t know that, he forgot, I suppose, and, as your grandpa waspoorly, I didn’t like to worry him by asking, though I did wantsome.”“Now, Jo, how could you think there was any need of asking? They are justas much yours as mine. Don’t we always go halves in everything?”began Laurie, in the tone that always made Jo turn thorny.“Gracious, I hope not! Half of some of your things wouldn’t suit meat all. But we mustn’t stand philandering here. I’ve got to helpAmy, so you go and make yourself splendid, and if you’ll be so very kindas to let Hayes take a few nice flowers up to the Hall, I’ll bless youforever.”“Couldn’t you do it now?” asked Laurie, so suggestively thatJo shut the gate in his face with inhospitable haste, and called through thebars, “Go away, Teddy, I’m busy.”Thanks to the conspirators, the tables were turned that night, for Hayes sentup a wilderness of flowers, with a lovely basket arranged in his best mannerfor a centerpiece. Then the March family turned out en masse, and Jo exertedherself to some purpose, for people not only came, but stayed, laughing at hernonsense, admiring Amy’s taste, and apparently enjoying themselves verymuch. Laurie and his friends gallantly threw themselves into the breach, boughtup the bouquets, encamped before the table, and made that corner the liveliestspot in the room. Amy was in her element now, and out of gratitude, if nothingmore, was as spritely and gracious as possible, coming to the conclusion, aboutthat time, that virtue was its own reward, after all.Jo behaved herself with exemplary propriety, and when Amy was happilysurrounded by her guard of honor, Jo circulated about the Hall, picking upvarious bits of gossip, which enlightened her upon the subject of the Chesterchange of base. She reproached herself for her share of the ill feeling andresolved to exonerate Amy as soon as possible. She also discovered what Amy haddone about the things in the morning, and considered her a model ofmagnanimity. As she passed the art table, she glanced over it for hersister’s things, but saw no sign of them. “Tucked away out ofsight, I dare say,” thought Jo, who could forgive her own wrongs, buthotly resented any insult offered her family.“Good evening, Miss Jo. How does Amy get on?” asked May with aconciliatory air, for she wanted to show that she also could be generous.“She has sold everything she had that was worth selling, and now she isenjoying herself. The flower table is always attractive, you know,‘especially to gentlemen’.” Jo couldn’t resist givingthat little slap, but May took it so meekly she regretted it a minute after,and fell to praising the great vases, which still remained unsold.“Is Amy’s illumination anywhere about? I took a fancy to buy thatfor Father,” said Jo, very anxious to learn the fate of hersister’s work.“Everything of Amy’s sold long ago. I took care that the rightpeople saw them, and they made a nice little sum of money for us,”returned May, who had overcome sundry small temptations, as well as Amy had,that day.Much gratified, Jo rushed back to tell the good news, and Amy looked bothtouched and surprised by the report of May’s word and manner.“Now, gentlemen, I want you to go and do your duty by the other tables asgenerously as you have by mine, especially the art table,” she said,ordering out ‘Teddy’s own’, as the girls called the collegefriends.“‘Charge, Chester, charge!’ is the motto for that table, butdo your duty like men, and you’ll get your money’s worth of art inevery sense of the word,” said the irrepressible Jo, as the devotedphalanx prepared to take the field.“To hear is to obey, but March is fairer far than May,” said littleParker, making a frantic effort to be both witty and tender, and gettingpromptly quenched by Laurie, who said...“Very well, my son, for a small boy!” and walked him off, with apaternal pat on the head.“Buy the vases,” whispered Amy to Laurie, as a final heaping ofcoals of fire on her enemy’s head.To May’s great delight, Mr. Laurence not only bought the vases, butpervaded the hall with one under each arm. The other gentlemen speculated withequal rashness in all sorts of frail trifles, and wandered helplessly aboutafterward, burdened with wax flowers, painted fans, filigree portfolios, andother useful and appropriate purchases.Aunt Carrol was there, heard the story, looked pleased, and said something toMrs. March in a corner, which made the latter lady beam with satisfaction, andwatch Amy with a face full of mingled pride and anxiety, though she did notbetray the cause of her pleasure till several days later.The fair was pronounced a success, and when May bade Amy goodnight, she did notgush as usual, but gave her an affectionate kiss, and a look which said‘forgive and forget’. That satisfied Amy, and when she got home shefound the vases paraded on the parlor chimney piece with a great bouquet ineach. “The reward of merit for a magnanimous March,” as Laurieannounced with a flourish.“You’ve a deal more principle and generosity and nobleness ofcharacter than I ever gave you credit for, Amy. You’ve behaved sweetly,and I respect you with all my heart,” said Jo warmly, as they brushedtheir hair together late that night.“Yes, we all do, and love her for being so ready to forgive. It must havebeen dreadfully hard, after working so long and setting your heart on sellingyour own pretty things. I don’t believe I could have done it as kindly asyou did,” added Beth from her pillow.“Why, girls, you needn’t praise me so. I only did as I’d bedone by. You laugh at me when I say I want to be a lady, but I mean a truegentlewoman in mind and manners, and I try to do it as far as I know how. Ican’t explain exactly, but I want to be above the little meannesses andfollies and faults that spoil so many women. I’m far from it now, but Ido my best, and hope in time to be what Mother is.”Amy spoke earnestly, and Jo said, with a cordial hug, “I understand nowwhat you mean, and I’ll never laugh at you again. You are getting onfaster than you think, and I’ll take lessons of you in true politeness,for you’ve learned the secret, I believe. Try away, deary, you’llget your reward some day, and no one will be more delighted than Ishall.”A week later Amy did get her reward, and poor Jo found it hard to be delighted.A letter came from Aunt Carrol, and Mrs. March’s face was illuminated tosuch a degree when she read it that Jo and Beth, who were with her, demandedwhat the glad tidings were.“Aunt Carrol is going abroad next month, and wants...”“Me to go with her!” burst in Jo, flying out of her chair in anuncontrollable rapture.“No, dear, not you. It’s Amy.”“Oh, Mother! She’s too young, it’s my turn first. I’vewanted it so long. It would do me so much good, and be so altogether splendid.I must go!”“I’m afraid it’s impossible, Jo. Aunt says Amy, decidedly,and it is not for us to dictate when she offers such a favor.”“It’s always so. Amy has all the fun and I have all the work. Itisn’t fair, oh, it isn’t fair!” cried Jo passionately.“I’m afraid it’s partly your own fault, dear. When Aunt spoketo me the other day, she regretted your blunt manners and too independentspirit, and here she writes, as if quoting something you hadsaid—‘I planned at first to ask Jo, but as ‘favors burdenher’, and she ‘hates French’, I think I won’t ventureto invite her. Amy is more docile, will make a good companion for Flo, andreceive gratefully any help the trip may give her.”“Oh, my tongue, my abominable tongue! Why can’t I learn to keep itquiet?” groaned Jo, remembering words which had been her undoing. Whenshe had heard the explanation of the quoted phrases, Mrs. March saidsorrowfully...“I wish you could have gone, but there is no hope of it this time, so tryto bear it cheerfully, and don’t sadden Amy’s pleasure byreproaches or regrets.”“I’ll try,” said Jo, winking hard as she knelt down to pickup the basket she had joyfully upset. “I’ll take a leaf out of herbook, and try not only to seem glad, but to be so, and not grudge her oneminute of happiness. But it won’t be easy, for it is a dreadfuldisappointment,” and poor Jo bedewed the little fat pincushion she heldwith several very bitter tears.“Jo, dear, I’m very selfish, but I couldn’t spare you, andI’m glad you are not going quite yet,” whispered Beth, embracingher, basket and all, with such a clinging touch and loving face that Jo feltcomforted in spite of the sharp regret that made her want to box her own ears,and humbly beg Aunt Carrol to burden her with this favor, and see howgratefully she would bear it.By the time Amy came in, Jo was able to take her part in the family jubilation,not quite as heartily as usual, perhaps, but without repinings at Amy’sgood fortune. The young lady herself received the news as tidings of great joy,went about in a solemn sort of rapture, and began to sort her colors and packher pencils that evening, leaving such trifles as clothes, money, and passportsto those less absorbed in visions of art than herself.“It isn’t a mere pleasure trip to me, girls,” she saidimpressively, as she scraped her best palette. “It will decide my career,for if I have any genius, I shall find it out in Rome, and will do something toprove it.”“Suppose you haven’t?” said Jo, sewing away, with red eyes,at the new collars which were to be handed over to Amy.“Then I shall come home and teach drawing for my living,” repliedthe aspirant for fame, with philosophic composure. But she made a wry face atthe prospect, and scratched away at her palette as if bent on vigorous measuresbefore she gave up her hopes.“No, you won’t. You hate hard work, and you’ll marry somerich man, and come home to sit in the lap of luxury all your days,” saidJo.“Your predictions sometimes come to pass, but I don’t believe thatone will. I’m sure I wish it would, for if I can’t be an artistmyself, I should like to be able to help those who are,” said Amy,smiling, as if the part of Lady Bountiful would suit her better than that of apoor drawing teacher.“Hum!” said Jo, with a sigh. “If you wish it you’llhave it, for your wishes are always granted—mine never.”“Would you like to go?” asked Amy, thoughtfully patting her nosewith her knife.“Rather!”“Well, in a year or two I’ll send for you, and we’ll dig inthe Forum for relics, and carry out all the plans we’ve made so manytimes.”“Thank you. I’ll remind you of your promise when that joyful daycomes, if it ever does,” returned Jo, accepting the vague but magnificentoffer as gratefully as she could.There was not much time for preparation, and the house was in a ferment tillAmy was off. Jo bore up very well till the last flutter of blue ribbonvanished, when she retired to her refuge, the garret, and cried till shecouldn’t cry any more. Amy likewise bore up stoutly till the steamersailed. Then just as the gangway was about to be withdrawn, it suddenly cameover her that a whole ocean was soon to roll between her and those who lovedher best, and she clung to Laurie, the last lingerer, saying with a sob...“Oh, take care of them for me, and if anything should happen...”“I will, dear, I will, and if anything happens, I’ll come andcomfort you,” whispered Laurie, little dreaming that he would be calledupon to keep his word.So Amy sailed away to find the Old World, which is always new and beautiful toyoung eyes, while her father and friend watched her from the shore, ferventlyhoping that none but gentle fortunes would befall the happy-hearted girl, whowaved her hand to them till they could see nothing but the summer sunshinedazzling on the sea.CHAPTER THIRTY-ONEOUR FOREIGN CORRESPONDENTLondonDearest People, Here I really sit at a front window of the Bath Hotel,Piccadilly. It’s not a fashionable place, but Uncle stopped here yearsago, and won’t go anywhere else. However, we don’t mean to staylong, so it’s no great matter. Oh, I can’t begin to tell you how Ienjoy it all! I never can, so I’ll only give you bits out of my notebook,for I’ve done nothing but sketch and scribble since I started.I sent a line from Halifax, when I felt pretty miserable, but after that I goton delightfully, seldom ill, on deck all day, with plenty of pleasant people toamuse me. Everyone was very kind to me, especially the officers. Don’tlaugh, Jo, gentlemen really are very necessary aboard ship, to hold on to, orto wait upon one, and as they have nothing to do, it’s a mercy to makethem useful, otherwise they would smoke themselves to death, I’m afraid.Aunt and Flo were poorly all the way, and liked to be let alone, so when I haddone what I could for them, I went and enjoyed myself. Such walks on deck, suchsunsets, such splendid air and waves! It was almost as exciting as riding afast horse, when we went rushing on so grandly. I wish Beth could have come, itwould have done her so much good. As for Jo, she would have gone up and sat onthe maintop jib, or whatever the high thing is called, made friends with theengineers, and tooted on the captain’s speaking trumpet, she’d havebeen in such a state of rapture.It was all heavenly, but I was glad to see the Irish coast, and found it verylovely, so green and sunny, with brown cabins here and there, ruins on some ofthe hills, and gentlemen’s countryseats in the valleys, with deer feedingin the parks. It was early in the morning, but I didn’t regret getting upto see it, for the bay was full of little boats, the shore so picturesque, anda rosy sky overhead. I never shall forget it.At Queenstown one of my new acquaintances left us, Mr. Lennox, and when I saidsomething about the Lakes of Killarney, he sighed, and sung, with a look atme...“Oh, have you e’er heard of Kate Kearney?She lives on the banks of Killarney;From the glance of her eye,Shun danger and fly,For fatal’s the glance of Kate Kearney.”Wasn’t that nonsensical?We only stopped at Liverpool a few hours. It’s a dirty, noisy place, andI was glad to leave it. Uncle rushed out and bought a pair of dogskin gloves,some ugly, thick shoes, and an umbrella, and got shaved à la muttonchop, the first thing. Then he flattered himself that he looked like a trueBriton, but the first time he had the mud cleaned off his shoes, the littlebootblack knew that an American stood in them, and said, with a grin,“There yer har, sir. I’ve given ’em the latest Yankeeshine.” It amused Uncle immensely. Oh, I must tell you what that absurdLennox did! He got his friend Ward, who came on with us, to order a bouquet forme, and the first thing I saw in my room was a lovely one, with “RobertLennox’s compliments,” on the card. Wasn’t that fun, girls? Ilike traveling.I never shall get to London if I don’t hurry. The trip was like ridingthrough a long picture gallery, full of lovely landscapes. The farmhouses weremy delight, with thatched roofs, ivy up to the eaves, latticed windows, andstout women with rosy children at the doors. The very cattle looked moretranquil than ours, as they stood knee-deep in clover, and the hens had acontented cluck, as if they never got nervous like Yankee biddies. Such perfectcolor I never saw, the grass so green, sky so blue, grain so yellow, woods sodark, I was in a rapture all the way. So was Flo, and we kept bouncing from oneside to the other, trying to see everything while we were whisking along at therate of sixty miles an hour. Aunt was tired and went to sleep, but Uncle readhis guidebook, and wouldn’t be astonished at anything. This is the way wewent on. Amy, flying up—“Oh, that must be Kenilworth, that grayplace among the trees!” Flo, darting to my window—“How sweet!We must go there sometime, won’t we Papa?” Uncle, calmly admiringhis boots—“No, my dear, not unless you want beer, that’s abrewery.”A pause—then Flo cried out, “Bless me, there’s a gallows anda man going up.” “Where, where?” shrieks Amy, staring out attwo tall posts with a crossbeam and some dangling chains. “Acolliery,” remarks Uncle, with a twinkle of the eye. “Here’sa lovely flock of lambs all lying down,” says Amy. “See, Papa,aren’t they pretty?” added Flo sentimentally. “Geese, youngladies,” returns Uncle, in a tone that keeps us quiet till Flo settlesdown to enjoy the Flirtations of Captain Cavendish, and I have thescenery all to myself.Of course it rained when we got to London, and there was nothing to be seen butfog and umbrellas. We rested, unpacked, and shopped a little between theshowers. Aunt Mary got me some new things, for I came off in such a hurry Iwasn’t half ready. A white hat and blue feather, a muslin dress to match,and the loveliest mantle you ever saw. Shopping in Regent Street is perfectlysplendid. Things seem so cheap, nice ribbons only sixpence a yard. I laid in astock, but shall get my gloves in Paris. Doesn’t that sound sort ofelegant and rich?Flo and I, for the fun of it, ordered a hansom cab, while Aunt and Uncle wereout, and went for a drive, though we learned afterward that it wasn’t thething for young ladies to ride in them alone. It was so droll! For when we wereshut in by the wooden apron, the man drove so fast that Flo was frightened, andtold me to stop him, but he was up outside behind somewhere, and Icouldn’t get at him. He didn’t hear me call, nor see me flap myparasol in front, and there we were, quite helpless, rattling away, andwhirling around corners at a breakneck pace. At last, in my despair, I saw alittle door in the roof, and on poking it open, a red eye appeared, and a beeryvoice said...“Now, then, mum?”I gave my order as soberly as I could, and slamming down the door, with an“Aye, aye, mum,” the man made his horse walk, as if going to afuneral. I poked again and said, “A little faster,” then off hewent, helter-skelter as before, and we resigned ourselves to our fate.Today was fair, and we went to Hyde Park, close by, for we are morearistocratic than we look. The Duke of Devonshire lives near. I often see hisfootmen lounging at the back gate, and the Duke of Wellington’s house isnot far off. Such sights as I saw, my dear! It was as good as Punch, for therewere fat dowagers rolling about in their red and yellow coaches, with gorgeousJeameses in silk stockings and velvet coats, up behind, and powdered coachmenin front. Smart maids, with the rosiest children I ever saw, handsome girls,looking half asleep, dandies in queer English hats and lavender kids loungingabout, and tall soldiers, in short red jackets and muffin caps stuck on oneside, looking so funny I longed to sketch them.Rotten Row means ‘Route de Roi’, or the king’s way, but nowit’s more like a riding school than anything else. The horses aresplendid, and the men, especially the grooms, ride well, but the women arestiff, and bounce, which isn’t according to our rules. I longed to showthem a tearing American gallop, for they trotted solemnly up and down, in theirscant habits and high hats, looking like the women in a toy Noah’s Ark.Everyone rides—old men, stout ladies, little children—and the youngfolks do a deal of flirting here, I saw a pair exchange rose buds, forit’s the thing to wear one in the button-hole, and I thought it rather anice little idea.In the P.M. to Westminster Abbey, but don’t expect me to describe it,that’s impossible, so I’ll only say it was sublime! This evening weare going to see Fechter, which will be an appropriate end to the happiest dayof my life.It’s very late, but I can’t let my letter go in the morning withouttelling you what happened last evening. Who do you think came in, as we were attea? Laurie’s English friends, Fred and Frank Vaughn! I was so surprised,for I shouldn’t have known them but for the cards. Both are tall fellowswith whiskers, Fred handsome in the English style, and Frank much better, forhe only limps slightly, and uses no crutches. They had heard from Laurie wherewe were to be, and came to ask us to their house, but Uncle won’t go, sowe shall return the call, and see them as we can. They went to the theater withus, and we did have such a good time, for Frank devoted himself to Flo, andFred and I talked over past, present, and future fun as if we had known eachother all our days. Tell Beth Frank asked for her, and was sorry to hear of herill health. Fred laughed when I spoke of Jo, and sent his ‘respectfulcompliments to the big hat’. Neither of them had forgotten Camp Laurence,or the fun we had there. What ages ago it seems, doesn’t it?Aunt is tapping on the wall for the third time, so I must stop. I really feellike a dissipated London fine lady, writing here so late, with my room full ofpretty things, and my head a jumble of parks, theaters, new gowns, and gallantcreatures who say “Ah!” and twirl their blond mustaches with thetrue English lordliness. I long to see you all, and in spite of my nonsense am,as ever, your loving...AMYPARISDear girls,In my last I told you about our London visit, how kind the Vaughns were, andwhat pleasant parties they made for us. I enjoyed the trips to Hampton Courtand the Kensington Museum more than anything else, for at Hampton I sawRaphael’s cartoons, and at the Museum, rooms full of pictures by Turner,Lawrence, Reynolds, Hogarth, and the other great creatures. The day in RichmondPark was charming, for we had a regular English picnic, and I had more splendidoaks and groups of deer than I could copy, also heard a nightingale, and sawlarks go up. We ‘did’ London to our heart’s content, thanksto Fred and Frank, and were sorry to go away, for though English people areslow to take you in, when they once make up their minds to do it they cannot beoutdone in hospitality, I think. The Vaughns hope to meet us in Rome nextwinter, and I shall be dreadfully disappointed if they don’t, for Graceand I are great friends, and the boys very nice fellows, especially Fred.Well, we were hardly settled here, when he turned up again, saying he had comefor a holiday, and was going to Switzerland. Aunt looked sober at first, but hewas so cool about it she couldn’t say a word. And now we get on nicely,and are very glad he came, for he speaks French like a native, and Idon’t know what we should do without him. Uncle doesn’t know tenwords, and insists on talking English very loud, as if it would make peopleunderstand him. Aunt’s pronunciation is old-fashioned, and Flo and I,though we flattered ourselves that we knew a good deal, find we don’t,and are very grateful to have Fred do the ‘parley vooing’,as Uncle calls it.Such delightful times as we are having! Sight-seeing from morning till night,stopping for nice lunches in the gay cafes, and meeting with all sortsof droll adventures. Rainy days I spend in the Louvre, revelling in pictures.Jo would turn up her naughty nose at some of the finest, because she has nosoul for art, but I have, and I’m cultivating eye and taste as fast as Ican. She would like the relics of great people better, for I’ve seen herNapoleon’s cocked hat and gray coat, his baby’s cradle and his oldtoothbrush, also Marie Antoinette’s little shoe, the ring of Saint Denis,Charlemagne’s sword, and many other interesting things. I’ll talkfor hours about them when I come, but haven’t time to write.The Palais Royale is a heavenly place, so full of bijouterie and lovelythings that I’m nearly distracted because I can’t buy them. Fredwanted to get me some, but of course I didn’t allow it. Then the Bois andChamps Elysees are tres magnifique. I’ve seen the imperial familyseveral times, the emperor an ugly, hard-looking man, the empress pale andpretty, but dressed in bad taste, I thought—purple dress, green hat, andyellow gloves. Little Nap is a handsome boy, who sits chatting to his tutor,and kisses his hand to the people as he passes in his four-horse barouche, withpostilions in red satin jackets and a mounted guard before and behind.We often walk in the Tuileries Gardens, for they are lovely, though the antiqueLuxembourg Gardens suit me better. Pere la Chaise is very curious, for many ofthe tombs are like small rooms, and looking in, one sees a table, with imagesor pictures of the dead, and chairs for the mourners to sit in when they cometo lament. That is so Frenchy.Our rooms are on the Rue de Rivoli, and sitting on the balcony, we look up anddown the long, brilliant street. It is so pleasant that we spend our eveningstalking there when too tired with our day’s work to go out. Fred is veryentertaining, and is altogether the most agreeable young man I everknew—except Laurie, whose manners are more charming. I wish Fred wasdark, for I don’t fancy light men, however, the Vaughns are very rich andcome of an excellent family, so I won’t find fault with their yellowhair, as my own is yellower.Next week we are off to Germany and Switzerland, and as we shall travel fast, Ishall only be able to give you hasty letters. I keep my diary, and try to‘remember correctly and describe clearly all that I see andadmire’, as Father advised. It is good practice for me, and with mysketchbook will give you a better idea of my tour than these scribbles.Adieu, I embrace you tenderly. “Votre Amie.”HEIDELBERGMy dear Mamma,Having a quiet hour before we leave for Berne, I’ll try to tell you whathas happened, for some of it is very important, as you will see.The sail up the Rhine was perfect, and I just sat and enjoyed it with all mymight. Get Father’s old guidebooks and read about it. I haven’twords beautiful enough to describe it. At Coblentz we had a lovely time, forsome students from Bonn, with whom Fred got acquainted on the boat, gave us aserenade. It was a moonlight night, and about one o’clock Flo and I werewaked by the most delicious music under our windows. We flew up, and hid behindthe curtains, but sly peeps showed us Fred and the students singing away downbelow. It was the most romantic thing I ever saw—the river, the bridge ofboats, the great fortress opposite, moonlight everywhere, and music fit to melta heart of stone.When they were done we threw down some flowers, and saw them scramble for them,kiss their hands to the invisible ladies, and go laughing away, to smoke anddrink beer, I suppose. Next morning Fred showed me one of the crumpled flowersin his vest pocket, and looked very sentimental. I laughed at him, and said Ididn’t throw it, but Flo, which seemed to disgust him, for he tossed itout of the window, and turned sensible again. I’m afraid I’m goingto have trouble with that boy, it begins to look like it.The baths at Nassau were very gay, so was Baden-Baden, where Fred lost somemoney, and I scolded him. He needs someone to look after him when Frank is notwith him. Kate said once she hoped he’d marry soon, and I quite agreewith her that it would be well for him. Frankfurt was delightful. I sawGoethe’s house, Schiller’s statue, and Dannecker’s famous‘Ariadne.’ It was very lovely, but I should have enjoyed it more ifI had known the story better. I didn’t like to ask, as everyone knew itor pretended they did. I wish Jo would tell me all about it. I ought to haveread more, for I find I don’t know anything, and it mortifies me.Now comes the serious part, for it happened here, and Fred has just gone. Hehas been so kind and jolly that we all got quite fond of him. I never thoughtof anything but a traveling friendship till the serenade night. Since thenI’ve begun to feel that the moonlight walks, balcony talks, and dailyadventures were something more to him than fun. I haven’t flirted,Mother, truly, but remembered what you said to me, and have done my very best.I can’t help it if people like me. I don’t try to make them, and itworries me if I don’t care for them, though Jo says I haven’t gotany heart. Now I know Mother will shake her head, and the girls say, “Oh,the mercenary little wretch!”, but I’ve made up my mind, and ifFred asks me, I shall accept him, though I’m not madly in love. I likehim, and we get on comfortably together. He is handsome, young, clever enough,and very rich—ever so much richer than the Laurences. I don’t thinkhis family would object, and I should be very happy, for they are all kind,well-bred, generous people, and they like me. Fred, as the eldest twin, willhave the estate, I suppose, and such a splendid one it is! A city house in afashionable street, not so showy as our big houses, but twice as comfortableand full of solid luxury, such as English people believe in. I like it, forit’s genuine. I’ve seen the plate, the family jewels, the oldservants, and pictures of the country place, with its park, great house, lovelygrounds, and fine horses. Oh, it would be all I should ask! And I’drather have it than any title such as girls snap up so readily, and findnothing behind. I may be mercenary, but I hate poverty, and don’t mean tobear it a minute longer than I can help. One of us must marry well. Megdidn’t, Jo won’t, Beth can’t yet, so I shall, and makeeverything okay all round. I wouldn’t marry a man I hated or despised.You may be sure of that, and though Fred is not my model hero, he does verywell, and in time I should get fond enough of him if he was very fond of me,and let me do just as I liked. So I’ve been turning the matter over in mymind the last week, for it was impossible to help seeing that Fred liked me. Hesaid nothing, but little things showed it. He never goes with Flo, always getson my side of the carriage, table, or promenade, looks sentimental when we arealone, and frowns at anyone else who ventures to speak to me. Yesterday atdinner, when an Austrian officer stared at us and then said something to hisfriend, a rakish-looking baron, about ‘ein wonderschonesBlondchen’, Fred looked as fierce as a lion, and cut his meat sosavagely it nearly flew off his plate. He isn’t one of the cool, stiffEnglishmen, but is rather peppery, for he has Scotch blood in him, as one mightguess from his bonnie blue eyes.Well, last evening we went up to the castle about sunset, at least all of usbut Fred, who was to meet us there after going to the Post Restante forletters. We had a charming time poking about the ruins, the vaults where themonster tun is, and the beautiful gardens made by the elector long ago for hisEnglish wife. I liked the great terrace best, for the view was divine, so whilethe rest went to see the rooms inside, I sat there trying to sketch the graystone lion’s head on the wall, with scarlet woodbine sprays hanging roundit. I felt as if I’d got into a romance, sitting there, watching theNeckar rolling through the valley, listening to the music of the Austrian bandbelow, and waiting for my lover, like a real storybook girl. I had a feelingthat something was going to happen and I was ready for it. I didn’t feelblushy or quakey, but quite cool and only a little excited.By-and-by I heard Fred’s voice, and then he came hurrying through thegreat arch to find me. He looked so troubled that I forgot all about myself,and asked what the matter was. He said he’d just got a letter begging himto come home, for Frank was very ill. So he was going at once on the nighttrain and only had time to say good-by. I was very sorry for him, anddisappointed for myself, but only for a minute because he said, as he shookhands, and said it in a way that I could not mistake, “I shall soon comeback, you won’t forget me, Amy?”I didn’t promise, but I looked at him, and he seemed satisfied, and therewas no time for anything but messages and good-byes, for he was off in an hour,and we all miss him very much. I know he wanted to speak, but I think, fromsomething he once hinted, that he had promised his father not to do anything ofthe sort yet a while, for he is a rash boy, and the old gentleman dreads aforeign daughter-in-law. We shall soon meet in Rome, and then, if I don’tchange my mind, I’ll say “Yes, thank you,” when he says“Will you, please?”Of course this is all very private, but I wished you to know what wasgoing on. Don’t be anxious about me, remember I am your ‘prudentAmy’, and be sure I will do nothing rashly. Send me as much advice as youlike. I’ll use it if I can. I wish I could see you for a good talk,Marmee. Love and trust me.Ever your AMYCHAPTER THIRTY-TWOTENDER TROUBLES“Jo, I’m anxious about Beth.”“Why, Mother, she has seemed unusually well since the babies came.”“It’s not her health that troubles me now, it’s her spirits.I’m sure there is something on her mind, and I want you to discover whatit is.”“What makes you think so, Mother?”“She sits alone a good deal, and doesn’t talk to her father as muchas she used. I found her crying over the babies the other day. When she sings,the songs are always sad ones, and now and then I see a look in her face that Idon’t understand. This isn’t like Beth, and it worries me.”“Have you asked her about it?”“I have tried once or twice, but she either evaded my questions or lookedso distressed that I stopped. I never force my children’s confidence, andI seldom have to wait for long.”Mrs. March glanced at Jo as she spoke, but the face opposite seemed quiteunconscious of any secret disquietude but Beth’s, and after sewingthoughtfully for a minute, Jo said, “I think she is growing up, and sobegins to dream dreams, and have hopes and fears and fidgets, without knowingwhy or being able to explain them. Why, Mother, Beth’s eighteen, but wedon’t realize it, and treat her like a child, forgetting she’s awoman.”“So she is. Dear heart, how fast you do grow up,” returned hermother with a sigh and a smile.“Can’t be helped, Marmee, so you must resign yourself to all sortsof worries, and let your birds hop out of the nest, one by one. I promise neverto hop very far, if that is any comfort to you.”“It’s a great comfort, Jo. I always feel strong when you are athome, now Meg is gone. Beth is too feeble and Amy too young to depend upon, butwhen the tug comes, you are always ready.”“Why, you know I don’t mind hard jobs much, and there must alwaysbe one scrub in a family. Amy is splendid in fine works and I’m not, butI feel in my element when all the carpets are to be taken up, or half thefamily fall sick at once. Amy is distinguishing herself abroad, but if anythingis amiss at home, I’m your man.”“I leave Beth to your hands, then, for she will open her tender littleheart to her Jo sooner than to anyone else. Be very kind, and don’t lether think anyone watches or talks about her. If she only would get quite strongand cheerful again, I shouldn’t have a wish in the world.”“Happy woman! I’ve got heaps.”“My dear, what are they?”“I’ll settle Bethy’s troubles, and then I’ll tell youmine. They are not very wearing, so they’ll keep.” and Jo stitchedaway, with a wise nod which set her mother’s heart at rest about her forthe present at least.While apparently absorbed in her own affairs, Jo watched Beth, and after manyconflicting conjectures, finally settled upon one which seemed to explain thechange in her. A slight incident gave Jo the clue to the mystery, she thought,and lively fancy, loving heart did the rest. She was affecting to write busilyone Saturday afternoon, when she and Beth were alone together. Yet as shescribbled, she kept her eye on her sister, who seemed unusually quiet. Sittingat the window, Beth’s work often dropped into her lap, and she leaned herhead upon her hand, in a dejected attitude, while her eyes rested on the dull,autumnal landscape. Suddenly some one passed below, whistling like an operaticblackbird, and a voice called out, “All serene! Coming in tonight.”Beth started, leaned forward, smiled and nodded, watched the passer-by till hisquick tramp died away, then said softly as if to herself, “How strong andwell and happy that dear boy looks.”“Hum!” said Jo, still intent upon her sister’s face, for thebright color faded as quickly as it came, the smile vanished, and presently atear lay shining on the window ledge. Beth whisked it off, and in herhalf-averted face read a tender sorrow that made her own eyes fill. Fearing tobetray herself, she slipped away, murmuring something about needing more paper.“Mercy on me, Beth loves Laurie!” she said, sitting down in her ownroom, pale with the shock of the discovery which she believed she had justmade. “I never dreamed of such a thing. What will Mother say? I wonder ifher...” there Jo stopped and turned scarlet with a sudden thought.“If he shouldn’t love back again, how dreadful it would be. Hemust. I’ll make him!” and she shook her head threateningly at thepicture of the mischievous-looking boy laughing at her from the wall. “Ohdear, we are growing up with a vengeance. Here’s Meg married and a mamma,Amy flourishing away at Paris, and Beth in love. I’m the only one thathas sense enough to keep out of mischief.” Jo thought intently for aminute with her eyes fixed on the picture, then she smoothed out her wrinkledforehead and said, with a decided nod at the face opposite, “No thankyou, sir, you’re very charming, but you’ve no more stability than aweathercock. So you needn’t write touching notes and smile in thatinsinuating way, for it won’t do a bit of good, and I won’t haveit.”Then she sighed, and fell into a reverie from which she did not wake till theearly twilight sent her down to take new observations, which only confirmed hersuspicion. Though Laurie flirted with Amy and joked with Jo, his manner to Bethhad always been peculiarly kind and gentle, but so was everybody’s.Therefore, no one thought of imagining that he cared more for her than for theothers. Indeed, a general impression had prevailed in the family of late that‘our boy’ was getting fonder than ever of Jo, who, however,wouldn’t hear a word upon the subject and scolded violently if anyonedared to suggest it. If they had known the various tender passages which hadbeen nipped in the bud, they would have had the immense satisfaction of saying,“I told you so.” But Jo hated ‘philandering’, andwouldn’t allow it, always having a joke or a smile ready at the leastsign of impending danger.When Laurie first went to college, he fell in love about once a month, butthese small flames were as brief as ardent, did no damage, and much amused Jo,who took great interest in the alternations of hope, despair, and resignation,which were confided to her in their weekly conferences. But there came a timewhen Laurie ceased to worship at many shrines, hinted darkly at oneall-absorbing passion, and indulged occasionally in Byronic fits of gloom. Thenhe avoided the tender subject altogether, wrote philosophical notes to Jo,turned studious, and gave out that he was going to ‘dig’, intendingto graduate in a blaze of glory. This suited the young lady better thantwilight confidences, tender pressures of the hand, and eloquent glances of theeye, for with Jo, brain developed earlier than heart, and she preferredimaginary heroes to real ones, because when tired of them, the former could beshut up in the tin kitchen till called for, and the latter were lessmanageable.Things were in this state when the grand discovery was made, and Jo watchedLaurie that night as she had never done before. If she had not got the new ideainto her head, she would have seen nothing unusual in the fact that Beth wasvery quiet, and Laurie very kind to her. But having given the rein to herlively fancy, it galloped away with her at a great pace, and common sense,being rather weakened by a long course of romance writing, did not come to therescue. As usual Beth lay on the sofa and Laurie sat in a low chair close by,amusing her with all sorts of gossip, for she depended on her weekly‘spin’, and he never disappointed her. But that evening Jo fanciedthat Beth’s eyes rested on the lively, dark face beside her with peculiarpleasure, and that she listened with intense interest to an account of someexciting cricket match, though the phrases, ‘caught off a tice’,‘stumped off his ground’, and ‘the leg hit for three’,were as intelligible to her as Sanskrit. She also fancied, having set her heartupon seeing it, that she saw a certain increase of gentleness in Laurie’smanner, that he dropped his voice now and then, laughed less than usual, was alittle absent-minded, and settled the afghan over Beth’s feet with anassiduity that was really almost tender.“Who knows? Stranger things have happened,” thought Jo, as shefussed about the room. “She will make quite an angel of him, and he willmake life delightfully easy and pleasant for the dear, if they only love eachother. I don’t see how he can help it, and I do believe he would if therest of us were out of the way.”As everyone was out of the way but herself, Jo began to feel that she ought todispose of herself with all speed. But where should she go? And burning to layherself upon the shrine of sisterly devotion, she sat down to settle thatpoint.Now, the old sofa was a regular patriarch of a sofa—long, broad,well-cushioned, and low, a trifle shabby, as well it might be, for the girlshad slept and sprawled on it as babies, fished over the back, rode on the arms,and had menageries under it as children, and rested tired heads, dreameddreams, and listened to tender talk on it as young women. They all loved it,for it was a family refuge, and one corner had always been Jo’s favoritelounging place. Among the many pillows that adorned the venerable couch wasone, hard, round, covered with prickly horsehair, and furnished with a knobbybutton at each end. This repulsive pillow was her especial property, being usedas a weapon of defense, a barricade, or a stern preventive of too much slumber.Laurie knew this pillow well, and had cause to regard it with deep aversion,having been unmercifully pummeled with it in former days when romping wasallowed, and now frequently debarred by it from the seat he most coveted nextto Jo in the sofa corner. If ‘the sausage’ as they called it, stoodon end, it was a sign that he might approach and repose, but if it lay flatacross the sofa, woe to man, woman, or child who dared disturb it! That eveningJo forgot to barricade her corner, and had not been in her seat five minutes,before a massive form appeared beside her, and with both arms spread over thesofa back, both long legs stretched out before him, Laurie exclaimed, with asigh of satisfaction...“Now, this is filling at the price.”“No slang,” snapped Jo, slamming down the pillow. But it was toolate, there was no room for it, and coasting onto the floor, it disappeared ina most mysterious manner.“Come, Jo, don’t be thorny. After studying himself to a skeletonall the week, a fellow deserves petting and ought to get it.”“Beth will pet you. I’m busy.”“No, she’s not to be bothered with me, but you like that sort ofthing, unless you’ve suddenly lost your taste for it. Have you? Do youhate your boy, and want to fire pillows at him?”Anything more wheedlesome than that touching appeal was seldom heard, but Joquenched ‘her boy’ by turning on him with a stern query, “Howmany bouquets have you sent Miss Randal this week?”“Not one, upon my word. She’s engaged. Now then.”“I’m glad of it, that’s one of your foolish extravagances,sending flowers and things to girls for whom you don’t care twopins,” continued Jo reprovingly.“Sensible girls for whom I do care whole papers of pins won’t letme send them ‘flowers and things’, so what can I do? My feelingsneed a ‘vent’.”“Mother doesn’t approve of flirting even in fun, and you do flirtdesperately, Teddy.”“I’d give anything if I could answer, ‘So do you’. As Ican’t, I’ll merely say that I don’t see any harm in thatpleasant little game, if all parties understand that it’s onlyplay.”“Well, it does look pleasant, but I can’t learn how it’sdone. I’ve tried, because one feels awkward in company not to do aseverybody else is doing, but I don’t seem to get on”, said Jo,forgetting to play mentor.“Take lessons of Amy, she has a regular talent for it.”“Yes, she does it very prettily, and never seems to go too far. I supposeit’s natural to some people to please without trying, and others toalways say and do the wrong thing in the wrong place.”“I’m glad you can’t flirt. It’s really refreshing tosee a sensible, straightforward girl, who can be jolly and kind without makinga fool of herself. Between ourselves, Jo, some of the girls I know really do goon at such a rate I’m ashamed of them. They don’t mean any harm,I’m sure, but if they knew how we fellows talked about them afterward,they’d mend their ways, I fancy.”“They do the same, and as their tongues are the sharpest, you fellows getthe worst of it, for you are as silly as they, every bit. If you behavedproperly, they would, but knowing you like their nonsense, they keep it up, andthen you blame them.”“Much you know about it, ma’am,” said Laurie in a superiortone. “We don’t like romps and flirts, though we may act as if wedid sometimes. The pretty, modest girls are never talked about, exceptrespectfully, among gentleman. Bless your innocent soul! If you could be in myplace for a month you’d see things that would astonish you a trifle. Uponmy word, when I see one of those harum-scarum girls, I always want to say withour friend Cock Robin...“Out upon you, fie upon you,Bold-faced jig!”It was impossible to help laughing at the funny conflict between Laurie’schivalrous reluctance to speak ill of womankind, and his very natural dislikeof the unfeminine folly of which fashionable society showed him many samples.Jo knew that ‘young Laurence’ was regarded as a most eligible partiby worldly mamas, was much smiled upon by their daughters, and flattered enoughby ladies of all ages to make a coxcomb of him, so she watched him ratherjealously, fearing he would be spoiled, and rejoiced more than she confessed tofind that he still believed in modest girls. Returning suddenly to heradmonitory tone, she said, dropping her voice, “If you must have a‘vent’, Teddy, go and devote yourself to one of the ‘pretty,modest girls’ whom you do respect, and not waste your time with the sillyones.”“You really advise it?” and Laurie looked at her with an oddmixture of anxiety and merriment in his face.“Yes, I do, but you’d better wait till you are through college, onthe whole, and be fitting yourself for the place meantime. You’re nothalf good enough for—well, whoever the modest girl may be.” and Jolooked a little queer likewise, for a name had almost escaped her.“That I’m not!” acquiesced Laurie, with an expression ofhumility quite new to him, as he dropped his eyes and absently wound Jo’sapron tassel round his finger.“Mercy on us, this will never do,” thought Jo, adding aloud,“Go and sing to me. I’m dying for some music, and always likeyours.”“I’d rather stay here, thank you.”“Well, you can’t, there isn’t room. Go and make yourselfuseful, since you are too big to be ornamental. I thought you hated to be tiedto a woman’s apron string?” retorted Jo, quoting certain rebelliouswords of his own.“Ah, that depends on who wears the apron!” and Laurie gave anaudacious tweak at the tassel.“Are you going?” demanded Jo, diving for the pillow.He fled at once, and the minute it was well, “Up with the bonnets ofbonnie Dundee,” she slipped away to return no more till the younggentleman departed in high dudgeon.Jo lay long awake that night, and was just dropping off when the sound of astifled sob made her fly to Beth’s bedside, with the anxious inquiry,“What is it, dear?”“I thought you were asleep,” sobbed Beth.“Is it the old pain, my precious?”“No, it’s a new one, but I can bear it,” and Beth tried tocheck her tears.“Tell me all about it, and let me cure it as I often did theother.”“You can’t, there is no cure.” There Beth’s voice gaveway, and clinging to her sister, she cried so despairingly that Jo wasfrightened.“Where is it? Shall I call Mother?”“No, no, don’t call her, don’t tell her. I shall be bettersoon. Lie down here and ‘poor’ my head. I’ll be quiet and goto sleep, indeed I will.”Jo obeyed, but as her hand went softly to and fro across Beth’s hotforehead and wet eyelids, her heart was very full and she longed to speak. Butyoung as she was, Jo had learned that hearts, like flowers, cannot be rudelyhandled, but must open naturally, so though she believed she knew the cause ofBeth’s new pain, she only said, in her tenderest tone, “Doesanything trouble you, deary?”“Yes, Jo,” after a long pause.“Wouldn’t it comfort you to tell me what it is?”“Not now, not yet.”“Then I won’t ask, but remember, Bethy, that Mother and Jo arealways glad to hear and help you, if they can.”“I know it. I’ll tell you by-and-by.”“Is the pain better now?”“Oh, yes, much better, you are so comfortable, Jo.”“Go to sleep, dear. I’ll stay with you.”So cheek to cheek they fell asleep, and on the morrow Beth seemed quite herselfagain, for at eighteen neither heads nor hearts ache long, and a loving wordcan medicine most ills.But Jo had made up her mind, and after pondering over a project for some days,she confided it to her mother.“You asked me the other day what my wishes were. I’ll tell you oneof them, Marmee,” she began, as they sat along together. “I want togo away somewhere this winter for a change.”“Why, Jo?” and her mother looked up quickly, as if the wordssuggested a double meaning.With her eyes on her work Jo answered soberly, “I want something new. Ifeel restless and anxious to be seeing, doing, and learning more than I am. Ibrood too much over my own small affairs, and need stirring up, so as I can bespared this winter, I’d like to hop a little way and try my wings.”“Where will you hop?”“To New York. I had a bright idea yesterday, and this is it. You knowMrs. Kirke wrote to you for some respectable young person to teach her childrenand sew. It’s rather hard to find just the thing, but I think I shouldsuit if I tried.”“My dear, go out to service in that great boarding house!” and Mrs.March looked surprised, but not displeased.“It’s not exactly going out to service, for Mrs. Kirke is yourfriend—the kindest soul that ever lived—and would make thingspleasant for me, I know. Her family is separate from the rest, and no one knowsme there. Don’t care if they do. It’s honest work, and I’mnot ashamed of it.”“Nor I. But your writing?”“All the better for the change. I shall see and hear new things, get newideas, and even if I haven’t much time there, I shall bring homequantities of material for my rubbish.”“I have no doubt of it, but are these your only reasons for this suddenfancy?”“No, Mother.”“May I know the others?”Jo looked up and Jo looked down, then said slowly, with sudden color in hercheeks. “It may be vain and wrong to say it, but—I’mafraid—Laurie is getting too fond of me.”“Then you don’t care for him in the way it is evident he begins tocare for you?” and Mrs. March looked anxious as she put the question.“Mercy, no! I love the dear boy, as I always have, and am immensely proudof him, but as for anything more, it’s out of the question.”“I’m glad of that, Jo.”“Why, please?”“Because, dear, I don’t think you suited to one another. As friendsyou are very happy, and your frequent quarrels soon blow over, but I fear youwould both rebel if you were mated for life. You are too much alike and toofond of freedom, not to mention hot tempers and strong wills, to get on happilytogether, in a relation which needs infinite patience and forbearance, as wellas love.”“That’s just the feeling I had, though I couldn’t express it.I’m glad you think he is only beginning to care for me. It would troubleme sadly to make him unhappy, for I couldn’t fall in love with the dearold fellow merely out of gratitude, could I?”“You are sure of his feeling for you?”The color deepened in Jo’s cheeks as she answered, with the look ofmingled pleasure, pride, and pain which young girls wear when speaking of firstlovers, “I’m afraid it is so, Mother. He hasn’t saidanything, but he looks a great deal. I think I had better go away before itcomes to anything.”“I agree with you, and if it can be managed you shall go.”Jo looked relieved, and after a pause, said, smiling, “How Mrs. Moffatwould wonder at your want of management, if she knew, and how she will rejoicethat Annie may still hope.”“Ah, Jo, mothers may differ in their management, but the hope is the samein all—the desire to see their children happy. Meg is so, and I amcontent with her success. You I leave to enjoy your liberty till you tire ofit, for only then will you find that there is something sweeter. Amy is mychief care now, but her good sense will help her. For Beth, I indulge no hopesexcept that she may be well. By the way, she seems brighter this last day ortwo. Have you spoken to her?’“Yes, she owned she had a trouble, and promised to tell me by-and-by. Isaid no more, for I think I know it,” and Jo told her little story.Mrs. March shook her head, and did not take so romantic a view of the case, butlooked grave, and repeated her opinion that for Laurie’s sake Jo shouldgo away for a time.“Let us say nothing about it to him till the plan is settled, thenI’ll run away before he can collect his wits and be tragic. Beth mustthink I’m going to please myself, as I am, for I can’t talk aboutLaurie to her. But she can pet and comfort him after I’m gone, and socure him of this romantic notion. He’s been through so many little trialsof the sort, he’s used to it, and will soon get over hislovelornity.”Jo spoke hopefully, but could not rid herself of the foreboding fear that this‘little trial’ would be harder than the others, and that Lauriewould not get over his ‘lovelornity’ as easily as heretofore.The plan was talked over in a family council and agreed upon, for Mrs. Kirkegladly accepted Jo, and promised to make a pleasant home for her. The teachingwould render her independent, and such leisure as she got might be madeprofitable by writing, while the new scenes and society would be both usefuland agreeable. Jo liked the prospect and was eager to be gone, for the homenest was growing too narrow for her restless nature and adventurous spirit.When all was settled, with fear and trembling she told Laurie, but to hersurprise he took it very quietly. He had been graver than usual of late, butvery pleasant, and when jokingly accused of turning over a new leaf, heanswered soberly, “So I am, and I mean this one shall stay turned.”Jo was very much relieved that one of his virtuous fits should come on justthen, and made her preparations with a lightened heart, for Beth seemed morecheerful, and hoped she was doing the best for all.“One thing I leave in your especial care,” she said, the nightbefore she left.“You mean your papers?” asked Beth.“No, my boy. Be very good to him, won’t you?”“Of course I will, but I can’t fill your place, and he’llmiss you sadly.”“It won’t hurt him, so remember, I leave him in your charge, toplague, pet, and keep in order.”“I’ll do my best, for your sake,” promised Beth, wonderingwhy Jo looked at her so queerly.When Laurie said good-by, he whispered significantly, “It won’t doa bit of good, Jo. My eye is on you, so mind what you do, or I’ll comeand bring you home.”CHAPTER THIRTY-THREEJO’S JOURNALNew York, NovemberDear Marmee and Beth,I’m going to write you a regular volume, for I’ve got heaps totell, though I’m not a fine young lady traveling on the continent. When Ilost sight of Father’s dear old face, I felt a trifle blue, and mighthave shed a briny drop or two, if an Irish lady with four small children, allcrying more or less, hadn’t diverted my mind, for I amused myself bydropping gingerbread nuts over the seat every time they opened their mouths toroar.Soon the sun came out, and taking it as a good omen, I cleared up likewise andenjoyed my journey with all my heart.Mrs. Kirke welcomed me so kindly I felt at home at once, even in that big housefull of strangers. She gave me a funny little sky parlor—all she had, butthere is a stove in it, and a nice table in a sunny window, so I can sit hereand write whenever I like. A fine view and a church tower opposite atone forthe many stairs, and I took a fancy to my den on the spot. The nursery, where Iam to teach and sew, is a pleasant room next Mrs. Kirke’s private parlor,and the two little girls are pretty children, rather spoiled, I fancy, but theytook to me after telling them The Seven Bad Pigs, and I’ve no doubt Ishall make a model governess.I am to have my meals with the children, if I prefer it to the great table, andfor the present I do, for I am bashful, though no one will believe it.“Now, my dear, make yourself at home,” said Mrs. K. in her motherlyway, “I’m on the drive from morning to night, as you may supposewith such a family, but a great anxiety will be off my mind if I know thechildren are safe with you. My rooms are always open to you, and your own shallbe as comfortable as I can make it. There are some pleasant people in the houseif you feel sociable, and your evenings are always free. Come to me if anythinggoes wrong, and be as happy as you can. There’s the tea bell, I must runand change my cap.” And off she bustled, leaving me to settle myself inmy new nest.As I went downstairs soon after, I saw something I liked. The flights are verylong in this tall house, and as I stood waiting at the head of the third onefor a little servant girl to lumber up, I saw a gentleman come along behindher, take the heavy hod of coal out of her hand, carry it all the way up, putit down at a door near by, and walk away, saying, with a kind nod and a foreignaccent, “It goes better so. The little back is too young to haf suchheaviness.”Wasn’t it good of him? I like such things, for as Father says, triflesshow character. When I mentioned it to Mrs. K., that evening, she laughed, andsaid, “That must have been Professor Bhaer, he’s always doingthings of that sort.”Mrs. K. told me he was from Berlin, very learned and good, but poor as a churchmouse, and gives lessons to support himself and two little orphan nephews whomhe is educating here, according to the wishes of his sister, who married anAmerican. Not a very romantic story, but it interested me, and I was glad tohear that Mrs. K. lends him her parlor for some of his scholars. There is aglass door between it and the nursery, and I mean to peep at him, and thenI’ll tell you how he looks. He’s almost forty, so it’s noharm, Marmee.After tea and a go-to-bed romp with the little girls, I attacked the bigworkbasket, and had a quiet evening chatting with my new friend. I shall keep ajournal-letter, and send it once a week, so goodnight, and more tomorrow.Tuesday EveHad a lively time in my seminary this morning, for the children acted likeSancho, and at one time I really thought I should shake them all round. Somegood angel inspired me to try gymnastics, and I kept it up till they were gladto sit down and keep still. After luncheon, the girl took them out for a walk,and I went to my needlework like little Mabel ‘with a willingmind’. I was thanking my stars that I’d learned to make nicebuttonholes, when the parlor door opened and shut, and someone began to hum,Kennst Du Das Land, like a big bumblebee. It was dreadfully improper, I know,but I couldn’t resist the temptation, and lifting one end of the curtainbefore the glass door, I peeped in. Professor Bhaer was there, and while hearranged his books, I took a good look at him. A regular German—ratherstout, with brown hair tumbled all over his head, a bushy beard, good nose, thekindest eyes I ever saw, and a splendid big voice that does one’s earsgood, after our sharp or slipshod American gabble. His clothes were rusty, hishands were large, and he hadn’t a really handsome feature in his face,except his beautiful teeth, yet I liked him, for he had a fine head, his linenwas very nice, and he looked like a gentleman, though two buttons were off hiscoat and there was a patch on one shoe. He looked sober in spite of hishumming, till he went to the window to turn the hyacinth bulbs toward the sun,and stroke the cat, who received him like an old friend. Then he smiled, andwhen a tap came at the door, called out in a loud, brisk tone,“Herein!”I was just going to run, when I caught sight of a morsel of a child carrying abig book, and stopped, to see what was going on.“Me wants me Bhaer,” said the mite, slamming down her book andrunning to meet him.“Thou shalt haf thy Bhaer. Come, then, and take a goot hug from him, myTina,” said the Professor, catching her up with a laugh, and holding herso high over his head that she had to stoop her little face to kiss him.“Now me mus tuddy my lessin,” went on the funny little thing. So heput her up at the table, opened the great dictionary she had brought, and gaveher a paper and pencil, and she scribbled away, turning a leaf now and then,and passing her little fat finger down the page, as if finding a word, sosoberly that I nearly betrayed myself by a laugh, while Mr. Bhaer stoodstroking her pretty hair with a fatherly look that made me think she must behis own, though she looked more French than German.Another knock and the appearance of two young ladies sent me back to my work,and there I virtuously remained through all the noise and gabbling that went onnext door. One of the girls kept laughing affectedly, and saying, “NowProfessor,” in a coquettish tone, and the other pronounced her Germanwith an accent that must have made it hard for him to keep sober.Both seemed to try his patience sorely, for more than once I heard him sayemphatically, “No, no, it is not so, you haf not attend to what Isay,” and once there was a loud rap, as if he struck the table with hisbook, followed by the despairing exclamation, “Prut! It all goes bad thisday.”Poor man, I pitied him, and when the girls were gone, took just one more peepto see if he survived it. He seemed to have thrown himself back in his chair,tired out, and sat there with his eyes shut till the clock struck two, when hejumped up, put his books in his pocket, as if ready for another lesson, andtaking little Tina who had fallen asleep on the sofa in his arms, he carriedher quietly away. I fancy he has a hard life of it. Mrs. Kirke asked me if Iwouldn’t go down to the five o’clock dinner, and feeling a littlebit homesick, I thought I would, just to see what sort of people are under thesame roof with me. So I made myself respectable and tried to slip in behindMrs. Kirke, but as she is short and I’m tall, my efforts at concealmentwere rather a failure. She gave me a seat by her, and after my face cooled off,I plucked up courage and looked about me. The long table was full, and everyone intent on getting their dinner, the gentlemen especially, who seemed to beeating on time, for they bolted in every sense of the word, vanishing as soonas they were done. There was the usual assortment of young men absorbed inthemselves, young couples absorbed in each other, married ladies in theirbabies, and old gentlemen in politics. I don’t think I shall care to havemuch to do with any of them, except one sweetfaced maiden lady, who looks as ifshe had something in her.Cast away at the very bottom of the table was the Professor, shouting answersto the questions of a very inquisitive, deaf old gentleman on one side, andtalking philosophy with a Frenchman on the other. If Amy had been here,she’d have turned her back on him forever because, sad to relate, he hada great appetite, and shoveled in his dinner in a manner which would havehorrified ‘her ladyship’. I didn’t mind, for I like ‘tosee folks eat with a relish’, as Hannah says, and the poor man must haveneeded a deal of food after teaching idiots all day.As I went upstairs after dinner, two of the young men were settling their hatsbefore the hall mirror, and I heard one say low to the other,“Who’s the new party?”“Governess, or something of that sort.”“What the deuce is she at our table for?”“Friend of the old lady’s.”“Handsome head, but no style.”“Not a bit of it. Give us a light and come on.”I felt angry at first, and then I didn’t care, for a governess is as goodas a clerk, and I’ve got sense, if I haven’t style, which is morethan some people have, judging from the remarks of the elegant beings whoclattered away, smoking like bad chimneys. I hate ordinary people!ThursdayYesterday was a quiet day spent in teaching, sewing, and writing in my littleroom, which is very cozy, with a light and fire. I picked up a few bits of newsand was introduced to the Professor. It seems that Tina is the child of theFrenchwoman who does the fine ironing in the laundry here. The little thing haslost her heart to Mr. Bhaer, and follows him about the house like a dogwhenever he is at home, which delights him, as he is very fond of children,though a ‘bacheldore’. Kitty and Minnie Kirke likewise regard himwith affection, and tell all sorts of stories about the plays he invents, thepresents he brings, and the splendid tales he tells. The younger men quiz him,it seems, call him Old Fritz, Lager Beer, Ursa Major, and make all manner ofjokes on his name. But he enjoys it like a boy, Mrs. Kirke says, and takes itso good-naturedly that they all like him in spite of his foreign ways.The maiden lady is a Miss Norton, rich, cultivated, and kind. She spoke to meat dinner today (for I went to table again, it’s such fun to watchpeople), and asked me to come and see her at her room. She has fine books andpictures, knows interesting persons, and seems friendly, so I shall make myselfagreeable, for I do want to get into good society, only it isn’t the samesort that Amy likes.I was in our parlor last evening when Mr. Bhaer came in with some newspapersfor Mrs. Kirke. She wasn’t there, but Minnie, who is a little old woman,introduced me very prettily. “This is Mamma’s friend, MissMarch.”“Yes, and she’s jolly and we like her lots,” added Kitty, whois an ‘enfant terrible’.We both bowed, and then we laughed, for the prim introduction and the bluntaddition were rather a comical contrast.“Ah, yes, I hear these naughty ones go to vex you, Mees Marsch. If soagain, call at me and I come,” he said, with a threatening frown thatdelighted the little wretches.I promised I would, and he departed, but it seems as if I was doomed to see agood deal of him, for today as I passed his door on my way out, by accident Iknocked against it with my umbrella. It flew open, and there he stood in hisdressing gown, with a big blue sock on one hand and a darning needle in theother. He didn’t seem at all ashamed of it, for when I explained andhurried on, he waved his hand, sock and all, saying in his loud, cheerfulway...“You haf a fine day to make your walk. Bon voyage, Mademoiselle.”I laughed all the way downstairs, but it was a little pathetic, also to thinkof the poor man having to mend his own clothes. The German gentlemen embroider,I know, but darning hose is another thing and not so pretty.SaturdayNothing has happened to write about, except a call on Miss Norton, who has aroom full of pretty things, and who was very charming, for she showed me allher treasures, and asked me if I would sometimes go with her to lectures andconcerts, as her escort, if I enjoyed them. She put it as a favor, butI’m sure Mrs. Kirke has told her about us, and she does it out ofkindness to me. I’m as proud as Lucifer, but such favors from such peopledon’t burden me, and I accepted gratefully.When I got back to the nursery there was such an uproar in the parlor that Ilooked in, and there was Mr. Bhaer down on his hands and knees, with Tina onhis back, Kitty leading him with a jump rope, and Minnie feeding two small boyswith seedcakes, as they roared and ramped in cages built of chairs.“We are playing nargerie,” explained Kitty.“Dis is mine effalunt!” added Tina, holding on by theProfessor’s hair.“Mamma always allows us to do what we like Saturday afternoon, when Franzand Emil come, doesn’t she, Mr. Bhaer?” said Minnie.The ‘effalunt’ sat up, looking as much in earnest as any of them,and said soberly to me, “I gif you my wort it is so, if we make too largea noise you shall say Hush! to us, and we go more softly.”I promised to do so, but left the door open and enjoyed the fun as much as theydid, for a more glorious frolic I never witnessed. They played tag andsoldiers, danced and sang, and when it began to grow dark they all piled ontothe sofa about the Professor, while he told charming fairy stories of thestorks on the chimney tops, and the little ‘koblods’, who ride thesnowflakes as they fall. I wish Americans were as simple and natural asGermans, don’t you?I’m so fond of writing, I should go spinning on forever if motives ofeconomy didn’t stop me, for though I’ve used thin paper and writtenfine, I tremble to think of the stamps this long letter will need. Pray forwardAmy’s as soon as you can spare them. My small news will sound very flatafter her splendors, but you will like them, I know. Is Teddy studying so hardthat he can’t find time to write to his friends? Take good care of himfor me, Beth, and tell me all about the babies, and give heaps of love toeveryone. From your faithful Jo.P.S. On reading over my letter, it strikes me as rather Bhaery, but I am alwaysinterested in odd people, and I really had nothing else to write about. Blessyou!DECEMBERMy Precious Betsey,As this is to be a scribble-scrabble letter, I direct it to you, for it mayamuse you, and give you some idea of my goings on, for though quiet, they arerather amusing, for which, oh, be joyful! After what Amy would call Herculaneumefforts, in the way of mental and moral agriculture, my young ideas begin toshoot and my little twigs to bend as I could wish. They are not so interestingto me as Tina and the boys, but I do my duty by them, and they are fond of me.Franz and Emil are jolly little lads, quite after my own heart, for the mixtureof German and American spirit in them produces a constant state ofeffervescence. Saturday afternoons are riotous times, whether spent in thehouse or out, for on pleasant days they all go to walk, like a seminary, withthe Professor and myself to keep order, and then such fun!We are very good friends now, and I’ve begun to take lessons. I reallycouldn’t help it, and it all came about in such a droll way that I musttell you. To begin at the beginning, Mrs. Kirke called to me one day as Ipassed Mr. Bhaer’s room where she was rummaging.“Did you ever see such a den, my dear? Just come and help me put thesebooks to rights, for I’ve turned everything upside down, trying todiscover what he has done with the six new handkerchiefs I gave him not longago.”I went in, and while we worked I looked about me, for it was ‘aden’ to be sure. Books and papers everywhere, a broken meerschaum, and anold flute over the mantlepiece as if done with, a ragged bird without any tailchirped on one window seat, and a box of white mice adorned the other.Half-finished boats and bits of string lay among the manuscripts. Dirty littleboots stood drying before the fire, and traces of the dearly beloved boys, forwhom he makes a slave of himself, were to be seen all over the room. After agrand rummage three of the missing articles were found, one over the bird cage,one covered with ink, and a third burned brown, having been used as a holder.“Such a man!” laughed good-natured Mrs. K., as she put the relicsin the rag bag. “I suppose the others are torn up to rig ships, bandagecut fingers, or make kite tails. It’s dreadful, but I can’t scoldhim. He’s so absent-minded and goodnatured, he lets those boys ride overhim roughshod. I agreed to do his washing and mending, but he forgets to giveout his things and I forget to look them over, so he comes to a sad passsometimes.”“Let me mend them,” said I. “I don’t mind it, and heneedn’t know. I’d like to, he’s so kind to me about bringingmy letters and lending books.”So I have got his things in order, and knit heels into two pairs of the socks,for they were boggled out of shape with his queer darns. Nothing was said, andI hoped he wouldn’t find it out, but one day last week he caught me atit. Hearing the lessons he gives to others has interested and amused me so muchthat I took a fancy to learn, for Tina runs in and out, leaving the door open,and I can hear. I had been sitting near this door, finishing off the last sock,and trying to understand what he said to a new scholar, who is as stupid as Iam. The girl had gone, and I thought he had also, it was so still, and I wasbusily gabbling over a verb, and rocking to and fro in a most absurd way, whena little crow made me look up, and there was Mr. Bhaer looking and laughingquietly, while he made signs to Tina not to betray him.“So!” he said, as I stopped and stared like a goose, “youpeep at me, I peep at you, and this is not bad, but see, I am not pleasantingwhen I say, haf you a wish for German?”“Yes, but you are too busy. I am too stupid to learn,” I blunderedout, as red as a peony.“Prut! We will make the time, and we fail not to find the sense. Atefening I shall gif a little lesson with much gladness, for look you, MeesMarsch, I haf this debt to pay.” And he pointed to my work‘Yes,’ they say to one another, these so kind ladies, ‘he isa stupid old fellow, he will see not what we do, he will never observe that hissock heels go not in holes any more, he will think his buttons grow out newwhen they fall, and believe that strings make theirselves.’ “Ah!But I haf an eye, and I see much. I haf a heart, and I feel thanks for this.Come, a little lesson then and now, or—no more good fairy works for meand mine.”Of course I couldn’t say anything after that, and as it really is asplendid opportunity, I made the bargain, and we began. I took four lessons,and then I stuck fast in a grammatical bog. The Professor was very patient withme, but it must have been torment to him, and now and then he’d look atme with such an expression of mild despair that it was a toss-up with mewhether to laugh or cry. I tried both ways, and when it came to a sniff orutter mortification and woe, he just threw the grammar on to the floor andmarched out of the room. I felt myself disgraced and deserted forever, butdidn’t blame him a particle, and was scrambling my papers together,meaning to rush upstairs and shake myself hard, when in he came, as brisk andbeaming as if I’d covered myself in glory.“Now we shall try a new way. You and I will read these pleasant littlemarchen together, and dig no more in that dry book, that goes in thecorner for making us trouble.”He spoke so kindly, and opened Hans Anderson’s fairy tales so invitinglybefore me, that I was more ashamed than ever, and went at my lesson in aneck-or-nothing style that seemed to amuse him immensely. I forgot mybashfulness, and pegged away (no other word will express it) with all my might,tumbling over long words, pronouncing according to inspiration of the minute,and doing my very best. When I finished reading my first page, and stopped forbreath, he clapped his hands and cried out in his hearty way, “Das istgut! Now we go well! My turn. I do him in German, gif me your ear.” Andaway he went, rumbling out the words with his strong voice and a relish whichwas good to see as well as hear. Fortunately the story was The Constant TinSoldier, which is droll, you know, so I could laugh, and I did, though Ididn’t understand half he read, for I couldn’t help it, he was soearnest, I so excited, and the whole thing so comical.After that we got on better, and now I read my lessons pretty well, for thisway of studying suits me, and I can see that the grammar gets tucked into thetales and poetry as one gives pills in jelly. I like it very much, and hedoesn’t seem tired of it yet, which is very good of him, isn’t it?I mean to give him something on Christmas, for I dare not offer money. Tell mesomething nice, Marmee.I’m glad Laurie seems so happy and busy, that he has given up smoking andlets his hair grow. You see Beth manages him better than I did. I’m notjealous, dear, do your best, only don’t make a saint of him. I’mafraid I couldn’t like him without a spice of human naughtiness. Read himbits of my letters. I haven’t time to write much, and that will do justas well. Thank Heaven Beth continues so comfortable.JANUARYA Happy New Year to you all, my dearest family, which of course includes Mr. L.and a young man by the name of Teddy. I can’t tell you how much I enjoyedyour Christmas bundle, for I didn’t get it till night and had given uphoping. Your letter came in the morning, but you said nothing about a parcel,meaning it for a surprise, so I was disappointed, for I’d had a‘kind of feeling’ that you wouldn’t forget me. I felt alittle low in my mind as I sat up in my room after tea, and when the big,muddy, battered-looking bundle was brought to me, I just hugged it and pranced.It was so homey and refreshing that I sat down on the floor and read and lookedand ate and laughed and cried, in my usual absurd way. The things were justwhat I wanted, and all the better for being made instead of bought.Beth’s new ‘ink bib’ was capital, and Hannah’s box ofhard gingerbread will be a treasure. I’ll be sure and wear the niceflannels you sent, Marmee, and read carefully the books Father has marked.Thank you all, heaps and heaps!Speaking of books reminds me that I’m getting rich in that line, for onNew Year’s Day Mr. Bhaer gave me a fine Shakespeare. It is one he valuesmuch, and I’ve often admired it, set up in the place of honor with hisGerman Bible, Plato, Homer, and Milton, so you may imagine how I felt when hebrought it down, without its cover, and showed me my own name in it,“from my friend Friedrich Bhaer”.“You say often you wish a library. Here I gif you one, for between theselids (he meant covers) is many books in one. Read him well, and he will helpyou much, for the study of character in this book will help you to read it inthe world and paint it with your pen.”I thanked him as well as I could, and talk now about ‘my library’,as if I had a hundred books. I never knew how much there was in Shakespearebefore, but then I never had a Bhaer to explain it to me. Now don’t laughat his horrid name. It isn’t pronounced either Bear or Beer, as peoplewill say it, but something between the two, as only Germans can give it.I’m glad you both like what I tell you about him, and hope you will knowhim some day. Mother would admire his warm heart, Father his wise head. Iadmire both, and feel rich in my new ‘friend Friedrich Bhaer’.Not having much money, or knowing what he’d like, I got several littlethings, and put them about the room, where he would find them unexpectedly.They were useful, pretty, or funny, a new standish on his table, a little vasefor his flower, he always has one, or a bit of green in a glass, to keep himfresh, he says, and a holder for his blower, so that he needn’t burn upwhat Amy calls ‘mouchoirs’. I made it like those Beth invented, abig butterfly with a fat body, and black and yellow wings, worsted feelers, andbead eyes. It took his fancy immensely, and he put it on his mantlepiece as anarticle of virtue, so it was rather a failure after all. Poor as he is, hedidn’t forget a servant or a child in the house, and not a soul here,from the French laundrywoman to Miss Norton forgot him. I was so glad of that.They got up a masquerade, and had a gay time New Year’s Eve. Ididn’t mean to go down, having no dress. But at the last minute, Mrs.Kirke remembered some old brocades, and Miss Norton lent me lace and feathers.So I dressed up as Mrs. Malaprop, and sailed in with a mask on. No one knew me,for I disguised my voice, and no one dreamed of the silent, haughty Miss March(for they think I am very stiff and cool, most of them, and so I am towhippersnappers) could dance and dress, and burst out into a ‘nicederangement of epitaphs, like an allegory on the banks of the Nile’. Ienjoyed it very much, and when we unmasked it was fun to see them stare at me.I heard one of the young men tell another that he knew I’d been anactress, in fact, he thought he remembered seeing me at one of the minortheaters. Meg will relish that joke. Mr. Bhaer was Nick Bottom, and Tina wasTitania, a perfect little fairy in his arms. To see them dance was ‘quitea landscape’, to use a Teddyism.I had a very happy New Year, after all, and when I thought it over in my room,I felt as if I was getting on a little in spite of my many failures, forI’m cheerful all the time now, work with a will, and take more interestin other people than I used to, which is satisfactory. Bless you all! Ever yourloving... JoCHAPTER THIRTY-FOURFRIENDThough very happy in the social atmosphere about her, and very busy with thedaily work that earned her bread and made it sweeter for the effort, Jo stillfound time for literary labors. The purpose which now took possession of herwas a natural one to a poor and ambitious girl, but the means she took to gainher end were not the best. She saw that money conferred power, money and power,therefore, she resolved to have, not to be used for herself alone, but forthose whom she loved more than life. The dream of filling home with comforts,giving Beth everything she wanted, from strawberries in winter to an organ inher bedroom, going abroad herself, and always having more than enough, so thatshe might indulge in the luxury of charity, had been for years Jo’s mostcherished castle in the air.The prize-story experience had seemed to open a way which might, after longtraveling and much uphill work, lead to this delightful chateau en Espagne. Butthe novel disaster quenched her courage for a time, for public opinion is agiant which has frightened stouter-hearted Jacks on bigger beanstalks thanhers. Like that immortal hero, she reposed awhile after the first attempt,which resulted in a tumble and the least lovely of the giant’s treasures,if I remember rightly. But the ‘up again and take another’ spiritwas as strong in Jo as in Jack, so she scrambled up on the shady side this timeand got more booty, but nearly left behind her what was far more precious thanthe moneybags.She took to writing sensation stories, for in those dark ages, even all-perfectAmerica read rubbish. She told no one, but concocted a ‘thrillingtale’, and boldly carried it herself to Mr. Dashwood, editor of theWeekly Volcano. She had never read Sartor Resartus, but she had a womanlyinstinct that clothes possess an influence more powerful over many than theworth of character or the magic of manners. So she dressed herself in her best,and trying to persuade herself that she was neither excited nor nervous,bravely climbed two pairs of dark and dirty stairs to find herself in adisorderly room, a cloud of cigar smoke, and the presence of three gentlemen,sitting with their heels rather higher than their hats, which articles of dressnone of them took the trouble to remove on her appearance. Somewhat daunted bythis reception, Jo hesitated on the threshold, murmuring in muchembarrassment...“Excuse me, I was looking for the Weekly Volcano office. I wished to seeMr. Dashwood.”Down went the highest pair of heels, up rose the smokiest gentleman, andcarefully cherishing his cigar between his fingers, he advanced with a nod anda countenance expressive of nothing but sleep. Feeling that she must getthrough the matter somehow, Jo produced her manuscript and, blushing redder andredder with each sentence, blundered out fragments of the little speechcarefully prepared for the occasion.“A friend of mine desired me to offer—a story—just as anexperiment—would like your opinion—be glad to write more if thissuits.”While she blushed and blundered, Mr. Dashwood had taken the manuscript, and wasturning over the leaves with a pair of rather dirty fingers, and castingcritical glances up and down the neat pages.“Not a first attempt, I take it?” observing that the pages werenumbered, covered only on one side, and not tied up with a ribbon—suresign of a novice.“No, sir. She has had some experience, and got a prize for a tale in theBlarneystone Banner.”“Oh, did she?” and Mr. Dashwood gave Jo a quick look, which seemedto take note of everything she had on, from the bow in her bonnet to thebuttons on her boots. “Well, you can leave it, if you like. We’vemore of this sort of thing on hand than we know what to do with at present, butI’ll run my eye over it, and give you an answer next week.”Now, Jo did not like to leave it, for Mr. Dashwood didn’t suit herat all, but, under the circumstances, there was nothing for her to do but bowand walk away, looking particularly tall and dignified, as she was apt to dowhen nettled or abashed. Just then she was both, for it was perfectly evidentfrom the knowing glances exchanged among the gentlemen that her little fictionof ‘my friend’ was considered a good joke, and a laugh, produced bysome inaudible remark of the editor, as he closed the door, completed herdiscomfiture. Half resolving never to return, she went home, and worked off herirritation by stitching pinafores vigorously, and in an hour or two was coolenough to laugh over the scene and long for next week.When she went again, Mr. Dashwood was alone, whereat she rejoiced. Mr. Dashwoodwas much wider awake than before, which was agreeable, and Mr. Dashwood was nottoo deeply absorbed in a cigar to remember his manners, so the second interviewwas much more comfortable than the first.“We’ll take this (editors never say I), if you don’t objectto a few alterations. It’s too long, but omitting the passages I’vemarked will make it just the right length,” he said, in a businessliketone.Jo hardly knew her own MS. again, so crumpled and underscored were its pagesand paragraphs, but feeling as a tender parent might on being asked to cut offher baby’s legs in order that it might fit into a new cradle, she lookedat the marked passages and was surprised to find that all the moralreflections—which she had carefully put in as ballast for muchromance—had been stricken out.“But, Sir, I thought every story should have some sort of a moral, so Itook care to have a few of my sinners repent.”Mr. Dashwoods’s editorial gravity relaxed into a smile, for Jo hadforgotten her ‘friend’, and spoken as only an author could.“People want to be amused, not preached at, you know. Morals don’tsell nowadays.” Which was not quite a correct statement, by the way.“You think it would do with these alterations, then?”“Yes, it’s a new plot, and pretty well worked up—languagegood, and so on,” was Mr. Dashwood’s affable reply.“What do you—that is, what compensation—” began Jo, notexactly knowing how to express herself.“Oh, yes, well, we give from twenty-five to thirty for things of thissort. Pay when it comes out,” returned Mr. Dashwood, as if that point hadescaped him. Such trifles do escape the editorial mind, it is said.“Very well, you can have it,” said Jo, handing back the story witha satisfied air, for after the dollar-a-column work, even twenty-five seemedgood pay.“Shall I tell my friend you will take another if she has one better thanthis?” asked Jo, unconscious of her little slip of the tongue, andemboldened by her success.“Well, we’ll look at it. Can’t promise to take it. Tell herto make it short and spicy, and never mind the moral. What name would yourfriend like to put on it?” in a careless tone.“None at all, if you please, she doesn’t wish her name to appearand has no nom de plume,” said Jo, blushing in spite of herself.“Just as she likes, of course. The tale will be out next week. Will youcall for the money, or shall I send it?” asked Mr. Dashwood, who felt anatural desire to know who his new contributor might be.“I’ll call. Good morning, Sir.”As she departed, Mr. Dashwood put up his feet, with the graceful remark,“Poor and proud, as usual, but she’ll do.”Following Mr. Dashwood’s directions, and making Mrs. Northbury her model,Jo rashly took a plunge into the frothy sea of sensational literature, butthanks to the life preserver thrown her by a friend, she came up again not muchthe worse for her ducking.Like most young scribblers, she went abroad for her characters and scenery, andbanditti, counts, gypsies, nuns, and duchesses appeared upon her stage, andplayed their parts with as much accuracy and spirit as could be expected. Herreaders were not particular about such trifles as grammar, punctuation, andprobability, and Mr. Dashwood graciously permitted her to fill his columns atthe lowest prices, not thinking it necessary to tell her that the real cause ofhis hospitality was the fact that one of his hacks, on being offered higherwages, had basely left him in the lurch.She soon became interested in her work, for her emaciated purse grew stout, andthe little hoard she was making to take Beth to the mountains next summer grewslowly but surely as the weeks passed. One thing disturbed her satisfaction,and that was that she did not tell them at home. She had a feeling that Fatherand Mother would not approve, and preferred to have her own way first, and begpardon afterward. It was easy to keep her secret, for no name appeared with herstories. Mr. Dashwood had of course found it out very soon, but promised to bedumb, and for a wonder kept his word.She thought it would do her no harm, for she sincerely meant to write nothingof which she would be ashamed, and quieted all pricks of conscience byanticipations of the happy minute when she should show her earnings and laughover her well-kept secret.But Mr. Dashwood rejected any but thrilling tales, and as thrills could not beproduced except by harrowing up the souls of the readers, history and romance,land and sea, science and art, police records and lunatic asylums, had to beransacked for the purpose. Jo soon found that her innocent experience had givenher but few glimpses of the tragic world which underlies society, so regardingit in a business light, she set about supplying her deficiencies withcharacteristic energy. Eager to find material for stories, and bent on makingthem original in plot, if not masterly in execution, she searched newspapersfor accidents, incidents, and crimes. She excited the suspicions of publiclibrarians by asking for works on poisons. She studied faces in the street, andcharacters, good, bad, and indifferent, all about her. She delved in the dustof ancient times for facts or fictions so old that they were as good as new,and introduced herself to folly, sin, and misery, as well as her limitedopportunities allowed. She thought she was prospering finely, but unconsciouslyshe was beginning to desecrate some of the womanliest attributes of awoman’s character. She was living in bad society, and imaginary though itwas, its influence affected her, for she was feeding heart and fancy ondangerous and unsubstantial food, and was fast brushing the innocent bloom fromher nature by a premature acquaintance with the darker side of life, whichcomes soon enough to all of us.She was beginning to feel rather than see this, for much describing of otherpeople’s passions and feelings set her to studying and speculating abouther own, a morbid amusement in which healthy young minds do not voluntarilyindulge. Wrongdoing always brings its own punishment, and when Jo most neededhers, she got it.I don’t know whether the study of Shakespeare helped her to readcharacter, or the natural instinct of a woman for what was honest, brave, andstrong, but while endowing her imaginary heroes with every perfection under thesun, Jo was discovering a live hero, who interested her in spite of many humanimperfections. Mr. Bhaer, in one of their conversations, had advised her tostudy simple, true, and lovely characters, wherever she found them, as goodtraining for a writer. Jo took him at his word, for she coolly turned round andstudied him—a proceeding which would have much surprised him, had heknown it, for the worthy Professor was very humble in his own conceit.Why everybody liked him was what puzzled Jo, at first. He was neither rich norgreat, young nor handsome, in no respect what is called fascinating, imposing,or brilliant, and yet he was as attractive as a genial fire, and people seemedto gather about him as naturally as about a warm hearth. He was poor, yetalways appeared to be giving something away; a stranger, yet everyone was hisfriend; no longer young, but as happy-hearted as a boy; plain and peculiar, yethis face looked beautiful to many, and his oddities were freely forgiven forhis sake. Jo often watched him, trying to discover the charm, and at lastdecided that it was benevolence which worked the miracle. If he had any sorrow,‘it sat with its head under its wing’, and he turned only his sunnyside to the world. There were lines upon his forehead, but Time seemed to havetouched him gently, remembering how kind he was to others. The pleasant curvesabout his mouth were the memorials of many friendly words and cheery laughs,his eyes were never cold or hard, and his big hand had a warm, strong graspthat was more expressive than words.His very clothes seemed to partake of the hospitable nature of the wearer. Theylooked as if they were at ease, and liked to make him comfortable. Hiscapacious waistcoat was suggestive of a large heart underneath. His rusty coathad a social air, and the baggy pockets plainly proved that little hands oftenwent in empty and came out full. His very boots were benevolent, and hiscollars never stiff and raspy like other people’s.“That’s it!” said Jo to herself, when she at lengthdiscovered that genuine good will toward one’s fellow men could beautifyand dignify even a stout German teacher, who shoveled in his dinner, darned hisown socks, and was burdened with the name of Bhaer.Jo valued goodness highly, but she also possessed a most feminine respect forintellect, and a little discovery which she made about the Professor added muchto her regard for him. He never spoke of himself, and no one ever knew that inhis native city he had been a man much honored and esteemed for learning andintegrity, till a countryman came to see him. He never spoke of himself, and ina conversation with Miss Norton divulged the pleasing fact. From her Jo learnedit, and liked it all the better because Mr. Bhaer had never told it. She feltproud to know that he was an honored Professor in Berlin, though only a poorlanguage-master in America, and his homely, hard-working life was muchbeautified by the spice of romance which this discovery gave it. Another and abetter gift than intellect was shown her in a most unexpected manner. MissNorton had the entree into most society, which Jo would have had no chance ofseeing but for her. The solitary woman felt an interest in the ambitious girl,and kindly conferred many favors of this sort both on Jo and the Professor. Shetook them with her one night to a select symposium, held in honor of severalcelebrities.Jo went prepared to bow down and adore the mighty ones whom she had worshipedwith youthful enthusiasm afar off. But her reverence for genius received asevere shock that night, and it took her some time to recover from thediscovery that the great creatures were only men and women after all. Imagineher dismay, on stealing a glance of timid admiration at the poet whose linessuggested an ethereal being fed on ‘spirit, fire, and dew’, tobehold him devouring his supper with an ardor which flushed his intellectualcountenance. Turning as from a fallen idol, she made other discoveries whichrapidly dispelled her romantic illusions. The great novelist vibrated betweentwo decanters with the regularity of a pendulum; the famous divine flirtedopenly with one of the Madame de Staels of the age, who looked daggers atanother Corinne, who was amiably satirizing her, after outmaneuvering her inefforts to absorb the profound philosopher, who imbibed tea Johnsonianly andappeared to slumber, the loquacity of the lady rendering speech impossible. Thescientific celebrities, forgetting their mollusks and glacial periods, gossipedabout art, while devoting themselves to oysters and ices with characteristicenergy; the young musician, who was charming the city like a second Orpheus,talked horses; and the specimen of the British nobility present happened to bethe most ordinary man of the party.Before the evening was half over, Jo felt so completely disillusioned, that shesat down in a corner to recover herself. Mr. Bhaer soon joined her, lookingrather out of his element, and presently several of the philosophers, eachmounted on his hobby, came ambling up to hold an intellectual tournament in therecess. The conversations were miles beyond Jo’s comprehension, but sheenjoyed it, though Kant and Hegel were unknown gods, the Subjective andObjective unintelligible terms, and the only thing ‘evolved from herinner consciousness’ was a bad headache after it was all over. It dawnedupon her gradually that the world was being picked to pieces, and put togetheron new and, according to the talkers, on infinitely better principles thanbefore, that religion was in a fair way to be reasoned into nothingness, andintellect was to be the only God. Jo knew nothing about philosophy ormetaphysics of any sort, but a curious excitement, half pleasurable, halfpainful, came over her as she listened with a sense of being turned adrift intotime and space, like a young balloon out on a holiday.She looked round to see how the Professor liked it, and found him looking ather with the grimmest expression she had ever seen him wear. He shook his headand beckoned her to come away, but she was fascinated just then by the freedomof Speculative Philosophy, and kept her seat, trying to find out what the wisegentlemen intended to rely upon after they had annihilated all the old beliefs.Now, Mr. Bhaer was a diffident man and slow to offer his own opinions, notbecause they were unsettled, but too sincere and earnest to be lightly spoken.As he glanced from Jo to several other young people, attracted by thebrilliancy of the philosophic pyrotechnics, he knit his brows and longed tospeak, fearing that some inflammable young soul would be led astray by therockets, to find when the display was over that they had only an empty stick ora scorched hand.He bore it as long as he could, but when he was appealed to for an opinion, heblazed up with honest indignation and defended religion with all the eloquenceof truth—an eloquence which made his broken English musical and his plainface beautiful. He had a hard fight, for the wise men argued well, but hedidn’t know when he was beaten and stood to his colors like a man.Somehow, as he talked, the world got right again to Jo. The old beliefs, thathad lasted so long, seemed better than the new. God was not a blind force, andimmortality was not a pretty fable, but a blessed fact. She felt as if she hadsolid ground under her feet again, and when Mr. Bhaer paused, outtalked but notone whit convinced, Jo wanted to clap her hands and thank him.She did neither, but she remembered the scene, and gave the Professor herheartiest respect, for she knew it cost him an effort to speak out then andthere, because his conscience would not let him be silent. She began to seethat character is a better possession than money, rank, intellect, or beauty,and to feel that if greatness is what a wise man has defined it to be,‘truth, reverence, and good will’, then her friend Friedrich Bhaerwas not only good, but great.This belief strengthened daily. She valued his esteem, she coveted his respect,she wanted to be worthy of his friendship, and just when the wish wassincerest, she came near to losing everything. It all grew out of a cocked hat,for one evening the Professor came in to give Jo her lesson with a papersoldier cap on his head, which Tina had put there and he had forgotten to takeoff.“It’s evident he doesn’t look in his glass before comingdown,” thought Jo, with a smile, as he said “Goot efening,”and sat soberly down, quite unconscious of the ludicrous contrast between hissubject and his headgear, for he was going to read her the Death ofWallenstein.She said nothing at first, for she liked to hear him laugh out his big, heartylaugh when anything funny happened, so she left him to discover it for himself,and presently forgot all about it, for to hear a German read Schiller is ratheran absorbing occupation. After the reading came the lesson, which was a livelyone, for Jo was in a gay mood that night, and the cocked hat kept her eyesdancing with merriment. The Professor didn’t know what to make of her,and stopped at last to ask with an air of mild surprise that was irresistible.. .“Mees Marsch, for what do you laugh in your master’s face? Haf youno respect for me, that you go on so bad?”“How can I be respectful, Sir, when you forget to take your hatoff?” said Jo.Lifting his hand to his head, the absent-minded Professor gravely felt andremoved the little cocked hat, looked at it a minute, and then threw back hishead and laughed like a merry bass viol.“Ah! I see him now, it is that imp Tina who makes me a fool with my cap.Well, it is nothing, but see you, if this lesson goes not well, you too shallwear him.”But the lesson did not go at all for a few minutes because Mr. Bhaer caughtsight of a picture on the hat, and unfolding it, said with great disgust,“I wish these papers did not come in the house. They are not for childrento see, nor young people to read. It is not well, and I haf no patience withthose who make this harm.”Jo glanced at the sheet and saw a pleasing illustration composed of a lunatic,a corpse, a villain, and a viper. She did not like it, but the impulse thatmade her turn it over was not one of displeasure but fear, because for a minuteshe fancied the paper was the Volcano. It was not, however, and her panicsubsided as she remembered that even if it had been and one of her own tales init, there would have been no name to betray her. She had betrayed herself,however, by a look and a blush, for though an absent man, the Professor saw agood deal more than people fancied. He knew that Jo wrote, and had met her downamong the newspaper offices more than once, but as she never spoke of it, heasked no questions in spite of a strong desire to see her work. Now it occurredto him that she was doing what she was ashamed to own, and it troubled him. Hedid not say to himself, “It is none of my business. I’ve no rightto say anything,” as many people would have done. He only remembered thatshe was young and poor, a girl far away from mother’s love andfather’s care, and he was moved to help her with an impulse as quick andnatural as that which would prompt him to put out his hand to save a baby froma puddle. All this flashed through his mind in a minute, but not a trace of itappeared in his face, and by the time the paper was turned, and Jo’sneedle threaded, he was ready to say quite naturally, but very gravely...“Yes, you are right to put it from you. I do not think that good younggirls should see such things. They are made pleasant to some, but I would morerather give my boys gunpowder to play with than this bad trash.”“All may not be bad, only silly, you know, and if there is a demand forit, I don’t see any harm in supplying it. Many very respectable peoplemake an honest living out of what are called sensation stories,” said Jo,scratching gathers so energetically that a row of little slits followed herpin.“There is a demand for whisky, but I think you and I do not care to sellit. If the respectable people knew what harm they did, they would not feel thatthe living was honest. They haf no right to put poison in the sugarplum, andlet the small ones eat it. No, they should think a little, and sweep mud in thestreet before they do this thing.”Mr. Bhaer spoke warmly, and walked to the fire, crumpling the paper in hishands. Jo sat still, looking as if the fire had come to her, for her cheeksburned long after the cocked hat had turned to smoke and gone harmlessly up thechimney.“I should like much to send all the rest after him,” muttered theProfessor, coming back with a relieved air.Jo thought what a blaze her pile of papers upstairs would make, and herhard-earned money lay rather heavily on her conscience at that minute. Then shethought consolingly to herself, “Mine are not like that, they are onlysilly, never bad, so I won’t be worried,” and taking up her book,she said, with a studious face, “Shall we go on, Sir? I’ll be verygood and proper now.”“I shall hope so,” was all he said, but he meant more than sheimagined, and the grave, kind look he gave her made her feel as if the wordsWeekly Volcano were printed in large type on her forehead.As soon as she went to her room, she got out her papers, and carefully rereadevery one of her stories. Being a little shortsighted, Mr. Bhaer sometimes usedeye glasses, and Jo had tried them once, smiling to see how they magnified thefine print of her book. Now she seemed to have on the Professor’s mentalor moral spectacles also, for the faults of these poor stories glared at herdreadfully and filled her with dismay.“They are trash, and will soon be worse trash if I go on, for each ismore sensational than the last. I’ve gone blindly on, hurting myself andother people, for the sake of money. I know it’s so, for I can’tread this stuff in sober earnest without being horribly ashamed of it, and whatshould I do if they were seen at home or Mr. Bhaer got hold of them?”Jo turned hot at the bare idea, and stuffed the whole bundle into her stove,nearly setting the chimney afire with the blaze.“Yes, that’s the best place for such inflammable nonsense.I’d better burn the house down, I suppose, than let other people blowthemselves up with my gunpowder,” she thought as she watched the Demon ofthe Jura whisk away, a little black cinder with fiery eyes.But when nothing remained of all her three month’s work except a heap ofashes and the money in her lap, Jo looked sober, as she sat on the floor,wondering what she ought to do about her wages.“I think I haven’t done much harm yet, and may keep this to pay formy time,” she said, after a long meditation, adding impatiently, “Ialmost wish I hadn’t any conscience, it’s so inconvenient. If Ididn’t care about doing right, and didn’t feel uncomfortable whendoing wrong, I should get on capitally. I can’t help wishing sometimes,that Mother and Father hadn’t been so particular about suchthings.”Ah, Jo, instead of wishing that, thank God that ‘Father and Mother wereparticular’, and pity from your heart those who have no such guardians tohedge them round with principles which may seem like prison walls to impatientyouth, but which will prove sure foundations to build character upon inwomanhood.Jo wrote no more sensational stories, deciding that the money did not pay forher share of the sensation, but going to the other extreme, as is the way withpeople of her stamp, she took a course of Mrs. Sherwood, Miss Edgeworth, andHannah More, and then produced a tale which might have been more properlycalled an essay or a sermon, so intensely moral was it. She had her doubtsabout it from the beginning, for her lively fancy and girlish romance felt asill at ease in the new style as she would have done masquerading in the stiffand cumbrous costume of the last century. She sent this didactic gem to severalmarkets, but it found no purchaser, and she was inclined to agree with Mr.Dashwood that morals didn’t sell.Then she tried a child’s story, which she could easily have disposed ofif she had not been mercenary enough to demand filthy lucre for it. The onlyperson who offered enough to make it worth her while to try juvenile literaturewas a worthy gentleman who felt it his mission to convert all the world to hisparticular belief. But much as she liked to write for children, Jo could notconsent to depict all her naughty boys as being eaten by bears or tossed by madbulls because they did not go to a particular Sabbath school, nor all the goodinfants who did go as rewarded by every kind of bliss, from gilded gingerbreadto escorts of angels when they departed this life with psalms or sermons ontheir lisping tongues. So nothing came of these trials, and Jo corked up herinkstand, and said in a fit of very wholesome humility...“I don’t know anything. I’ll wait until I do before I tryagain, and meantime, ‘sweep mud in the street’ if I can’t dobetter, that’s honest, at least.” Which decision proved that hersecond tumble down the beanstalk had done her some good.While these internal revolutions were going on, her external life had been asbusy and uneventful as usual, and if she sometimes looked serious or a littlesad no one observed it but Professor Bhaer. He did it so quietly that Jo neverknew he was watching to see if she would accept and profit by his reproof, butshe stood the test, and he was satisfied, for though no words passed betweenthem, he knew that she had given up writing. Not only did he guess it by thefact that the second finger of her right hand was no longer inky, but she spenther evenings downstairs now, was met no more among newspaper offices, andstudied with a dogged patience, which assured him that she was bent onoccupying her mind with something useful, if not pleasant.He helped her in many ways, proving himself a true friend, and Jo was happy,for while her pen lay idle, she was learning other lessons besides German, andlaying a foundation for the sensation story of her own life.It was a pleasant winter and a long one, for she did not leave Mrs. Kirke tillJune. Everyone seemed sorry when the time came. The children were inconsolable,and Mr. Bhaer’s hair stuck straight up all over his head, for he alwaysrumpled it wildly when disturbed in mind.“Going home? Ah, you are happy that you haf a home to go in,” hesaid, when she told him, and sat silently pulling his beard in the corner,while she held a little levee on that last evening.She was going early, so she bade them all goodbye overnight, and when his turncame, she said warmly, “Now, Sir, you won’t forget to come and seeus, if you ever travel our way, will you? I’ll never forgive you if youdo, for I want them all to know my friend.”“Do you? Shall I come?” he asked, looking down at her with an eagerexpression which she did not see.“Yes, come next month. Laurie graduates then, and you’d enjoycommencement as something new.”“That is your best friend, of whom you speak?” he said in analtered tone.“Yes, my boy Teddy. I’m very proud of him and should like you tosee him.”Jo looked up then, quite unconscious of anything but her own pleasure in theprospect of showing them to one another. Something in Mr. Bhaer’s facesuddenly recalled the fact that she might find Laurie more than a ‘bestfriend’, and simply because she particularly wished not to look as ifanything was the matter, she involuntarily began to blush, and the more shetried not to, the redder she grew. If it had not been for Tina on her knee. Shedidn’t know what would have become of her. Fortunately the child wasmoved to hug her, so she managed to hide her face an instant, hoping theProfessor did not see it. But he did, and his own changed again from thatmomentary anxiety to its usual expression, as he said cordially...“I fear I shall not make the time for that, but I wish the friend muchsuccess, and you all happiness. Gott bless you!” And with that, he shookhands warmly, shouldered Tina, and went away.But after the boys were abed, he sat long before his fire with the tired lookon his face and the ‘heimweh’, or homesickness, lying heavy at hisheart. Once, when he remembered Jo as she sat with the little child in her lapand that new softness in her face, he leaned his head on his hands a minute,and then roamed about the room, as if in search of something that he could notfind.“It is not for me, I must not hope it now,” he said to himself,with a sigh that was almost a groan. Then, as if reproaching himself for thelonging that he could not repress, he went and kissed the two tousled headsupon the pillow, took down his seldom-used meerschaum, and opened his Plato.He did his best and did it manfully, but I don’t think he found that apair of rampant boys, a pipe, or even the divine Plato, were very satisfactorysubstitutes for wife and child at home.Early as it was, he was at the station next morning to see Jo off, and thanksto him, she began her solitary journey with the pleasant memory of a familiarface smiling its farewell, a bunch of violets to keep her company, and best ofall, the happy thought, “Well, the winter’s gone, and I’vewritten no books, earned no fortune, but I’ve made a friend worth havingand I’ll try to keep him all my life.”CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVEHEARTACHEWhatever his motive might have been, Laurie studied to some purpose that year,for he graduated with honor, and gave the Latin oration with the grace of aPhillips and the eloquence of a Demosthenes, so his friends said. They were allthere, his grandfather—oh, so proud—Mr. and Mrs. March, John andMeg, Jo and Beth, and all exulted over him with the sincere admiration whichboys make light of at the time, but fail to win from the world by anyafter-triumphs.“I’ve got to stay for this confounded supper, but I shall be homeearly tomorrow. You’ll come and meet me as usual, girls?” Lauriesaid, as he put the sisters into the carriage after the joys of the day wereover. He said ‘girls’, but he meant Jo, for she was the only onewho kept up the old custom. She had not the heart to refuse her splendid,successful boy anything, and answered warmly...“I’ll come, Teddy, rain or shine, and march before you, playing‘Hail the conquering hero comes’ on a jew’s-harp.”Laurie thanked her with a look that made her think in a sudden panic,“Oh, deary me! I know he’ll say something, and then what shall Ido?”Evening meditation and morning work somewhat allayed her fears, and havingdecided that she wouldn’t be vain enough to think people were going topropose when she had given them every reason to know what her answer would be,she set forth at the appointed time, hoping Teddy wouldn’t do anything tomake her hurt his poor feelings. A call at Meg’s, and a refreshing sniffand sip at the Daisy and Demijohn, still further fortified her for thetete-a-tete, but when she saw a stalwart figure looming in the distance, shehad a strong desire to turn about and run away.“Where’s the jew’s-harp, Jo?” cried Laurie, as soon ashe was within speaking distance.“I forgot it.” And Jo took heart again, for that salutation couldnot be called lover-like.She always used to take his arm on these occasions, now she did not, and hemade no complaint, which was a bad sign, but talked on rapidly about all sortsof faraway subjects, till they turned from the road into the little path thatled homeward through the grove. Then he walked more slowly, suddenly lost hisfine flow of language, and now and then a dreadful pause occurred. To rescuethe conversation from one of the wells of silence into which it kept falling,Jo said hastily, “Now you must have a good long holiday!”“I intend to.”Something in his resolute tone made Jo look up quickly to find him looking downat her with an expression that assured her the dreaded moment had come, andmade her put out her hand with an imploring, “No, Teddy. Pleasedon’t!”“I will, and you must hear me. It’s no use, Jo, we’ve got tohave it out, and the sooner the better for both of us,” he answered,getting flushed and excited all at once.“Say what you like then. I’ll listen,” said Jo, with adesperate sort of patience.Laurie was a young lover, but he was in earnest, and meant to ‘have itout’, if he died in the attempt, so he plunged into the subject withcharacteristic impetuousity, saying in a voice that would get choky now andthen, in spite of manful efforts to keep it steady...“I’ve loved you ever since I’ve known you, Jo, couldn’thelp it, you’ve been so good to me. I’ve tried to show it, but youwouldn’t let me. Now I’m going to make you hear, and give me ananswer, for I can’t go on so any longer.”“I wanted to save you this. I thought you’d understand...”began Jo, finding it a great deal harder than she expected.“I know you did, but the girls are so queer you never know what theymean. They say no when they mean yes, and drive a man out of his wits just forthe fun of it,” returned Laurie, entrenching himself behind an undeniablefact.“I don’t. I never wanted to make you care for me so, and I wentaway to keep you from it if I could.”“I thought so. It was like you, but it was no use. I only loved you allthe more, and I worked hard to please you, and I gave up billiards andeverything you didn’t like, and waited and never complained, for I hopedyou’d love me, though I’m not half good enough...” Here therewas a choke that couldn’t be controlled, so he decapitated buttercupswhile he cleared his ‘confounded throat’.“You, you are, you’re a great deal too good for me, and I’mso grateful to you, and so proud and fond of you, I don’t know why Ican’t love you as you want me to. I’ve tried, but I can’tchange the feeling, and it would be a lie to say I do when Idon’t.”“Really, truly, Jo?”He stopped short, and caught both her hands as he put his question with a lookthat she did not soon forget.“Really, truly, dear.”They were in the grove now, close by the stile, and when the last words fellreluctantly from Jo’s lips, Laurie dropped her hands and turned as if togo on, but for once in his life the fence was too much for him. So he just laidhis head down on the mossy post, and stood so still that Jo was frightened.“Oh, Teddy, I’m sorry, so desperately sorry, I could kill myself ifit would do any good! I wish you wouldn’t take it so hard, I can’thelp it. You know it’s impossible for people to make themselves loveother people if they don’t,” cried Jo inelegantly but remorsefully,as she softly patted his shoulder, remembering the time when he had comfortedher so long ago.“They do sometimes,” said a muffled voice from the post. “Idon’t believe it’s the right sort of love, and I’d rather nottry it,” was the decided answer.There was a long pause, while a blackbird sung blithely on the willow by theriver, and the tall grass rustled in the wind. Presently Jo said very soberly,as she sat down on the step of the stile, “Laurie, I want to tell yousomething.”He started as if he had been shot, threw up his head, and cried out in a fiercetone, “Don’t tell me that, Jo, I can’t bear it now!”“Tell what?” she asked, wondering at his violence.“That you love that old man.”“What old man?” demanded Jo, thinking he must mean his grandfather.“That devilish Professor you were always writing about. If you say youlove him, I know I shall do something desperate;” and he looked as if hewould keep his word, as he clenched his hands with a wrathful spark in hiseyes.Jo wanted to laugh, but restrained herself and said warmly, for she too, wasgetting excited with all this, “Don’t swear, Teddy! He isn’told, nor anything bad, but good and kind, and the best friend I’ve got,next to you. Pray, don’t fly into a passion. I want to be kind, but Iknow I shall get angry if you abuse my Professor. I haven’t the leastidea of loving him or anybody else.”“But you will after a while, and then what will become of me?”“You’ll love someone else too, like a sensible boy, and forget allthis trouble.”“I can’t love anyone else, and I’ll never forget you, Jo,Never! Never!” with a stamp to emphasize his passionate words.“What shall I do with him?” sighed Jo, finding that emotions weremore unmanagable than she expected. “You haven’t heard what Iwanted to tell you. Sit down and listen, for indeed I want to do right and makeyou happy,” she said, hoping to soothe him with a little reason, whichproved that she knew nothing about love.Seeing a ray of hope in that last speech, Laurie threw himself down on thegrass at her feet, leaned his arm on the lower step of the stile, and looked upat her with an expectant face. Now that arrangement was not conducive to calmspeech or clear thought on Jo’s part, for how could she say hard thingsto her boy while he watched her with eyes full of love and longing, and lashesstill wet with the bitter drop or two her hardness of heart had wrung from him?She gently turned his head away, saying, as she stroked the wavy hair which hadbeen allowed to grow for her sake—how touching that was, to be sure!“I agree with Mother that you and I are not suited to each other, becauseour quick tempers and strong wills would probably make us very miserable, if wewere so foolish as to...” Jo paused a little over the last word, butLaurie uttered it with a rapturous expression.“Marry—no we shouldn’t! If you loved me, Jo, I should be aperfect saint, for you could make me anything you like.”“No, I can’t. I’ve tried and failed, and I won’t riskour happiness by such a serious experiment. We don’t agree and we nevershall, so we’ll be good friends all our lives, but we won’t go anddo anything rash.”“Yes, we will if we get the chance,” muttered Laurie rebelliously.“Now do be reasonable, and take a sensible view of the case,”implored Jo, almost at her wit’s end.“I won’t be reasonable. I don’t want to take what you call‘a sensible view’. It won’t help me, and it only makes itharder. I don’t believe you’ve got any heart.”“I wish I hadn’t.”There was a little quiver in Jo’s voice, and thinking it a good omen,Laurie turned round, bringing all his persuasive powers to bear as he said, inthe wheedlesome tone that had never been so dangerously wheedlesome before,“Don’t disappoint us, dear! Everyone expects it. Grandpa has sethis heart upon it, your people like it, and I can’t get on without you.Say you will, and let’s be happy. Do, do!”Not until months afterward did Jo understand how she had the strength of mindto hold fast to the resolution she had made when she decided that she did notlove her boy, and never could. It was very hard to do, but she did it, knowingthat delay was both useless and cruel.“I can’t say ‘yes’ truly, so I won’t say it atall. You’ll see that I’m right, by-and-by, and thank me forit...” she began solemnly.“I’ll be hanged if I do!” and Laurie bounced up off thegrass, burning with indignation at the very idea.“Yes, you will!” persisted Jo. “You’ll get over thisafter a while, and find some lovely accomplished girl, who will adore you, andmake a fine mistress for your fine house. I shouldn’t. I’m homelyand awkward and odd and old, and you’d be ashamed of me, and we shouldquarrel—we can’t help it even now, you see—and Ishouldn’t like elegant society and you would, and you’d hate myscribbling, and I couldn’t get on without it, and we should be unhappy,and wish we hadn’t done it, and everything would be horrid!”“Anything more?” asked Laurie, finding it hard to listen patientlyto this prophetic burst.“Nothing more, except that I don’t believe I shall ever marry.I’m happy as I am, and love my liberty too well to be in a hurry to giveit up for any mortal man.”“I know better!” broke in Laurie. “You think so now, butthere’ll come a time when you will care for somebody, and you’lllove him tremendously, and live and die for him. I know you will, it’syour way, and I shall have to stand by and see it,” and the despairinglover cast his hat upon the ground with a gesture that would have seemedcomical, if his face had not been so tragic.“Yes, I will live and die for him, if he ever comes and makes me love himin spite of myself, and you must do the best you can!” cried Jo, losingpatience with poor Teddy. “I’ve done my best, but you won’tbe reasonable, and it’s selfish of you to keep teasing for what Ican’t give. I shall always be fond of you, very fond indeed, as a friend,but I’ll never marry you, and the sooner you believe it the better forboth of us—so now!”That speech was like gunpowder. Laurie looked at her a minute as if he did notquite know what to do with himself, then turned sharply away, saying in adesperate sort of tone, “You’ll be sorry some day, Jo.”“Oh, where are you going?” she cried, for his face frightened her.“To the devil!” was the consoling answer.For a minute Jo’s heart stood still, as he swung himself down the banktoward the river, but it takes much folly, sin or misery to send a young man toa violent death, and Laurie was not one of the weak sort who are conquered by asingle failure. He had no thought of a melodramatic plunge, but some blindinstinct led him to fling hat and coat into his boat, and row away with all hismight, making better time up the river than he had done in any race. Jo drew along breath and unclasped her hands as she watched the poor fellow trying tooutstrip the trouble which he carried in his heart.“That will do him good, and he’ll come home in such a tender,penitent state of mind, that I shan’t dare to see him,” she said,adding, as she went slowly home, feeling as if she had murdered some innocentthing, and buried it under the leaves. “Now I must go and prepare Mr.Laurence to be very kind to my poor boy. I wish he’d love Beth, perhapshe may in time, but I begin to think I was mistaken about her. Oh dear! How cangirls like to have lovers and refuse them? I think it’s dreadful.”Being sure that no one could do it so well as herself, she went straight to Mr.Laurence, told the hard story bravely through, and then broke down, crying sodismally over her own insensibility that the kind old gentleman, though sorelydisappointed, did not utter a reproach. He found it difficult to understand howany girl could help loving Laurie, and hoped she would change her mind, but heknew even better than Jo that love cannot be forced, so he shook his head sadlyand resolved to carry his boy out of harm’s way, for YoungImpetuosity’s parting words to Jo disturbed him more than he wouldconfess.When Laurie came home, dead tired but quite composed, his grandfather met himas if he knew nothing, and kept up the delusion very successfully for an houror two. But when they sat together in the twilight, the time they used to enjoyso much, it was hard work for the old man to ramble on as usual, and harderstill for the young one to listen to praises of the last year’s success,which to him now seemed like love’s labor lost. He bore it as long as hecould, then went to his piano and began to play. The windows were open, and Jo,walking in the garden with Beth, for once understood music better than hersister, for he played the ‘Sonata Pathetique’, and played itas he never did before.“That’s very fine, I dare say, but it’s sad enough to makeone cry. Give us something gayer, lad,” said Mr. Laurence, whose kind oldheart was full of sympathy, which he longed to show but knew not how.Laurie dashed into a livelier strain, played stormily for several minutes, andwould have got through bravely, if in a momentary lull Mrs. March’s voicehad not been heard calling, “Jo, dear, come in. I want you.”Just what Laurie longed to say, with a different meaning! As he listened, helost his place, the music ended with a broken chord, and the musician satsilent in the dark.“I can’t stand this,” muttered the old gentleman. Up he got,groped his way to the piano, laid a kind hand on either of the broad shoulders,and said, as gently as a woman, “I know, my boy, I know.”No answer for an instant, then Laurie asked sharply, “Who toldyou?”“Jo herself.”“Then there’s an end of it!” And he shook off hisgrandfather’s hands with an impatient motion, for though grateful for thesympathy, his man’s pride could not bear a man’s pity.“Not quite. I want to say one thing, and then there shall be an end ofit,” returned Mr. Laurence with unusual mildness. “You won’tcare to stay at home now, perhaps?”“I don’t intend to run away from a girl. Jo can’t prevent myseeing her, and I shall stay and do it as long as I like,” interruptedLaurie in a defiant tone.“Not if you are the gentleman I think you. I’m disappointed, butthe girl can’t help it, and the only thing left for you to do is to goaway for a time. Where will you go?”“Anywhere. I don’t care what becomes of me,” and Laurie gotup with a reckless laugh that grated on his grandfather’s ear.“Take it like a man, and don’t do anything rash, for God’ssake. Why not go abroad, as you planned, and forget it?”“I can’t.”“But you’ve been wild to go, and I promised you should when you gotthrough college.”“Ah, but I didn’t mean to go alone!” and Laurie walked fastthrough the room with an expression which it was well his grandfather did notsee.“I don’t ask you to go alone. There’s someone ready and gladto go with you, anywhere in the world.”“Who, Sir?” stopping to listen.“Myself.”Laurie came back as quickly as he went, and put out his hand, saying huskily,“I’m a selfish brute, but—youknow—Grandfather—”“Lord help me, yes, I do know, for I’ve been through it all before,once in my own young days, and then with your father. Now, my dear boy, justsit quietly down and hear my plan. It’s all settled, and can be carriedout at once,” said Mr. Laurence, keeping hold of the young man, as iffearful that he would break away as his father had done before him.“Well, sir, what is it?” and Laurie sat down, without a sign ofinterest in face or voice.“There is business in London that needs looking after. I meant you shouldattend to it, but I can do it better myself, and things here will get on verywell with Brooke to manage them. My partners do almost everything, I’mmerely holding on until you take my place, and can be off at any time.”“But you hate traveling, Sir. I can’t ask it of you at yourage,” began Laurie, who was grateful for the sacrifice, but muchpreferred to go alone, if he went at all.The old gentleman knew that perfectly well, and particularly desired to preventit, for the mood in which he found his grandson assured him that it would notbe wise to leave him to his own devices. So, stifling a natural regret at thethought of the home comforts he would leave behind him, he said stoutly,“Bless your soul, I’m not superannuated yet. I quite enjoy theidea. It will do me good, and my old bones won’t suffer, for travelingnowadays is almost as easy as sitting in a chair.”A restless movement from Laurie suggested that his chair was not easy, or thathe did not like the plan, and made the old man add hastily, “Idon’t mean to be a marplot or a burden. I go because I think you’dfeel happier than if I was left behind. I don’t intend to gad about withyou, but leave you free to go where you like, while I amuse myself in my ownway. I’ve friends in London and Paris, and should like to visit them.Meantime you can go to Italy, Germany, Switzerland, where you will, and enjoypictures, music, scenery, and adventures to your heart’s content.”Now, Laurie felt just then that his heart was entirely broken and the world ahowling wilderness, but at the sound of certain words which the old gentlemanartfully introduced into his closing sentence, the broken heart gave anunexpected leap, and a green oasis or two suddenly appeared in the howlingwilderness. He sighed, and then said, in a spiritless tone, “Just as youlike, Sir. It doesn’t matter where I go or what I do.”“It does to me, remember that, my lad. I give you entire liberty, but Itrust you to make an honest use of it. Promise me that, Laurie.”“Anything you like, Sir.”“Good,” thought the old gentleman. “You don’t care now,but there’ll come a time when that promise will keep you out of mischief,or I’m much mistaken.”Being an energetic individual, Mr. Laurence struck while the iron was hot, andbefore the blighted being recovered spirit enough to rebel, they were off.During the time necessary for preparation, Laurie bore himself as younggentleman usually do in such cases. He was moody, irritable, and pensive byturns, lost his appetite, neglected his dress and devoted much time to playingtempestuously on his piano, avoided Jo, but consoled himself by staring at herfrom his window, with a tragic face that haunted her dreams by night andoppressed her with a heavy sense of guilt by day. Unlike some sufferers, henever spoke of his unrequited passion, and would allow no one, not even Mrs.March, to attempt consolation or offer sympathy. On some accounts, this was arelief to his friends, but the weeks before his departure were veryuncomfortable, and everyone rejoiced that the ‘poor, dear fellow wasgoing away to forget his trouble, and come home happy’. Of course, hesmiled darkly at their delusion, but passed it by with the sad superiority ofone who knew that his fidelity like his love was unalterable.When the parting came he affected high spirits, to conceal certain inconvenientemotions which seemed inclined to assert themselves. This gaiety did not imposeupon anybody, but they tried to look as if it did for his sake, and he got onvery well till Mrs. March kissed him, with a whisper full of motherlysolicitude. Then feeling that he was going very fast, he hastily embraced themall round, not forgetting the afflicted Hannah, and ran downstairs as if forhis life. Jo followed a minute after to wave her hand to him if he lookedround. He did look round, came back, put his arms about her as she stood on thestep above him, and looked up at her with a face that made his short appealeloquent and pathetic.“Oh, Jo, can’t you?”“Teddy, dear, I wish I could!”That was all, except a little pause. Then Laurie straightened himself up, said,“It’s all right, never mind,” and went away without anotherword. Ah, but it wasn’t all right, and Jo did mind, for while the curlyhead lay on her arm a minute after her hard answer, she felt as if she hadstabbed her dearest friend, and when he left her without a look behind him, sheknew that the boy Laurie never would come again.CHAPTER THIRTY-SIXBETH’S SECRETWhen Jo came home that spring, she had been struck with the change in Beth. Noone spoke of it or seemed aware of it, for it had come too gradually to startlethose who saw her daily, but to eyes sharpened by absence, it was very plainand a heavy weight fell on Jo’s heart as she saw her sister’s face.It was no paler and but littler thinner than in the autumn, yet there was astrange, transparent look about it, as if the mortal was being slowly refinedaway, and the immortal shining through the frail flesh with an indescribablypathetic beauty. Jo saw and felt it, but said nothing at the time, and soon thefirst impression lost much of its power, for Beth seemed happy, no one appearedto doubt that she was better, and presently in other cares Jo for a time forgother fear.But when Laurie was gone, and peace prevailed again, the vague anxiety returnedand haunted her. She had confessed her sins and been forgiven, but when sheshowed her savings and proposed a mountain trip, Beth had thanked her heartily,but begged not to go so far away from home. Another little visit to theseashore would suit her better, and as Grandma could not be prevailed upon toleave the babies, Jo took Beth down to the quiet place, where she could livemuch in the open air, and let the fresh sea breezes blow a little color intoher pale cheeks.It was not a fashionable place, but even among the pleasant people there, thegirls made few friends, preferring to live for one another. Beth was too shy toenjoy society, and Jo too wrapped up in her to care for anyone else. So theywere all in all to each other, and came and went, quite unconscious of theinterest they excited in those about them, who watched with sympathetic eyesthe strong sister and the feeble one, always together, as if they feltinstinctively that a long separation was not far away.They did feel it, yet neither spoke of it, for often between ourselves andthose nearest and dearest to us there exists a reserve which it is very hard toovercome. Jo felt as if a veil had fallen between her heart and Beth’s,but when she put out her hand to lift it up, there seemed something sacred inthe silence, and she waited for Beth to speak. She wondered, and was thankfulalso, that her parents did not seem to see what she saw, and during the quietweeks when the shadows grew so plain to her, she said nothing of it to those athome, believing that it would tell itself when Beth came back no better. Shewondered still more if her sister really guessed the hard truth, and whatthoughts were passing through her mind during the long hours when she lay onthe warm rocks with her head in Jo’s lap, while the winds blewhealthfully over her and the sea made music at her feet.One day Beth told her. Jo thought she was asleep, she lay so still, and puttingdown her book, sat looking at her with wistful eyes, trying to see signs ofhope in the faint color on Beth’s cheeks. But she could not find enoughto satisfy her, for the cheeks were very thin, and the hands seemed too feebleto hold even the rosy little shells they had been collecting. It came to herthen more bitterly than ever that Beth was slowly drifting away from her, andher arms instinctively tightened their hold upon the dearest treasure shepossessed. For a minute her eyes were too dim for seeing, and when theycleared, Beth was looking up at her so tenderly that there was hardly any needfor her to say, “Jo, dear, I’m glad you know it. I’ve triedto tell you, but I couldn’t.”There was no answer except her sister’s cheek against her own, not eventears, for when most deeply moved, Jo did not cry. She was the weaker then, andBeth tried to comfort and sustain her, with her arms about her and the soothingwords she whispered in her ear.“I’ve known it for a good while, dear, and now I’m used toit, it isn’t hard to think of or to bear. Try to see it so anddon’t be troubled about me, because it’s best, indeed it is.”“Is this what made you so unhappy in the autumn, Beth? You did not feelit then, and keep it to yourself so long, did you?” asked Jo, refusing tosee or say that it was best, but glad to know that Laurie had no part inBeth’s trouble.“Yes, I gave up hoping then, but I didn’t like to own it. I triedto think it was a sick fancy, and would not let it trouble anyone. But when Isaw you all so well and strong and full of happy plans, it was hard to feelthat I could never be like you, and then I was miserable, Jo.”“Oh, Beth, and you didn’t tell me, didn’t let me comfort andhelp you? How could you shut me out, bear it all alone?”Jo’s voice was full of tender reproach, and her heart ached to think ofthe solitary struggle that must have gone on while Beth learned to say goodbyeto health, love, and life, and take up her cross so cheerfully.“Perhaps it was wrong, but I tried to do right. I wasn’t sure, noone said anything, and I hoped I was mistaken. It would have been selfish tofrighten you all when Marmee was so anxious about Meg, and Amy away, and you sohappy with Laurie—at least I thought so then.”“And I thought you loved him, Beth, and I went away because Icouldn’t,” cried Jo, glad to say all the truth.Beth looked so amazed at the idea that Jo smiled in spite of her pain, andadded softly, “Then you didn’t, dearie? I was afraid it was so, andimagined your poor little heart full of lovelornity all that while.”“Why, Jo, how could I, when he was so fond of you?” asked Beth, asinnocently as a child. “I do love him dearly. He is so good to me, howcan I help It? But he could never be anything to me but my brother. I hope hetruly will be, sometime.”“Not through me,” said Jo decidedly. “Amy is left for him,and they would suit excellently, but I have no heart for such things, now. Idon’t care what becomes of anybody but you, Beth. You must getwell.”“I want to, oh, so much! I try, but every day I lose a little, and feelmore sure that I shall never gain it back. It’s like the tide, Jo, whenit turns, it goes slowly, but it can’t be stopped.”“It shall be stopped, your tide must not turn so soon, nineteen is tooyoung, Beth. I can’t let you go. I’ll work and pray and fightagainst it. I’ll keep you in spite of everything. There must be ways, itcan’t be too late. God won’t be so cruel as to take you fromme,” cried poor Jo rebelliously, for her spirit was far less piouslysubmissive than Beth’s.Simple, sincere people seldom speak much of their piety. It shows itself inacts rather than in words, and has more influence than homilies orprotestations. Beth could not reason upon or explain the faith that gave hercourage and patience to give up life, and cheerfully wait for death. Like aconfiding child, she asked no questions, but left everything to God and nature,Father and Mother of us all, feeling sure that they, and they only, could teachand strengthen heart and spirit for this life and the life to come. She did notrebuke Jo with saintly speeches, only loved her better for her passionateaffection, and clung more closely to the dear human love, from which our Fathernever means us to be weaned, but through which He draws us closer to Himself.She could not say, “I’m glad to go,” for life was very sweetfor her. She could only sob out, “I try to be willing,” while sheheld fast to Jo, as the first bitter wave of this great sorrow broke over themtogether.By and by Beth said, with recovered serenity, “You’ll tell themthis when we go home?”“I think they will see it without words,” sighed Jo, for now itseemed to her that Beth changed every day.“Perhaps not. I’ve heard that the people who love best are oftenblindest to such things. If they don’t see it, you will tell them for me.I don’t want any secrets, and it’s kinder to prepare them. Meg hasJohn and the babies to comfort her, but you must stand by Father and Mother,won’t you Jo?”“If I can. But, Beth, I don’t give up yet. I’m going tobelieve that it is a sick fancy, and not let you think it’s true.”said Jo, trying to speak cheerfully.Beth lay a minute thinking, and then said in her quiet way, “Idon’t know how to express myself, and shouldn’t try to anyone butyou, because I can’t speak out except to my Jo. I only mean to say that Ihave a feeling that it never was intended I should live long. I’m notlike the rest of you. I never made any plans about what I’d do when Igrew up. I never thought of being married, as you all did. I couldn’tseem to imagine myself anything but stupid little Beth, trotting about at home,of no use anywhere but there. I never wanted to go away, and the hard part nowis the leaving you all. I’m not afraid, but it seems as if I should behomesick for you even in heaven.”Jo could not speak, and for several minutes there was no sound but the sigh ofthe wind and the lapping of the tide. A white-winged gull flew by, with theflash of sunshine on its silvery breast. Beth watched it till it vanished, andher eyes were full of sadness. A little gray-coated sand bird came trippingover the beach ‘peeping’ softly to itself, as if enjoying the sunand sea. It came quite close to Beth, and looked at her with a friendly eye andsat upon a warm stone, dressing its wet feathers, quite at home. Beth smiledand felt comforted, for the tiny thing seemed to offer its small friendship andremind her that a pleasant world was still to be enjoyed.“Dear little bird! See, Jo, how tame it is. I like peeps better than thegulls. They are not so wild and handsome, but they seem happy, confiding littlethings. I used to call them my birds last summer, and Mother said they remindedher of me—busy, quaker-colored creatures, always near the shore, andalways chirping that contented little song of theirs. You are the gull, Jo,strong and wild, fond of the storm and the wind, flying far out to sea, andhappy all alone. Meg is the turtledove, and Amy is like the lark she writesabout, trying to get up among the clouds, but always dropping down into itsnest again. Dear little girl! She’s so ambitious, but her heart is goodand tender, and no matter how high she flies, she never will forget home. Ihope I shall see her again, but she seems so far away.”“She is coming in the spring, and I mean that you shall be all ready tosee and enjoy her. I’m going to have you well and rosy by thattime,” began Jo, feeling that of all the changes in Beth, the talkingchange was the greatest, for it seemed to cost no effort now, and she thoughtaloud in a way quite unlike bashful Beth.“Jo, dear, don’t hope any more. It won’t do any good.I’m sure of that. We won’t be miserable, but enjoy being togetherwhile we wait. We’ll have happy times, for I don’t suffer much, andI think the tide will go out easily, if you help me.”Jo leaned down to kiss the tranquil face, and with that silent kiss, shededicated herself soul and body to Beth.She was right. There was no need of any words when they got home, for Fatherand Mother saw plainly now what they had prayed to be saved from seeing. Tiredwith her short journey, Beth went at once to bed, saying how glad she was to behome, and when Jo went down, she found that she would be spared the hard taskof telling Beth’s secret. Her father stood leaning his head on themantelpiece and did not turn as she came in, but her mother stretched out herarms as if for help, and Jo went to comfort her without a word.CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVENNEW IMPRESSIONSAt three o’clock in the afternoon, all the fashionable world at Nice maybe seen on the Promenade des Anglais—a charming place, for the wide walk,bordered with palms, flowers, and tropical shrubs, is bounded on one side bythe sea, on the other by the grand drive, lined with hotels and villas, whilebeyond lie orange orchards and the hills. Many nations are represented, manylanguages spoken, many costumes worn, and on a sunny day the spectacle is asgay and brilliant as a carnival. Haughty English, lively French, sober Germans,handsome Spaniards, ugly Russians, meek Jews, free-and-easy Americans, alldrive, sit, or saunter here, chatting over the news, and criticizing the latestcelebrity who has arrived—Ristori or Dickens, Victor Emmanuel or theQueen of the Sandwich Islands. The equipages are as varied as the company andattract as much attention, especially the low basket barouches in which ladiesdrive themselves, with a pair of dashing ponies, gay nets to keep theirvoluminous flounces from overflowing the diminutive vehicles, and little groomson the perch behind.Along this walk, on Christmas Day, a tall young man walked slowly, with hishands behind him, and a somewhat absent expression of countenance. He lookedlike an Italian, was dressed like an Englishman, and had the independent air ofan American—a combination which caused sundry pairs of feminine eyes tolook approvingly after him, and sundry dandies in black velvet suits, withrose-colored neckties, buff gloves, and orange flowers in their buttonholes, toshrug their shoulders, and then envy him his inches. There were plenty ofpretty faces to admire, but the young man took little notice of them, except toglance now and then at some blonde girl in blue. Presently he strolled out ofthe promenade and stood a moment at the crossing, as if undecided whether to goand listen to the band in the Jardin Publique, or to wander along the beachtoward Castle Hill. The quick trot of ponies’ feet made him look up, asone of the little carriages, containing a single young lady, came rapidly downthe street. The lady was young, blonde, and dressed in blue. He stared aminute, then his whole face woke up, and, waving his hat like a boy, he hurriedforward to meet her.“Oh, Laurie, is it really you? I thought you’d never come!”cried Amy, dropping the reins and holding out both hands, to the greatscandalization of a French mamma, who hastened her daughter’s steps, lestshe should be demoralized by beholding the free manners of these ‘madEnglish’.“I was detained by the way, but I promised to spend Christmas with you,and here I am.”“How is your grandfather? When did you come? Where are youstaying?”“Very well—last night—at the Chauvain. I called at yourhotel, but you were out.”“I have so much to say, I don’t know where to begin! Get in and wecan talk at our ease. I was going for a drive and longing for company.Flo’s saving up for tonight.”“What happens then, a ball?”“A Christmas party at our hotel. There are many Americans there, and theygive it in honor of the day. You’ll go with us, of course? Aunt will becharmed.”“Thank you. Where now?” asked Laurie, leaning back and folding hisarms, a proceeding which suited Amy, who preferred to drive, for her parasolwhip and blue reins over the white ponies’ backs afforded her infinitesatisfaction.“I’m going to the bankers first for letters, and then to CastleHill. The view is so lovely, and I like to feed the peacocks. Have you everbeen there?”“Often, years ago, but I don’t mind having a look at it.”“Now tell me all about yourself. The last I heard of you, yourgrandfather wrote that he expected you from Berlin.”“Yes, I spent a month there and then joined him in Paris, where he hassettled for the winter. He has friends there and finds plenty to amuse him, soI go and come, and we get on capitally.”“That’s a sociable arrangement,” said Amy, missing somethingin Laurie’s manner, though she couldn’t tell what.“Why, you see, he hates to travel, and I hate to keep still, so we eachsuit ourselves, and there is no trouble. I am often with him, and he enjoys myadventures, while I like to feel that someone is glad to see me when I get backfrom my wanderings. Dirty old hole, isn’t it?” he added, with alook of disgust as they drove along the boulevard to the Place Napoleon in theold city.“The dirt is picturesque, so I don’t mind. The river and the hillsare delicious, and these glimpses of the narrow cross streets are my delight.Now we shall have to wait for that procession to pass. It’s going to theChurch of St. John.”While Laurie listlessly watched the procession of priests under their canopies,white-veiled nuns bearing lighted tapers, and some brotherhood in blue chantingas they walked, Amy watched him, and felt a new sort of shyness steal over her,for he was changed, and she could not find the merry-faced boy she left in themoody-looking man beside her. He was handsomer than ever and greatly improved,she thought, but now that the flush of pleasure at meeting her was over, helooked tired and spiritless—not sick, nor exactly unhappy, but older andgraver than a year or two of prosperous life should have made him. Shecouldn’t understand it and did not venture to ask questions, so she shookher head and touched up her ponies, as the procession wound away across thearches of the Paglioni bridge and vanished in the church.“Que pensez-vous?” she said, airing her French, which had improvedin quantity, if not in quality, since she came abroad.“That mademoiselle has made good use of her time, and the result ischarming,” replied Laurie, bowing with his hand on his heart and anadmiring look.She blushed with pleasure, but somehow the compliment did not satisfy her likethe blunt praises he used to give her at home, when he promenaded round her onfestival occasions, and told her she was ‘altogether jolly’, with ahearty smile and an approving pat on the head. She didn’t like the newtone, for though not blase, it sounded indifferent in spite of the look.“If that’s the way he’s going to grow up, I wish he’dstay a boy,” she thought, with a curious sense of disappointment anddiscomfort, trying meantime to seem quite easy and gay.At Avigdor’s she found the precious home letters and, giving the reins toLaurie, read them luxuriously as they wound up the shady road between greenhedges, where tea roses bloomed as freshly as in June.“Beth is very poorly, Mother says. I often think I ought to go home, butthey all say ‘stay’. So I do, for I shall never have another chancelike this,” said Amy, looking sober over one page.“I think you are right, there. You could do nothing at home, and it is agreat comfort to them to know that you are well and happy, and enjoying somuch, my dear.”He drew a little nearer, and looked more like his old self as he said that, andthe fear that sometimes weighed on Amy’s heart was lightened, for thelook, the act, the brotherly ‘my dear’, seemed to assure her thatif any trouble did come, she would not be alone in a strange land. Presentlyshe laughed and showed him a small sketch of Jo in her scribbling suit, withthe bow rampantly erect upon her cap, and issuing from her mouth the words,‘Genius burns!’.Laurie smiled, took it, put it in his vest pocket ‘to keep it fromblowing away’, and listened with interest to the lively letter Amy readhim.“This will be a regularly merry Christmas to me, with presents in themorning, you and letters in the afternoon, and a party at night,” saidAmy, as they alighted among the ruins of the old fort, and a flock of splendidpeacocks came trooping about them, tamely waiting to be fed. While Amy stoodlaughing on the bank above him as she scattered crumbs to the brilliant birds,Laurie looked at her as she had looked at him, with a natural curiosity to seewhat changes time and absence had wrought. He found nothing to perplex ordisappoint, much to admire and approve, for overlooking a few littleaffectations of speech and manner, she was as sprightly and graceful as ever,with the addition of that indescribable something in dress and bearing which wecall elegance. Always mature for her age, she had gained a certain aplomb inboth carriage and conversation, which made her seem more of a woman of theworld than she was, but her old petulance now and then showed itself, herstrong will still held its own, and her native frankness was unspoiled byforeign polish.Laurie did not read all this while he watched her feed the peacocks, but he sawenough to satisfy and interest him, and carried away a pretty little picture ofa bright-faced girl standing in the sunshine, which brought out the soft hue ofher dress, the fresh color of her cheeks, the golden gloss of her hair, andmade her a prominent figure in the pleasant scene.As they came up onto the stone plateau that crowns the hill, Amy waved her handas if welcoming him to her favorite haunt, and said, pointing here and there,“Do you remember the Cathedral and the Corso, the fishermen draggingtheir nets in the bay, and the lovely road to Villa Franca, Schubert’sTower, just below, and best of all, that speck far out to sea which they say isCorsica?”“I remember. It’s not much changed,” he answered withoutenthusiasm.“What Jo would give for a sight of that famous speck!” said Amy,feeling in good spirits and anxious to see him so also.“Yes,” was all he said, but he turned and strained his eyes to seethe island which a greater usurper than even Napoleon now made interesting inhis sight.“Take a good look at it for her sake, and then come and tell me what youhave been doing with yourself all this while,” said Amy, seating herself,ready for a good talk.But she did not get it, for though he joined her and answered all her questionsfreely, she could only learn that he had roved about the Continent and been toGreece. So after idling away an hour, they drove home again, and having paidhis respects to Mrs. Carrol, Laurie left them, promising to return in theevening.It must be recorded of Amy that she deliberately prinked that night. Time andabsence had done its work on both the young people. She had seen her old friendin a new light, not as ‘our boy’, but as a handsome and agreeableman, and she was conscious of a very natural desire to find favor in his sight.Amy knew her good points, and made the most of them with the taste and skillwhich is a fortune to a poor and pretty woman.Tarlatan and tulle were cheap at Nice, so she enveloped herself in them on suchoccasions, and following the sensible English fashion of simple dress for younggirls, got up charming little toilettes with fresh flowers, a few trinkets, andall manner of dainty devices, which were both inexpensive and effective. Itmust be confessed that the artist sometimes got possession of the woman, andindulged in antique coiffures, statuesque attitudes, and classic draperies.But, dear heart, we all have our little weaknesses, and find it easy to pardonsuch in the young, who satisfy our eyes with their comeliness, and keep ourhearts merry with their artless vanities.“I do want him to think I look well, and tell them so at home,”said Amy to herself, as she put on Flo’s old white silk ball dress, andcovered it with a cloud of fresh illusion, out of which her white shoulders andgolden head emerged with a most artistic effect. Her hair she had the sense tolet alone, after gathering up the thick waves and curls into a Hebe-like knotat the back of her head.“It’s not the fashion, but it’s becoming, and I can’tafford to make a fright of myself,” she used to say, when advised tofrizzle, puff, or braid, as the latest style commanded.Having no ornaments fine enough for this important occasion, Amy looped herfleecy skirts with rosy clusters of azalea, and framed the white shoulders indelicate green vines. Remembering the painted boots, she surveyed her whitesatin slippers with girlish satisfaction, and chasseed down the room, admiringher aristocratic feet all by herself.“My new fan just matches my flowers, my gloves fit to a charm, and thereal lace on Aunt’s mouchoir gives an air to my whole dress. If I onlyhad a classical nose and mouth I should be perfectly happy,” she said,surveying herself with a critical eye and a candle in each hand.In spite of this affliction, she looked unusually gay and graceful as sheglided away. She seldom ran—it did not suit her style, she thought, forbeing tall, the stately and Junoesque was more appropriate than the sportive orpiquante. She walked up and down the long saloon while waiting for Laurie, andonce arranged herself under the chandelier, which had a good effect upon herhair, then she thought better of it, and went away to the other end of theroom, as if ashamed of the girlish desire to have the first view a propitiousone. It so happened that she could not have done a better thing, for Lauriecame in so quietly she did not hear him, and as she stood at the distantwindow, with her head half turned and one hand gathering up her dress, theslender, white figure against the red curtains was as effective as awell-placed statue.“Good evening, Diana!” said Laurie, with the look of satisfactionshe liked to see in his eyes when they rested on her.“Good evening, Apollo!” she answered, smiling back at him, for hetoo looked unusually debonair, and the thought of entering the ballroom on thearm of such a personable man caused Amy to pity the four plain Misses Davisfrom the bottom of her heart.“Here are your flowers. I arranged them myself, remembering that youdidn’t like what Hannah calls a ‘sot-bookay’,” saidLaurie, handing her a delicate nosegay, in a holder that she had long covetedas she daily passed it in Cardiglia’s window.“How kind you are!” she exclaimed gratefully. “If I’dknown you were coming I’d have had something ready for you today, thoughnot as pretty as this, I’m afraid.”“Thank you. It isn’t what it should be, but you have improvedit,” he added, as she snapped the silver bracelet on her wrist.“Please don’t.”“I thought you liked that sort of thing.”“Not from you, it doesn’t sound natural, and I like your oldbluntness better.”“I’m glad of it,” he answered, with a look of relief, thenbuttoned her gloves for her, and asked if his tie was straight, just as he usedto do when they went to parties together at home.The company assembled in the long salle a manger, that evening, was such as onesees nowhere but on the Continent. The hospitable Americans had invited everyacquaintance they had in Nice, and having no prejudice against titles, secureda few to add luster to their Christmas ball.A Russian prince condescended to sit in a corner for an hour and talk with amassive lady, dressed like Hamlet’s mother in black velvet with a pearlbridle under her chin. A Polish count, aged eighteen, devoted himself to theladies, who pronounced him, ‘a fascinating dear’, and a GermanSerene Something, having come to supper alone, roamed vaguely about, seekingwhat he might devour. Baron Rothschild’s private secretary, a large-nosedJew in tight boots, affably beamed upon the world, as if his master’sname crowned him with a golden halo. A stout Frenchman, who knew the Emperor,came to indulge his mania for dancing, and Lady de Jones, a British matron,adorned the scene with her little family of eight. Of course, there were manylight-footed, shrill-voiced American girls, handsome, lifeless-looking Englishditto, and a few plain but piquante French demoiselles, likewise the usual setof traveling young gentlemen who disported themselves gaily, while mammas ofall nations lined the walls and smiled upon them benignly when they danced withtheir daughters.Any young girl can imagine Amy’s state of mind when she ‘took thestage’ that night, leaning on Laurie’s arm. She knew she lookedwell, she loved to dance, she felt that her foot was on her native heath in aballroom, and enjoyed the delightful sense of power which comes when younggirls first discover the new and lovely kingdom they are born to rule by virtueof beauty, youth, and womanhood. She did pity the Davis girls, who wereawkward, plain, and destitute of escort, except a grim papa and three grimmermaiden aunts, and she bowed to them in her friendliest manner as she passed,which was good of her, as it permitted them to see her dress, and burn withcuriosity to know who her distinguished-looking friend might be. With the firstburst of the band, Amy’s color rose, her eyes began to sparkle, and herfeet to tap the floor impatiently, for she danced well and wanted Laurie toknow it. Therefore the shock she received can better be imagined thandescribed, when he said in a perfectly tranquil tone, “Do you care todance?”“One usually does at a ball.”Her amazed look and quick answer caused Laurie to repair his error as fast aspossible.“I meant the first dance. May I have the honor?”“I can give you one if I put off the Count. He dances divinely, but hewill excuse me, as you are an old friend,” said Amy, hoping that the namewould have a good effect, and show Laurie that she was not to be trifled with.“Nice little boy, but rather a short Pole to support...A daughter of the gods,Devinely tall, and most divinely fair,”was all the satisfaction she got, however.The set in which they found themselves was composed of English, and Amy wascompelled to walk decorously through a cotillion, feeling all the while as ifshe could dance the tarantella with relish. Laurie resigned her to the‘nice little boy’, and went to do his duty to Flo, without securingAmy for the joys to come, which reprehensible want of forethought was properlypunished, for she immediately engaged herself till supper, meaning to relent ifhe then gave any signs penitence. She showed him her ball book with demuresatisfaction when he strolled instead of rushed up to claim her for the next, aglorious polka redowa. But his polite regrets didn’t impose upon her, andwhen she galloped away with the Count, she saw Laurie sit down by her aunt withan actual expression of relief.That was unpardonable, and Amy took no more notice of him for a long while,except a word now and then when she came to her chaperon between the dances fora necessary pin or a moment’s rest. Her anger had a good effect, however,for she hid it under a smiling face, and seemed unusually blithe and brilliant.Laurie’s eyes followed her with pleasure, for she neither romped norsauntered, but danced with spirit and grace, making the delightsome pastimewhat it should be. He very naturally fell to studying her from this new pointof view, and before the evening was half over, had decided that ‘littleAmy was going to make a very charming woman’.It was a lively scene, for soon the spirit of the social season took possessionof everyone, and Christmas merriment made all faces shine, hearts happy, andheels light. The musicians fiddled, tooted, and banged as if they enjoyed it,everybody danced who could, and those who couldn’t admired theirneighbors with uncommon warmth. The air was dark with Davises, and many Jonesesgamboled like a flock of young giraffes. The golden secretary darted throughthe room like a meteor with a dashing French-woman who carpeted the floor withher pink satin train. The serene Teuton found the supper-table and was happy,eating steadily through the bill of fare, and dismayed the garcons by theravages he committed. But the Emperor’s friend covered himself withglory, for he danced everything, whether he knew it or not, and introducedimpromptu pirouettes when the figures bewildered him. The boyish abandon ofthat stout man was charming to behold, for though he ‘carriedweight’, he danced like an India-rubber ball. He ran, he flew, hepranced, his face glowed, his bald head shown, his coattails waved wildly, hispumps actually twinkled in the air, and when the music stopped, he wiped thedrops from his brow, and beamed upon his fellow men like a French Pickwickwithout glasses.Amy and her Pole distinguished themselves by equal enthusiasm but more gracefulagility, and Laurie found himself involuntarily keeping time to the rhythmicrise and fall of the white slippers as they flew by as indefatigably as ifwinged. When little Vladimir finally relinquished her, with assurances that hewas ‘desolated to leave so early’, she was ready to rest, and seehow her recreant knight had borne his punishment.It had been successful, for at three-and-twenty, blighted affections find abalm in friendly society, and young nerves will thrill, young blood dance, andhealthy young spirits rise, when subjected to the enchantment of beauty, light,music, and motion. Laurie had a waked-up look as he rose to give her his seat,and when he hurried away to bring her some supper, she said to herself, with asatisfied smile, “Ah, I thought that would do him good!”“You look like Balzac’s ‘Femme Peinte ParElle-Meme’,” he said, as he fanned her with one hand and heldher coffee cup in the other.“My rouge won’t come off.” and Amy rubbed her brilliantcheek, and showed him her white glove with a sober simplicity that made himlaugh outright.“What do you call this stuff?” he asked, touching a fold of herdress that had blown over his knee.“Illusion.”“Good name for it. It’s very pretty—new thing, isn’tit?”“It’s as old as the hills. You have seen it on dozens of girls, andyou never found out that it was pretty till now—stupide!”“I never saw it on you before, which accounts for the mistake, yousee.”“None of that, it is forbidden. I’d rather take coffee thancompliments just now. No, don’t lounge, it makes me nervous.”Laurie sat bold upright, and meekly took her empty plate feeling an odd sort ofpleasure in having ‘little Amy’ order him about, for she had losther shyness now, and felt an irrestible desire to trample on him, as girls havea delightful way of doing when lords of creation show any signs of subjection.“Where did you learn all this sort of thing?” he asked with aquizzical look.“As ‘this sort of thing’ is rather a vague expression, wouldyou kindly explain?” returned Amy, knowing perfectly well what he meant,but wickedly leaving him to describe what is indescribable.“Well—the general air, the style, the self-possession,the—the—illusion—you know”, laughed Laurie, breakingdown and helping himself out of his quandary with the new word.Amy was gratified, but of course didn’t show it, and demurely answered,“Foreign life polishes one in spite of one’s self. I study as wellas play, and as for this”—with a little gesture toward herdress—“why, tulle is cheap, posies to be had for nothing, and I amused to making the most of my poor little things.”Amy rather regretted that last sentence, fearing it wasn’t in good taste,but Laurie liked her better for it, and found himself both admiring andrespecting the brave patience that made the most of opportunity, and thecheerful spirit that covered poverty with flowers. Amy did not know why helooked at her so kindly, nor why he filled up her book with his own name, anddevoted himself to her for the rest of the evening in the most delightfulmanner; but the impulse that wrought this agreeable change was the result ofone of the new impressions which both of them were unconsciously giving andreceiving.CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHTON THE SHELFIn France the young girls have a dull time of it till they are married, when‘Vive la liberte!’ becomes their motto. In America, as everyoneknows, girls early sign the declaration of independence, and enjoy theirfreedom with republican zest, but the young matrons usually abdicate with thefirst heir to the throne and go into a seclusion almost as close as a Frenchnunnery, though by no means as quiet. Whether they like it or not, they arevirtually put upon the shelf as soon as the wedding excitement is over, andmost of them might exclaim, as did a very pretty woman the other day,“I’m as handsome as ever, but no one takes any notice of me becauseI’m married.”Not being a belle or even a fashionable lady, Meg did not experience thisaffliction till her babies were a year old, for in her little world primitivecustoms prevailed, and she found herself more admired and beloved than ever.As she was a womanly little woman, the maternal instinct was very strong, andshe was entirely absorbed in her children, to the utter exclusion of everythingand everybody else. Day and night she brooded over them with tireless devotionand anxiety, leaving John to the tender mercies of the help, for an Irish ladynow presided over the kitchen department. Being a domestic man, John decidedlymissed the wifely attentions he had been accustomed to receive, but as headored his babies, he cheerfully relinquished his comfort for a time, supposingwith masculine ignorance that peace would soon be restored. But three monthspassed, and there was no return of repose. Meg looked worn and nervous, thebabies absorbed every minute of her time, the house was neglected, and Kitty,the cook, who took life ‘aisy’, kept him on short commons. When hewent out in the morning he was bewildered by small commissions for the captivemamma, if he came gaily in at night, eager to embrace his family, he wasquenched by a “Hush! They are just asleep after worrying all day.”If he proposed a little amusement at home, “No, it would disturb thebabies.” If he hinted at a lecture or a concert, he was answered with areproachful look, and a decided—“Leave my children for pleasure,never!” His sleep was broken by infant wails and visions of a phantomfigure pacing noiselessly to and fro in the watches of the night. His mealswere interrupted by the frequent flight of the presiding genius, who desertedhim, half-helped, if a muffled chirp sounded from the nest above. And when heread his paper of an evening, Demi’s colic got into the shipping list andDaisy’s fall affected the price of stocks, for Mrs. Brooke was onlyinterested in domestic news.The poor man was very uncomfortable, for the children had bereft him of hiswife, home was merely a nursery and the perpetual ‘hushing’ madehim feel like a brutal intruder whenever he entered the sacred precincts ofBabyland. He bore it very patiently for six months, and when no signs ofamendment appeared, he did what other paternal exiles do—tried to get alittle comfort elsewhere. Scott had married and gone to housekeeping not faroff, and John fell into the way of running over for an hour or two of anevening, when his own parlor was empty, and his own wife singing lullabies thatseemed to have no end. Mrs. Scott was a lively, pretty girl, with nothing to dobut be agreeable, and she performed her mission most successfully. The parlorwas always bright and attractive, the chessboard ready, the piano in tune,plenty of gay gossip, and a nice little supper set forth in tempting style.John would have preferred his own fireside if it had not been so lonely, but asit was he gratefully took the next best thing and enjoyed his neighbor’ssociety.Meg rather approved of the new arrangement at first, and found it a relief toknow that John was having a good time instead of dozing in the parlor, ortramping about the house and waking the children. But by-and-by, when theteething worry was over and the idols went to sleep at proper hours, leavingMamma time to rest, she began to miss John, and find her workbasket dullcompany, when he was not sitting opposite in his old dressing gown, comfortablyscorching his slippers on the fender. She would not ask him to stay at home,but felt injured because he did not know that she wanted him without beingtold, entirely forgetting the many evenings he had waited for her in vain. Shewas nervous and worn out with watching and worry, and in that unreasonableframe of mind which the best of mothers occasionally experience when domesticcares oppress them. Want of exercise robs them of cheerfulness, and too muchdevotion to that idol of American women, the teapot, makes them feel as if theywere all nerve and no muscle.“Yes,” she would say, looking in the glass, “I’mgetting old and ugly. John doesn’t find me interesting any longer, so heleaves his faded wife and goes to see his pretty neighbor, who has noincumbrances. Well, the babies love me, they don’t care if I am thin andpale and haven’t time to crimp my hair, they are my comfort, and some dayJohn will see what I’ve gladly sacrificed for them, won’t he, myprecious?”To which pathetic appeal Daisy would answer with a coo, or Demi with a crow,and Meg would put by her lamentations for a maternal revel, which soothed hersolitude for the time being. But the pain increased as politics absorbed John,who was always running over to discuss interesting points with Scott, quiteunconscious that Meg missed him. Not a word did she say, however, till hermother found her in tears one day, and insisted on knowing what the matter was,for Meg’s drooping spirits had not escaped her observation.“I wouldn’t tell anyone except you, Mother, but I really do needadvice, for if John goes on much longer I might as well be widowed,”replied Mrs. Brooke, drying her tears on Daisy’s bib with an injured air.“Goes on how, my dear?” asked her mother anxiously.“He’s away all day, and at night when I want to see him, he iscontinually going over to the Scotts’. It isn’t fair that I shouldhave the hardest work, and never any amusement. Men are very selfish, even thebest of them.”“So are women. Don’t blame John till you see where you are wrongyourself.”“But it can’t be right for him to neglect me.”“Don’t you neglect him?”“Why, Mother, I thought you’d take my part!”“So I do, as far as sympathizing goes, but I think the fault is yours,Meg.”“I don’t see how.”“Let me show you. Did John ever neglect you, as you call it, while youmade it a point to give him your society of an evening, his only leisuretime?”“No, but I can’t do it now, with two babies to tend.”“I think you could, dear, and I think you ought. May I speak quitefreely, and will you remember that it’s Mother who blames as well asMother who sympathizes?”“Indeed I will! Speak to me as if I were little Meg again. I often feelas if I needed teaching more than ever since these babies look to me foreverything.”Meg drew her low chair beside her mother’s, and with a littleinterruption in either lap, the two women rocked and talked lovingly together,feeling that the tie of motherhood made them more one than ever.“You have only made the mistake that most young wivesmake—forgotten your duty to your husband in your love for your children.A very natural and forgivable mistake, Meg, but one that had better be remediedbefore you take to different ways, for children should draw you nearer thanever, not separate you, as if they were all yours, and John had nothing to dobut support them. I’ve seen it for some weeks, but have not spoken,feeling sure it would come right in time.”“I’m afraid it won’t. If I ask him to stay, he’ll thinkI’m jealous, and I wouldn’t insult him by such an idea. Hedoesn’t see that I want him, and I don’t know how to tell himwithout words.”“Make it so pleasant he won’t want to go away. My dear, he’slonging for his little home, but it isn’t home without you, and you arealways in the nursery.”“Oughtn’t I to be there?”“Not all the time, too much confinement makes you nervous, and then youare unfitted for everything. Besides, you owe something to John as well as tothe babies. Don’t neglect husband for children, don’t shut him outof the nursery, but teach him how to help in it. His place is there as well asyours, and the children need him. Let him feel that he has a part to do, and hewill do it gladly and faithfully, and it will be better for you all.”“You really think so, Mother?”“I know it, Meg, for I’ve tried it, and I seldom give advice unlessI’ve proved its practicability. When you and Jo were little, I went onjust as you are, feeling as if I didn’t do my duty unless I devotedmyself wholly to you. Poor Father took to his books, after I had refused alloffers of help, and left me to try my experiment alone. I struggled along aswell as I could, but Jo was too much for me. I nearly spoiled her byindulgence. You were poorly, and I worried about you till I fell sick myself.Then Father came to the rescue, quietly managed everything, and made himself sohelpful that I saw my mistake, and never have been able to get on without himsince. That is the secret of our home happiness. He does not let business weanhim from the little cares and duties that affect us all, and I try not to letdomestic worries destroy my interest in his pursuits. Each do our part alone inmany things, but at home we work together, always.”“It is so, Mother, and my great wish is to be to my husband and childrenwhat you have been to yours. Show me how, I’ll do anything yousay.”“You always were my docile daughter. Well, dear, if I were you, I’dlet John have more to do with the management of Demi, for the boy needstraining, and it’s none too soon to begin. Then I’d do what I haveoften proposed, let Hannah come and help you. She is a capital nurse, and youmay trust the precious babies to her while you do more housework. You need theexercise, Hannah would enjoy the rest, and John would find his wife again. Goout more, keep cheerful as well as busy, for you are the sunshine-maker of thefamily, and if you get dismal there is no fair weather. Then I’d try totake an interest in whatever John likes—talk with him, let him read toyou, exchange ideas, and help each other in that way. Don’t shut yourselfup in a bandbox because you are a woman, but understand what is going on, andeducate yourself to take your part in the world’s work, for it allaffects you and yours.”“John is so sensible, I’m afraid he will think I’m stupid ifI ask questions about politics and things.”“I don’t believe he would. Love covers a multitude of sins, and ofwhom could you ask more freely than of him? Try it, and see if he doesn’tfind your society far more agreeable than Mrs. Scott’s suppers.”“I will. Poor John! I’m afraid I have neglected him sadly, but Ithought I was right, and he never said anything.”“He tried not to be selfish, but he has felt rather forlorn, I fancy.This is just the time, Meg, when young married people are apt to grow apart,and the very time when they ought to be most together, for the first tendernesssoon wears off, unless care is taken to preserve it. And no time is sobeautiful and precious to parents as the first years of the little lives givento them to train. Don’t let John be a stranger to the babies, for theywill do more to keep him safe and happy in this world of trial and temptationthan anything else, and through them you will learn to know and love oneanother as you should. Now, dear, good-by. Think over Mother’spreachment, act upon it if it seems good, and God bless you all.”Meg did think it over, found it good, and acted upon it, though the firstattempt was not made exactly as she planned to have it. Of course the childrentyrannized over her, and ruled the house as soon as they found out that kickingand squalling brought them whatever they wanted. Mamma was an abject slave totheir caprices, but Papa was not so easily subjugated, and occasionallyafflicted his tender spouse by an attempt at paternal discipline with hisobstreperous son. For Demi inherited a trifle of his sire’s firmness ofcharacter, we won’t call it obstinacy, and when he made up his littlemind to have or to do anything, all the king’s horses and all theking’s men could not change that pertinacious little mind. Mamma thoughtthe dear too young to be taught to conquer his prejudices, but Papa believedthat it never was too soon to learn obedience. So Master Demi early discoveredthat when he undertook to ‘wrastle’ with ‘Parpar’, healways got the worst of it, yet like the Englishman, baby respected the man whoconquered him, and loved the father whose grave “No, no,” was moreimpressive than all Mamma’s love pats.A few days after the talk with her mother, Meg resolved to try a social eveningwith John, so she ordered a nice supper, set the parlor in order, dressedherself prettily, and put the children to bed early, that nothing shouldinterfere with her experiment. But unfortunately Demi’s mostunconquerable prejudice was against going to bed, and that night he decided togo on a rampage. So poor Meg sang and rocked, told stories and tried everysleep-prevoking wile she could devise, but all in vain, the big eyeswouldn’t shut, and long after Daisy had gone to byelow, like the chubbylittle bunch of good nature she was, naughty Demi lay staring at the light,with the most discouragingly wide-awake expression of countenance.“Will Demi lie still like a good boy, while Mamma runs down and givespoor Papa his tea?” asked Meg, as the hall door softly closed, and thewell-known step went tip-toeing into the dining room.“Me has tea!” said Demi, preparing to join in the revel.“No, but I’ll save you some little cakies for breakfast, ifyou’ll go bye-bye like Daisy. Will you, lovey?”“Iss!” and Demi shut his eyes tight, as if to catch sleep and hurrythe desired day.Taking advantage of the propitious moment, Meg slipped away and ran down togreet her husband with a smiling face and the little blue bow in her hair whichwas his especial admiration. He saw it at once and said with pleased surprise,“Why, little mother, how gay we are tonight. Do you expectcompany?”“Only you, dear.”“Is it a birthday, anniversary, or anything?”“No, I’m tired of being dowdy, so I dressed up as a change. Youalways make yourself nice for table, no matter how tired you are, so whyshouldn’t I when I have the time?”“I do it out of respect for you, my dear,” said old-fashioned John.“Ditto, ditto, Mr. Brooke,” laughed Meg, looking young and prettyagain, as she nodded to him over the teapot.“Well, it’s altogether delightful, and like old times. This tastesright. I drink your health, dear.” and John sipped his tea with an air ofreposeful rapture, which was of very short duration however, for as he put downhis cup, the door handle rattled mysteriously, and a little voice was heard,saying impatiently...“Opy doy. Me’s tummin!”“It’s that naughty boy. I told him to go to sleep alone, and herehe is, downstairs, getting his death a-cold pattering over that canvas,”said Meg, answering the call.“Mornin’ now,” announced Demi in joyful tone as he entered,with his long nightgown gracefully festooned over his arm and every curlbobbing gayly as he pranced about the table, eyeing the ‘cakies’with loving glances.“No, it isn’t morning yet. You must go to bed, and not trouble poorMamma. Then you can have the little cake with sugar on it.”“Me loves Parpar,” said the artful one, preparing to climb thepaternal knee and revel in forbidden joys. But John shook his head, and said toMeg...“If you told him to stay up there, and go to sleep alone, make him do it,or he will never learn to mind you.”“Yes, of course. Come, Demi,” and Meg led her son away, feeling astrong desire to spank the little marplot who hopped beside her, laboring underthe delusion that the bribe was to be administered as soon as they reached thenursery.Nor was he disappointed, for that shortsighted woman actually gave him a lumpof sugar, tucked him into his bed, and forbade any more promenades tillmorning.“Iss!” said Demi the perjured, blissfully sucking his sugar, andregarding his first attempt as eminently successful.Meg returned to her place, and supper was progressing pleasantly, when thelittle ghost walked again, and exposed the maternal delinquencies by boldlydemanding, “More sudar, Marmar.”“Now this won’t do,” said John, hardening his heart againstthe engaging little sinner. “We shall never know any peace till thatchild learns to go to bed properly. You have made a slave of yourself longenough. Give him one lesson, and then there will be an end of it. Put him inhis bed and leave him, Meg.”“He won’t stay there, he never does unless I sit by him.”“I’ll manage him. Demi, go upstairs, and get into your bed, asMamma bids you.”“S’ant!” replied the young rebel, helping himself to thecoveted ‘cakie’, and beginning to eat the same with calm audacity.“You must never say that to Papa. I shall carry you if you don’t goyourself.”“Go ’way, me don’t love Parpar.” and Demi retired tohis mother’s skirts for protection.But even that refuge proved unavailing, for he was delivered over to the enemy,with a “Be gentle with him, John,” which struck the culprit withdismay, for when Mamma deserted him, then the judgment day was at hand. Bereftof his cake, defrauded of his frolic, and borne away by a strong hand to thatdetested bed, poor Demi could not restrain his wrath, but openly defied Papa,and kicked and screamed lustily all the way upstairs. The minute he was putinto bed on one side, he rolled out on the other, and made for the door, onlyto be ignominiously caught up by the tail of his little toga and put backagain, which lively performance was kept up till the young man’s strengthgave out, when he devoted himself to roaring at the top of his voice. Thisvocal exercise usually conquered Meg, but John sat as unmoved as the post whichis popularly believed to be deaf. No coaxing, no sugar, no lullaby, no story,even the light was put out and only the red glow of the fire enlivened the‘big dark’ which Demi regarded with curiosity rather than fear.This new order of things disgusted him, and he howled dismally for‘Marmar’, as his angry passions subsided, and recollections of histender bondwoman returned to the captive autocrat. The plaintive wail whichsucceeded the passionate roar went to Meg’s heart, and she ran up to saybeseechingly...“Let me stay with him, he’ll be good now, John.”“No, my dear. I’ve told him he must go to sleep, as you bid him,and he must, if I stay here all night.”“But he’ll cry himself sick,” pleaded Meg, reproachingherself for deserting her boy.“No, he won’t, he’s so tired he will soon drop off and thenthe matter is settled, for he will understand that he has got to mind.Don’t interfere, I’ll manage him.”“He’s my child, and I can’t have his spirit broken byharshness.”“He’s my child, and I won’t have his temper spoiled byindulgence. Go down, my dear, and leave the boy to me.”When John spoke in that masterful tone, Meg always obeyed, and never regrettedher docility.“Please let me kiss him once, John?”“Certainly. Demi, say good night to Mamma, and let her go and rest, forshe is very tired with taking care of you all day.”Meg always insisted upon it that the kiss won the victory, for after it wasgiven, Demi sobbed more quietly, and lay quite still at the bottom of the bed,whither he had wriggled in his anguish of mind.“Poor little man, he’s worn out with sleep and crying. I’llcover him up, and then go and set Meg’s heart at rest,” thoughtJohn, creeping to the bedside, hoping to find his rebellious heir asleep.But he wasn’t, for the moment his father peeped at him, Demi’s eyesopened, his little chin began to quiver, and he put up his arms, saying with apenitent hiccough, “Me’s dood, now.”Sitting on the stairs outside Meg wondered at the long silence which followedthe uproar, and after imagining all sorts of impossible accidents, she slippedinto the room to set her fears at rest. Demi lay fast asleep, not in his usualspreadeagle attitude, but in a subdued bunch, cuddled close in the circle ofhis father’s arm and holding his father’s finger, as if he feltthat justice was tempered with mercy, and had gone to sleep a sadder and wiserbaby. So held, John had waited with a womanly patience till the little handrelaxed its hold, and while waiting had fallen asleep, more tired by thattussle with his son than with his whole day’s work.As Meg stood watching the two faces on the pillow, she smiled to herself, andthen slipped away again, saying in a satisfied tone, “I never need fearthat John will be too harsh with my babies. He does know how to manage them,and will be a great help, for Demi is getting too much for me.”When John came down at last, expecting to find a pensive or reproachful wife,he was agreeably surprised to find Meg placidly trimming a bonnet, and to begreeted with the request to read something about the election, if he was nottoo tired. John saw in a minute that a revolution of some kind was going on,but wisely asked no questions, knowing that Meg was such a transparent littleperson, she couldn’t keep a secret to save her life, and therefore theclue would soon appear. He read a long debate with the most amiable readinessand then explained it in his most lucid manner, while Meg tried to look deeplyinterested, to ask intelligent questions, and keep her thoughts from wanderingfrom the state of the nation to the state of her bonnet. In her secret soul,however, she decided that politics were as bad as mathematics, and that themission of politicians seemed to be calling each other names, but she keptthese feminine ideas to herself, and when John paused, shook her head and saidwith what she thought diplomatic ambiguity, “Well, I really don’tsee what we are coming to.”John laughed, and watched her for a minute, as she poised a pretty littlepreparation of lace and flowers on her hand, and regarded it with the genuineinterest which his harangue had failed to waken.“She is trying to like politics for my sake, so I’ll try and likemillinery for hers, that’s only fair,” thought John the Just,adding aloud, “That’s very pretty. Is it what you call a breakfastcap?”“My dear man, it’s a bonnet! My very best go-to-concert-and-theaterbonnet.”“I beg your pardon, it was so small, I naturally mistook it for one ofthe flyaway things you sometimes wear. How do you keep it on?”“These bits of lace are fastened under the chin with a rosebud,so,” and Meg illustrated by putting on the bonnet and regarding him withan air of calm satisfaction that was irresistible.“It’s a love of a bonnet, but I prefer the face inside, for itlooks young and happy again,” and John kissed the smiling face, to thegreat detriment of the rosebud under the chin.“I’m glad you like it, for I want you to take me to one of the newconcerts some night. I really need some music to put me in tune. Will you,please?”“Of course I will, with all my heart, or anywhere else you like. You havebeen shut up so long, it will do you no end of good, and I shall enjoy it, ofall things. What put it into your head, little mother?”“Well, I had a talk with Marmee the other day, and told her how nervousand cross and out of sorts I felt, and she said I needed change and less care,so Hannah is to help me with the children, and I’m to see to things aboutthe house more, and now and then have a little fun, just to keep me fromgetting to be a fidgety, broken-down old woman before my time. It’s onlyan experiment, John, and I want to try it for your sake as much as for mine,because I’ve neglected you shamefully lately, and I’m going to makehome what it used to be, if I can. You don’t object, I hope?”Never mind what John said, or what a very narrow escape the little bonnet hadfrom utter ruin. All that we have any business to know is that John did notappear to object, judging from the changes which gradually took place in thehouse and its inmates. It was not all Paradise by any means, but everyone wasbetter for the division of labor system. The children throve under the paternalrule, for accurate, steadfast John brought order and obedience into Babydom,while Meg recovered her spirits and composed her nerves by plenty of wholesomeexercise, a little pleasure, and much confidential conversation with hersensible husband. Home grew homelike again, and John had no wish to leave it,unless he took Meg with him. The Scotts came to the Brookes’ now, andeveryone found the little house a cheerful place, full of happiness, content,and family love. Even Sallie Moffatt liked to go there. “It is always soquiet and pleasant here, it does me good, Meg,” she used to say, lookingabout her with wistful eyes, as if trying to discover the charm, that she mightuse it in her great house, full of splendid loneliness, for there were noriotous, sunny-faced babies there, and Ned lived in a world of his own, wherethere was no place for her.This household happiness did not come all at once, but John and Meg had foundthe key to it, and each year of married life taught them how to use it,unlocking the treasuries of real home love and mutual helpfulness, which thepoorest may possess, and the richest cannot buy. This is the sort of shelf onwhich young wives and mothers may consent to be laid, safe from the restlessfret and fever of the world, finding loyal lovers in the little sons anddaughters who cling to them, undaunted by sorrow, poverty, or age, walking sideby side, through fair and stormy weather, with a faithful friend, who is, inthe true sense of the good old Saxon word, the ‘house-band’, andlearning, as Meg learned, that a woman’s happiest kingdom is home, herhighest honor the art of ruling it not as a queen, but as a wise wife andmother.CHAPTER THIRTY-NINELAZY LAURENCELaurie went to Nice intending to stay a week, and remained a month. He wastired of wandering about alone, and Amy’s familiar presence seemed togive a homelike charm to the foreign scenes in which she bore a part. He rathermissed the ‘petting’ he used to receive, and enjoyed a taste of itagain, for no attentions, however flattering, from strangers, were half sopleasant as the sisterly adoration of the girls at home. Amy never would pethim like the others, but she was very glad to see him now, and quite clung tohim, feeling that he was the representative of the dear family for whom shelonged more than she would confess. They naturally took comfort in eachother’s society and were much together, riding, walking, dancing, ordawdling, for at Nice no one can be very industrious during the gay season.But, while apparently amusing themselves in the most careless fashion, theywere half-consciously making discoveries and forming opinions about each other.Amy rose daily in the estimation of her friend, but he sank in hers, and eachfelt the truth before a word was spoken. Amy tried to please, and succeeded,for she was grateful for the many pleasures he gave her, and repaid him withthe little services to which womanly women know how to lend an indescribablecharm. Laurie made no effort of any kind, but just let himself drift along ascomfortably as possible, trying to forget, and feeling that all women owed hima kind word because one had been cold to him. It cost him no effort to begenerous, and he would have given Amy all the trinkets in Nice if she wouldhave taken them, but at the same time he felt that he could not change theopinion she was forming of him, and he rather dreaded the keen blue eyes thatseemed to watch him with such half-sorrowful, half-scornful surprise.“All the rest have gone to Monaco for the day. I preferred to stay athome and write letters. They are done now, and I am going to Valrosa to sketch,will you come?” said Amy, as she joined Laurie one lovely day when helounged in as usual, about noon.“Well, yes, but isn’t it rather warm for such a long walk?”he answered slowly, for the shaded salon looked inviting after the glarewithout.“I’m going to have the little carriage, and Baptiste can drive, soyou’ll have nothing to do but hold your umbrella, and keep your glovesnice,” returned Amy, with a sarcastic glance at the immaculate kids,which were a weak point with Laurie.“Then I’ll go with pleasure.” and he put out his hand for hersketchbook. But she tucked it under her arm with a sharp...“Don’t trouble yourself. It’s no exertion to me, but youdon’t look equal to it.”Laurie lifted his eyebrows and followed at a leisurely pace as she randownstairs, but when they got into the carriage he took the reins himself, andleft little Baptiste nothing to do but fold his arms and fall asleep on hisperch.The two never quarreled. Amy was too well-bred, and just now Laurie was toolazy, so in a minute he peeped under her hatbrim with an inquiring air. Sheanswered him with a smile, and they went on together in the most amicablemanner.It was a lovely drive, along winding roads rich in the picturesque scenes thatdelight beauty-loving eyes. Here an ancient monastery, whence the solemnchanting of the monks came down to them. There a bare-legged shepherd, inwooden shoes, pointed hat, and rough jacket over one shoulder, sat piping on astone while his goats skipped among the rocks or lay at his feet. Meek,mouse-colored donkeys, laden with panniers of freshly cut grass passed by, witha pretty girl in a capaline sitting between the green piles, or an old womanspinning with a distaff as she went. Brown, soft-eyed children ran out from thequaint stone hovels to offer nosegays, or bunches of oranges still on thebough. Gnarled olive trees covered the hills with their dusky foliage, fruithung golden in the orchard, and great scarlet anemones fringed the roadside,while beyond green slopes and craggy heights, the Maritime Alps rose sharp andwhite against the blue Italian sky.Valrosa well deserved its name, for in that climate of perpetual summer rosesblossomed everywhere. They overhung the archway, thrust themselves between thebars of the great gate with a sweet welcome to passers-by, and lined theavenue, winding through lemon trees and feathery palms up to the villa on thehill. Every shadowy nook, where seats invited one to stop and rest, was a massof bloom, every cool grotto had its marble nymph smiling from a veil of flowersand every fountain reflected crimson, white, or pale pink roses, leaning downto smile at their own beauty. Roses covered the walls of the house, draped thecornices, climbed the pillars, and ran riot over the balustrade of the wideterrace, whence one looked down on the sunny Mediterranean, and thewhite-walled city on its shore.“This is a regular honeymoon paradise, isn’t it? Did you ever seesuch roses?” asked Amy, pausing on the terrace to enjoy the view, and aluxurious whiff of perfume that came wandering by.“No, nor felt such thorns,” returned Laurie, with his thumb in hismouth, after a vain attempt to capture a solitary scarlet flower that grew justbeyond his reach.“Try lower down, and pick those that have no thorns,” said Amy,gathering three of the tiny cream-colored ones that starred the wall behindher. She put them in his buttonhole as a peace offering, and he stood a minutelooking down at them with a curious expression, for in the Italian part of hisnature there was a touch of superstition, and he was just then in that state ofhalf-sweet, half-bitter melancholy, when imaginative young men findsignificance in trifles and food for romance everywhere. He had thought of Join reaching after the thorny red rose, for vivid flowers became her, and shehad often worn ones like that from the greenhouse at home. The pale roses Amygave him were the sort that the Italians lay in dead hands, never in bridalwreaths, and for a moment he wondered if the omen was for Jo or for himself,but the next instant his American common sense got the better ofsentimentality, and he laughed a heartier laugh than Amy had heard since hecame.“It’s good advice, you’d better take it and save yourfingers,” she said, thinking her speech amused him.“Thank you, I will,” he answered in jest, and a few months later hedid it in earnest.“Laurie, when are you going to your grandfather?” she askedpresently, as she settled herself on a rustic seat.“Very soon.”“You have said that a dozen times within the last three weeks.”“I dare say, short answers save trouble.”“He expects you, and you really ought to go.”“Hospitable creature! I know it.”“Then why don’t you do it?”“Natural depravity, I suppose.”“Natural indolence, you mean. It’s really dreadful!” and Amylooked severe.“Not so bad as it seems, for I should only plague him if I went, so Imight as well stay and plague you a little longer, you can bear it better, infact I think it agrees with you excellently,” and Laurie composed himselffor a lounge on the broad ledge of the balustrade.Amy shook her head and opened her sketchbook with an air of resignation, butshe had made up her mind to lecture ‘that boy’ and in a minute shebegan again.“What are you doing just now?”“Watching lizards.”“No, no. I mean what do you intend and wish to do?”“Smoke a cigarette, if you’ll allow me.”“How provoking you are! I don’t approve of cigars and I will onlyallow it on condition that you let me put you into my sketch. I need afigure.”“With all the pleasure in life. How will you have me, full length orthree-quarters, on my head or my heels? I should respectfully suggest arecumbent posture, then put yourself in also and call it ‘Dolce farniente’.”“Stay as you are, and go to sleep if you like. I intend to workhard,” said Amy in her most energetic tone.“What delightful enthusiasm!” and he leaned against a tall urn withan air of entire satisfaction.“What would Jo say if she saw you now?” asked Amy impatiently,hoping to stir him up by the mention of her still more energetic sister’sname.“As usual, ‘Go away, Teddy. I’m busy!’” Helaughed as he spoke, but the laugh was not natural, and a shade passed over hisface, for the utterance of the familiar name touched the wound that was nothealed yet. Both tone and shadow struck Amy, for she had seen and heard thembefore, and now she looked up in time to catch a new expression onLaurie’s face—a hard bitter look, full of pain, dissatisfaction,and regret. It was gone before she could study it and the listless expressionback again. She watched him for a moment with artistic pleasure, thinking howlike an Italian he looked, as he lay basking in the sun with uncovered head andeyes full of southern dreaminess, for he seemed to have forgotten her andfallen into a reverie.“You look like the effigy of a young knight asleep on his tomb,”she said, carefully tracing the well-cut profile defined against the darkstone.“Wish I was!”“That’s a foolish wish, unless you have spoiled your life. You areso changed, I sometimes think—” there Amy stopped, with ahalf-timid, half-wistful look, more significant than her unfinished speech.Laurie saw and understood the affectionate anxiety which she hesitated toexpress, and looking straight into her eyes, said, just as he used to say it toher mother, “It’s all right, ma’am.”That satisfied her and set at rest the doubts that had begun to worry herlately. It also touched her, and she showed that it did, by the cordial tone inwhich she said...“I’m glad of that! I didn’t think you’d been a very badboy, but I fancied you might have wasted money at that wicked Baden-Baden, lostyour heart to some charming Frenchwoman with a husband, or got into some of thescrapes that young men seem to consider a necessary part of a foreign tour.Don’t stay out there in the sun, come and lie on the grass here and‘let us be friendly’, as Jo used to say when we got in the sofacorner and told secrets.”Laurie obediently threw himself down on the turf, and began to amuse himself bysticking daisies into the ribbons of Amy’s hat, that lay there.“I’m all ready for the secrets.” and he glanced up with adecided expression of interest in his eyes.“I’ve none to tell. You may begin.”“Haven’t one to bless myself with. I thought perhaps you’dhad some news from home..”“You have heard all that has come lately. Don’t you hear often? Ifancied Jo would send you volumes.”“She’s very busy. I’m roving about so, it’s impossibleto be regular, you know. When do you begin your great work of art,Raphaella?” he asked, changing the subject abruptly after another pause,in which he had been wondering if Amy knew his secret and wanted to talk aboutit.“Never,” she answered, with a despondent but decided air.“Rome took all the vanity out of me, for after seeing the wonders there,I felt too insignificant to live and gave up all my foolish hopes indespair.”“Why should you, with so much energy and talent?”“That’s just why, because talent isn’t genius, and no amountof energy can make it so. I want to be great, or nothing. I won’t be acommon-place dauber, so I don’t intend to try any more.”“And what are you going to do with yourself now, if I may ask?”“Polish up my other talents, and be an ornament to society, if I get thechance.”It was a characteristic speech, and sounded daring, but audacity becomes youngpeople, and Amy’s ambition had a good foundation. Laurie smiled, but heliked the spirit with which she took up a new purpose when a long-cherished onedied, and spent no time lamenting.“Good! And here is where Fred Vaughn comes in, I fancy.”Amy preserved a discreet silence, but there was a conscious look in herdowncast face that made Laurie sit up and say gravely, “Now I’mgoing to play brother, and ask questions. May I?”“I don’t promise to answer.”“Your face will, if your tongue won’t. You aren’t woman ofthe world enough yet to hide your feelings, my dear. I heard rumors about Fredand you last year, and it’s my private opinion that if he had not beencalled home so suddenly and detained so long, something would have come of it,hey?”“That’s not for me to say,” was Amy’s grim reply, buther lips would smile, and there was a traitorous sparkle of the eye whichbetrayed that she knew her power and enjoyed the knowledge.“You are not engaged, I hope?” and Laurie looked veryelder-brotherly and grave all of a sudden.“No.”“But you will be, if he comes back and goes properly down on his knees,won’t you?”“Very likely.”“Then you are fond of old Fred?”“I could be, if I tried.”“But you don’t intend to try till the proper moment? Bless my soul,what unearthly prudence! He’s a good fellow, Amy, but not the man Ifancied you’d like.”“He is rich, a gentleman, and has delightful manners,” began Amy,trying to be quite cool and dignified, but feeling a little ashamed of herself,in spite of the sincerity of her intentions.“I understand. Queens of society can’t get on without money, so youmean to make a good match, and start in that way? Quite right and proper, asthe world goes, but it sounds odd from the lips of one of your mother’sgirls.”“True, nevertheless.”A short speech, but the quiet decision with which it was uttered contrastedcuriously with the young speaker. Laurie felt this instinctively and laidhimself down again, with a sense of disappointment which he could not explain.His look and silence, as well as a certain inward self-disapproval, ruffledAmy, and made her resolve to deliver her lecture without delay.“I wish you’d do me the favor to rouse yourself a little,”she said sharply.“Do it for me, there’s a dear girl.”“I could, if I tried.” and she looked as if she would like doing itin the most summary style.“Try, then. I give you leave,” returned Laurie, who enjoyed havingsomeone to tease, after his long abstinence from his favorite pastime.“You’d be angry in five minutes.”“I’m never angry with you. It takes two flints to make a fire. Youare as cool and soft as snow.”“You don’t know what I can do. Snow produces a glow and a tingle,if applied rightly. Your indifference is half affectation, and a good stirringup would prove it.”“Stir away, it won’t hurt me and it may amuse you, as the big mansaid when his little wife beat him. Regard me in the light of a husband or acarpet, and beat till you are tired, if that sort of exercise agrees withyou.”Being decidedly nettled herself, and longing to see him shake off the apathythat so altered him, Amy sharpened both tongue and pencil, and began.“Flo and I have got a new name for you. It’s Lazy Laurence. How doyou like it?”She thought it would annoy him, but he only folded his arms under his head,with an imperturbable, “That’s not bad. Thank you, ladies.”“Do you want to know what I honestly think of you?”“Pining to be told.”“Well, I despise you.”If she had even said ‘I hate you’ in a petulant or coquettish tone,he would have laughed and rather liked it, but the grave, almost sad, accent inher voice made him open his eyes, and ask quickly...“Why, if you please?”“Because, with every chance for being good, useful, and happy, you arefaulty, lazy, and miserable.”“Strong language, mademoiselle.”“If you like it, I’ll go on.”“Pray do, it’s quite interesting.”“I thought you’d find it so. Selfish people always like to talkabout themselves.”“Am I selfish?” the question slipped out involuntarily and in atone of surprise, for the one virtue on which he prided himself was generosity.“Yes, very selfish,” continued Amy, in a calm, cool voice, twice aseffective just then as an angry one. “I’ll show you how, forI’ve studied you while we were frolicking, and I’m not at allsatisfied with you. Here you have been abroad nearly six months, and donenothing but waste time and money and disappoint your friends.”“Isn’t a fellow to have any pleasure after a four-yeargrind?”“You don’t look as if you’d had much. At any rate, you arenone the better for it, as far as I can see. I said when we first met that youhad improved. Now I take it all back, for I don’t think you half so niceas when I left you at home. You have grown abominably lazy, you like gossip,and waste time on frivolous things, you are contented to be petted and admiredby silly people, instead of being loved and respected by wise ones. With money,talent, position, health, and beauty, ah you like that old Vanity! Butit’s the truth, so I can’t help saying it, with all these splendidthings to use and enjoy, you can find nothing to do but dawdle, and instead ofbeing the man you ought to be, you are only...” there she stopped, with alook that had both pain and pity in it.“Saint Laurence on a gridiron,” added Laurie, blandly finishing thesentence. But the lecture began to take effect, for there was a wide-awakesparkle in his eyes now and a half-angry, half-injured expression replaced theformer indifference.“I supposed you’d take it so. You men tell us we are angels, andsay we can make you what we will, but the instant we honestly try to do yougood, you laugh at us and won’t listen, which proves how much yourflattery is worth.” Amy spoke bitterly, and turned her back on theexasperating martyr at her feet.In a minute a hand came down over the page, so that she could not draw, andLaurie’s voice said, with a droll imitation of a penitent child, “Iwill be good, oh, I will be good!”But Amy did not laugh, for she was in earnest, and tapping on the outspreadhand with her pencil, said soberly, “Aren’t you ashamed of a handlike that? It’s as soft and white as a woman’s, and looks as if itnever did anything but wear Jouvin’s best gloves and pick flowers forladies. You are not a dandy, thank Heaven, so I’m glad to see there areno diamonds or big seal rings on it, only the little old one Jo gave you solong ago. Dear soul, I wish she was here to help me!”“So do I!”The hand vanished as suddenly as it came, and there was energy enough in theecho of her wish to suit even Amy. She glanced down at him with a new thoughtin her mind, but he was lying with his hat half over his face, as if for shade,and his mustache hid his mouth. She only saw his chest rise and fall, with along breath that might have been a sigh, and the hand that wore the ringnestled down into the grass, as if to hide something too precious or too tenderto be spoken of. All in a minute various hints and trifles assumed shape andsignificance in Amy’s mind, and told her what her sister never hadconfided to her. She remembered that Laurie never spoke voluntarily of Jo, sherecalled the shadow on his face just now, the change in his character, and thewearing of the little old ring which was no ornament to a handsome hand. Girlsare quick to read such signs and feel their eloquence. Amy had fancied thatperhaps a love trouble was at the bottom of the alteration, and now she wassure of it. Her keen eyes filled, and when she spoke again, it was in a voicethat could be beautifully soft and kind when she chose to make it so.“I know I have no right to talk so to you, Laurie, and if youweren’t the sweetest-tempered fellow in the world, you’d be veryangry with me. But we are all so fond and proud of you, I couldn’t bearto think they should be disappointed in you at home as I have been, though,perhaps they would understand the change better than I do.”“I think they would,” came from under the hat, in a grim tone,quite as touching as a broken one.“They ought to have told me, and not let me go blundering and scolding,when I should have been more kind and patient than ever. I never did like thatMiss Randal and now I hate her!” said artful Amy, wishing to be sure ofher facts this time.“Hang Miss Randal!” and Laurie knocked the hat off his face with alook that left no doubt of his sentiments toward that young lady.“I beg pardon, I thought...” and there she paused diplomatically.“No, you didn’t, you knew perfectly well I never cared for anyonebut Jo,” Laurie said that in his old, impetuous tone, and turned his faceaway as he spoke.“I did think so, but as they never said anything about it, and you cameaway, I supposed I was mistaken. And Jo wouldn’t be kind to you? Why, Iwas sure she loved you dearly.”“She was kind, but not in the right way, and it’s lucky for her shedidn’t love me, if I’m the good-for-nothing fellow you think me.It’s her fault though, and you may tell her so.”The hard, bitter look came back again as he said that, and it troubled Amy, forshe did not know what balm to apply.“I was wrong, I didn’t know. I’m very sorry I was so cross,but I can’t help wishing you’d bear it better, Teddy, dear.”“Don’t, that’s her name for me!” and Laurie put up hishand with a quick gesture to stop the words spoken in Jo’s half-kind,half-reproachful tone. “Wait till you’ve tried it yourself,”he added in a low voice, as he pulled up the grass by the handful.“I’d take it manfully, and be respected if I couldn’t beloved,” said Amy, with the decision of one who knew nothing about it.Now, Laurie flattered himself that he had borne it remarkably well, making nomoan, asking no sympathy, and taking his trouble away to live it down alone.Amy’s lecture put the matter in a new light, and for the first time itdid look weak and selfish to lose heart at the first failure, and shut himselfup in moody indifference. He felt as if suddenly shaken out of a pensive dreamand found it impossible to go to sleep again. Presently he sat up and askedslowly, “Do you think Jo would despise me as you do?”“Yes, if she saw you now. She hates lazy people. Why don’t you dosomething splendid, and make her love you?”“I did my best, but it was no use.”“Graduating well, you mean? That was no more than you ought to have done,for your grandfather’s sake. It would have been shameful to fail afterspending so much time and money, when everyone knew that you could dowell.”“I did fail, say what you will, for Jo wouldn’t love me,”began Laurie, leaning his head on his hand in a despondent attitude.“No, you didn’t, and you’ll say so in the end, for it did yougood, and proved that you could do something if you tried. If you’d onlyset about another task of some sort, you’d soon be your hearty, happyself again, and forget your trouble.”“That’s impossible.”“Try it and see. You needn’t shrug your shoulders, and think,‘Much she knows about such things’. I don’t pretend to bewise, but I am observing, and I see a great deal more than you’d imagine.I’m interested in other people’s experiences and inconsistencies,and though I can’t explain, I remember and use them for my own benefit.Love Jo all your days, if you choose, but don’t let it spoil you, forit’s wicked to throw away so many good gifts because you can’t havethe one you want. There, I won’t lecture any more, for I knowyou’ll wake up and be a man in spite of that hardhearted girl.”Neither spoke for several minutes. Laurie sat turning the little ring on hisfinger, and Amy put the last touches to the hasty sketch she had been workingat while she talked. Presently she put it on his knee, merely saying,“How do you like that?”He looked and then he smiled, as he could not well help doing, for it wascapitally done, the long, lazy figure on the grass, with listless face,half-shut eyes, and one hand holding a cigar, from which came the little wreathof smoke that encircled the dreamer’s head.“How well you draw!” he said, with a genuine surprise and pleasureat her skill, adding, with a half-laugh, “Yes, that’s me.”“As you are. This is as you were.” and Amy laid another sketchbeside the one he held.It was not nearly so well done, but there was a life and spirit in it whichatoned for many faults, and it recalled the past so vividly that a suddenchange swept over the young man’s face as he looked. Only a rough sketchof Laurie taming a horse. Hat and coat were off, and every line of the activefigure, resolute face, and commanding attitude was full of energy and meaning.The handsome brute, just subdued, stood arching his neck under the tightlydrawn rein, with one foot impatiently pawing the ground, and ears pricked up asif listening for the voice that had mastered him. In the ruffled mane, therider’s breezy hair and erect attitude, there was a suggestion ofsuddenly arrested motion, of strength, courage, and youthful buoyancy thatcontrasted sharply with the supine grace of the ‘Dolce farNiente’ sketch. Laurie said nothing but as his eye went from one tothe other, Amy saw him flush up and fold his lips together as if he read andaccepted the little lesson she had given him. That satisfied her, and withoutwaiting for him to speak, she said, in her sprightly way...“Don’t you remember the day you played Rarey with Puck, and we alllooked on? Meg and Beth were frightened, but Jo clapped and pranced, and I saton the fence and drew you. I found that sketch in my portfolio the other day,touched it up, and kept it to show you.”“Much obliged. You’ve improved immensely since then, and Icongratulate you. May I venture to suggest in ‘a honeymoonparadise’ that five o’clock is the dinner hour at yourhotel?”Laurie rose as he spoke, returned the pictures with a smile and a bow andlooked at his watch, as if to remind her that even moral lectures should havean end. He tried to resume his former easy, indifferent air, but it was anaffectation now, for the rousing had been more effacious than he would confess.Amy felt the shade of coldness in his manner, and said to herself...“Now, I’ve offended him. Well, if it does him good, I’m glad,if it makes him hate me, I’m sorry, but it’s true, and Ican’t take back a word of it.”They laughed and chatted all the way home, and little Baptiste, up behind,thought that monsieur and madamoiselle were in charming spirits. But both feltill at ease. The friendly frankness was disturbed, the sunshine had a shadowover it, and despite their apparent gaiety, there was a secret discontent inthe heart of each.“Shall we see you this evening, mon frere?” asked Amy, as theyparted at her aunt’s door.“Unfortunately I have an engagement. Au revoir, madamoiselle,” andLaurie bent as if to kiss her hand, in the foreign fashion, which became himbetter than many men. Something in his face made Amy say quickly and warmly...“No, be yourself with me, Laurie, and part in the good old way. I’drather have a hearty English handshake than all the sentimental salutations inFrance.”“Goodbye, dear,” and with these words, uttered in the tone sheliked, Laurie left her, after a handshake almost painful in its heartiness.Next morning, instead of the usual call, Amy received a note which made hersmile at the beginning and sigh at the end.My Dear Mentor, Please make my adieux to your aunt, and exult within yourself,for ‘Lazy Laurence’ has gone to his grandpa, like the best of boys.A pleasant winter to you, and may the gods grant you a blissful honeymoon atValrosa! I think Fred would be benefited by a rouser. Tell him so, with mycongratulations.Yours gratefully, Telemachus“Good boy! I’m glad he’s gone,” said Amy, with anapproving smile. The next minute her face fell as she glanced about the emptyroom, adding, with an involuntary sigh, “Yes, I am glad, but how I shallmiss him.”CHAPTER FORTYTHE VALLEY OF THE SHADOWWhen the first bitterness was over, the family accepted the inevitable, andtried to bear it cheerfully, helping one another by the increased affectionwhich comes to bind households tenderly together in times of trouble. They putaway their grief, and each did his or her part toward making that last year ahappy one.The pleasantest room in the house was set apart for Beth, and in it wasgathered everything that she most loved, flowers, pictures, her piano, thelittle worktable, and the beloved pussies. Father’s best books foundtheir way there, Mother’s easy chair, Jo’s desk, Amy’s finestsketches, and every day Meg brought her babies on a loving pilgrimage, to makesunshine for Aunty Beth. John quietly set apart a little sum, that he mightenjoy the pleasure of keeping the invalid supplied with the fruit she loved andlonged for. Old Hannah never wearied of concocting dainty dishes to tempt acapricious appetite, dropping tears as she worked, and from across the sea camelittle gifts and cheerful letters, seeming to bring breaths of warmth andfragrance from lands that know no winter.Here, cherished like a household saint in its shrine, sat Beth, tranquil andbusy as ever, for nothing could change the sweet, unselfish nature, and evenwhile preparing to leave life, she tried to make it happier for those whoshould remain behind. The feeble fingers were never idle, and one of herpleasures was to make little things for the school children daily passing toand fro, to drop a pair of mittens from her window for a pair of purple hands,a needlebook for some small mother of many dolls, penwipers for young penmentoiling through forests of pothooks, scrapbooks for picture-loving eyes, andall manner of pleasant devices, till the reluctant climbers of the ladder oflearning found their way strewn with flowers, as it were, and came to regardthe gentle giver as a sort of fairy godmother, who sat above there, andshowered down gifts miraculously suited to their tastes and needs. If Beth hadwanted any reward, she found it in the bright little faces always turned up toher window, with nods and smiles, and the droll little letters which came toher, full of blots and gratitude.The first few months were very happy ones, and Beth often used to look round,and say “How beautiful this is!” as they all sat together in hersunny room, the babies kicking and crowing on the floor, mother and sistersworking near, and father reading, in his pleasant voice, from the wise oldbooks which seemed rich in good and comfortable words, as applicable now aswhen written centuries ago, a little chapel, where a paternal priest taught hisflock the hard lessons all must learn, trying to show them that hope cancomfort love, and faith make resignation possible. Simple sermons, that wentstraight to the souls of those who listened, for the father’s heart wasin the minister’s religion, and the frequent falter in the voice gave adouble eloquence to the words he spoke or read.It was well for all that this peaceful time was given them as preparation forthe sad hours to come, for by-and-by, Beth said the needle was ‘soheavy’, and put it down forever. Talking wearied her, faces troubled her,pain claimed her for its own, and her tranquil spirit was sorrowfully perturbedby the ills that vexed her feeble flesh. Ah me! Such heavy days, such long,long nights, such aching hearts and imploring prayers, when those who loved herbest were forced to see the thin hands stretched out to them beseechingly, tohear the bitter cry, “Help me, help me!” and to feel that there wasno help. A sad eclipse of the serene soul, a sharp struggle of the young lifewith death, but both were mercifully brief, and then the natural rebellionover, the old peace returned more beautiful than ever. With the wreck of herfrail body, Beth’s soul grew strong, and though she said little, thoseabout her felt that she was ready, saw that the first pilgrim called waslikewise the fittest, and waited with her on the shore, trying to see theShining Ones coming to receive her when she crossed the river.Jo never left her for an hour since Beth had said “I feel stronger whenyou are here.” She slept on a couch in the room, waking often to renewthe fire, to feed, lift, or wait upon the patient creature who seldom asked foranything, and ‘tried not to be a trouble’. All day she haunted theroom, jealous of any other nurse, and prouder of being chosen then than of anyhonor her life ever brought her. Precious and helpful hours to Jo, for now herheart received the teaching that it needed. Lessons in patience were so sweetlytaught her that she could not fail to learn them, charity for all, the lovelyspirit that can forgive and truly forget unkindness, the loyalty to duty thatmakes the hardest easy, and the sincere faith that fears nothing, but trustsundoubtingly.Often when she woke Jo found Beth reading in her well-worn little book, heardher singing softly, to beguile the sleepless night, or saw her lean her faceupon her hands, while slow tears dropped through the transparent fingers, andJo would lie watching her with thoughts too deep for tears, feeling that Beth,in her simple, unselfish way, was trying to wean herself from the dear oldlife, and fit herself for the life to come, by sacred words of comfort, quietprayers, and the music she loved so well.Seeing this did more for Jo than the wisest sermons, the saintliest hymns, themost fervent prayers that any voice could utter. For with eyes made clear bymany tears, and a heart softened by the tenderest sorrow, she recognized thebeauty of her sister’s life—uneventful, unambitious, yet full ofthe genuine virtues which ‘smell sweet, and blossom in the dust’,the self-forgetfulness that makes the humblest on earth remembered soonest inheaven, the true success which is possible to all.One night when Beth looked among the books upon her table, to find something tomake her forget the mortal weariness that was almost as hard to bear as pain,as she turned the leaves of her old favorite, Pilgrims’s Progress, shefound a little paper, scribbled over in Jo’s hand. The name caught hereye and the blurred look of the lines made her sure that tears had fallen onit.“Poor Jo! She’s fast asleep, so I won’t wake her to askleave. She shows me all her things, and I don’t think she’ll mindif I look at this”, thought Beth, with a glance at her sister, who lay onthe rug, with the tongs beside her, ready to wake up the minute the log fellapart.MY BETHSitting patient in the shadowTill the blessed light shall come,A serene and saintly presenceSanctifies our troubled home.Earthly joys and hopes and sorrowsBreak like ripples on the strandOf the deep and solemn riverWhere her willing feet now stand.O my sister, passing from me,Out of human care and strife,Leave me, as a gift, those virtuesWhich have beautified your life.Dear, bequeath me that great patienceWhich has power to sustainA cheerful, uncomplaining spiritIn its prison-house of pain.Give me, for I need it sorely,Of that courage, wise and sweet,Which has made the path of dutyGreen beneath your willing feet.Give me that unselfish nature,That with charity divineCan pardon wrong for love’s dear sake—Meek heart, forgive me mine!Thus our parting daily losethSomething of its bitter pain,And while learning this hard lesson,My great loss becomes my gain.For the touch of grief will renderMy wild nature more serene,Give to life new aspirations,A new trust in the unseen.Henceforth, safe across the river,I shall see forever moreA beloved, household spiritWaiting for me on the shore.Hope and faith, born of my sorrow,Guardian angels shall become,And the sister gone before meBy their hands shall lead me home.Blurred and blotted, faulty and feeble as the lines were, they brought a lookof inexpressible comfort to Beth’s face, for her one regret had been thatshe had done so little, and this seemed to assure her that her life had notbeen useless, that her death would not bring the despair she feared. As she satwith the paper folded between her hands, the charred log fell asunder. Jostarted up, revived the blaze, and crept to the bedside, hoping Beth slept.“Not asleep, but so happy, dear. See, I found this and read it. I knewyou wouldn’t care. Have I been all that to you, Jo?” she asked,with wistful, humble earnestness.“Oh, Beth, so much, so much!” and Jo’s head went downupon the pillow beside her sister’s.“Then I don’t feel as if I’d wasted my life. I’m not sogood as you make me, but I have tried to do right. And now, when it’s toolate to begin even to do better, it’s such a comfort to know that someoneloves me so much, and feels as if I’d helped them.”“More than any one in the world, Beth. I used to think I couldn’tlet you go, but I’m learning to feel that I don’t lose you, thatyou’ll be more to me than ever, and death can’t part us, though itseems to.”“I know it cannot, and I don’t fear it any longer, for I’msure I shall be your Beth still, to love and help you more than ever. You musttake my place, Jo, and be everything to Father and Mother when I’m gone.They will turn to you, don’t fail them, and if it’s hard to workalone, remember that I don’t forget you, and that you’ll be happierin doing that than writing splendid books or seeing all the world, for love isthe only thing that we can carry with us when we go, and it makes the end soeasy.”“I’ll try, Beth.” and then and there Jo renounced her oldambition, pledged herself to a new and better one, acknowledging the poverty ofother desires, and feeling the blessed solace of a belief in the immortality oflove.So the spring days came and went, the sky grew clearer, the earth greener, theflowers were up fairly early, and the birds came back in time to say goodbye toBeth, who, like a tired but trustful child, clung to the hands that had led herall her life, as Father and Mother guided her tenderly through the Valley ofthe Shadow, and gave her up to God.Seldom except in books do the dying utter memorable words, see visions, ordepart with beatified countenances, and those who have sped many parting soulsknow that to most the end comes as naturally and simply as sleep. As Beth hadhoped, the ‘tide went out easily’, and in the dark hour beforedawn, on the bosom where she had drawn her first breath, she quietly drew herlast, with no farewell but one loving look, one little sigh.With tears and prayers and tender hands, Mother and sisters made her ready forthe long sleep that pain would never mar again, seeing with grateful eyes thebeautiful serenity that soon replaced the pathetic patience that had wrungtheir hearts so long, and feeling with reverent joy that to their darling deathwas a benignant angel, not a phantom full of dread.When morning came, for the first time in many months the fire was out,Jo’s place was empty, and the room was very still. But a bird sangblithely on a budding bough, close by, the snowdrops blossomed freshly at thewindow, and the spring sunshine streamed in like a benediction over the placidface upon the pillow, a face so full of painless peace that those who loved itbest smiled through their tears, and thanked God that Beth was well at last.CHAPTER FORTY-ONELEARNING TO FORGETAmy’s lecture did Laurie good, though, of course, he did not own it tilllong afterward. Men seldom do, for when women are the advisers, the lords ofcreation don’t take the advice till they have persuaded themselves thatit is just what they intended to do. Then they act upon it, and, if itsucceeds, they give the weaker vessel half the credit of it. If it fails, theygenerously give her the whole. Laurie went back to his grandfather, and was sodutifully devoted for several weeks that the old gentleman declared the climateof Nice had improved him wonderfully, and he had better try it again. There wasnothing the young gentleman would have liked better, but elephants could nothave dragged him back after the scolding he had received. Pride forbid, andwhenever the longing grew very strong, he fortified his resolution by repeatingthe words that had made the deepest impression—“I despiseyou.” “Go and do something splendid that will make her loveyou.”Laurie turned the matter over in his mind so often that he soon brought himselfto confess that he had been selfish and lazy, but then when a man has a greatsorrow, he should be indulged in all sorts of vagaries till he has lived itdown. He felt that his blighted affections were quite dead now, and though heshould never cease to be a faithful mourner, there was no occasion to wear hisweeds ostentatiously. Jo wouldn’t love him, but he might make her respectand admire him by doing something which should prove that a girl’s‘No’ had not spoiled his life. He had always meant to do something,and Amy’s advice was quite unnecessary. He had only been waiting till theaforesaid blighted affections were decently interred. That being done, he feltthat he was ready to ‘hide his stricken heart, and still toil on’.As Goethe, when he had a joy or a grief, put it into a song, so Laurie resolvedto embalm his love sorrow in music, and to compose a Requiem which shouldharrow up Jo’s soul and melt the heart of every hearer. Therefore thenext time the old gentleman found him getting restless and moody and orderedhim off, he went to Vienna, where he had musical friends, and fell to work withthe firm determination to distinguish himself. But whether the sorrow was toovast to be embodied in music, or music too ethereal to uplift a mortal woe, hesoon discovered that the Requiem was beyond him just at present. It was evidentthat his mind was not in working order yet, and his ideas needed clarifying,for often in the middle of a plaintive strain, he would find himself humming adancing tune that vividly recalled the Christmas ball at Nice, especially thestout Frenchman, and put an effectual stop to tragic composition for the timebeing.Then he tried an opera, for nothing seemed impossible in the beginning, buthere again unforeseen difficulties beset him. He wanted Jo for his heroine, andcalled upon his memory to supply him with tender recollections and romanticvisions of his love. But memory turned traitor, and as if possessed by theperverse spirit of the girl, would only recall Jo’s oddities, faults, andfreaks, would only show her in the most unsentimental aspects—beatingmats with her head tied up in a bandanna, barricading herself with the sofapillow, or throwing cold water over his passion a la Gummidge—and anirresistable laugh spoiled the pensive picture he was endeavoring to paint. Jowouldn’t be put into the opera at any price, and he had to give her upwith a “Bless that girl, what a torment she is!” and a clutch athis hair, as became a distracted composer.When he looked about him for another and a less intractable damsel toimmortalize in melody, memory produced one with the most obliging readiness.This phantom wore many faces, but it always had golden hair, was enveloped in adiaphanous cloud, and floated airily before his mind’s eye in a pleasingchaos of roses, peacocks, white ponies, and blue ribbons. He did not give thecomplacent wraith any name, but he took her for his heroine and grew quite fondof her, as well he might, for he gifted her with every gift and grace under thesun, and escorted her, unscathed, through trials which would have annihilatedany mortal woman.Thanks to this inspiration, he got on swimmingly for a time, but gradually thework lost its charm, and he forgot to compose, while he sat musing, pen inhand, or roamed about the gay city to get some new ideas and refresh his mind,which seemed to be in a somewhat unsettled state that winter. He did not domuch, but he thought a great deal and was conscious of a change of some sortgoing on in spite of himself. “It’s genius simmering, perhaps.I’ll let it simmer, and see what comes of it,” he said, with asecret suspicion all the while that it wasn’t genius, but something farmore common. Whatever it was, it simmered to some purpose, for he grew more andmore discontented with his desultory life, began to long for some real andearnest work to go at, soul and body, and finally came to the wise conclusionthat everyone who loved music was not a composer. Returning from one ofMozart’s grand operas, splendidly performed at the Royal Theatre, helooked over his own, played a few of the best parts, sat staring at the bustsof Mendelssohn, Beethoven, and Bach, who stared benignly back again. Thensuddenly he tore up his music sheets, one by one, and as the last fluttered outof his hand, he said soberly to himself...“She is right! Talent isn’t genius, and you can’t make it so.That music has taken the vanity out of me as Rome took it out of her, and Iwon’t be a humbug any longer. Now what shall I do?”That seemed a hard question to answer, and Laurie began to wish he had to workfor his daily bread. Now if ever, occurred an eligible opportunity for‘going to the devil’, as he once forcibly expressed it, for he hadplenty of money and nothing to do, and Satan is proverbially fond of providingemployment for full and idle hands. The poor fellow had temptations enough fromwithout and from within, but he withstood them pretty well, for much as hevalued liberty, he valued good faith and confidence more, so his promise to hisgrandfather, and his desire to be able to look honestly into the eyes of thewomen who loved him, and say “All’s well,” kept him safe andsteady.Very likely some Mrs. Grundy will observe, “I don’t believe it,boys will be boys, young men must sow their wild oats, and women must notexpect miracles.” I dare say you don’t, Mrs. Grundy, but it’strue nevertheless. Women work a good many miracles, and I have a persuasionthat they may perform even that of raising the standard of manhood by refusingto echo such sayings. Let the boys be boys, the longer the better, and let theyoung men sow their wild oats if they must. But mothers, sisters, and friendsmay help to make the crop a small one, and keep many tares from spoiling theharvest, by believing, and showing that they believe, in the possibility ofloyalty to the virtues which make men manliest in good women’s eyes. Ifit is a feminine delusion, leave us to enjoy it while we may, for without ithalf the beauty and the romance of life is lost, and sorrowful forebodingswould embitter all our hopes of the brave, tenderhearted little lads, who stilllove their mothers better than themselves and are not ashamed to own it.Laurie thought that the task of forgetting his love for Jo would absorb all hispowers for years, but to his great surprise he discovered it grew easier everyday. He refused to believe it at first, got angry with himself, andcouldn’t understand it, but these hearts of ours are curious and contrarythings, and time and nature work their will in spite of us. Laurie’sheart wouldn’t ache. The wound persisted in healing with a rapidity thatastonished him, and instead of trying to forget, he found himself trying toremember. He had not foreseen this turn of affairs, and was not prepared forit. He was disgusted with himself, surprised at his own fickleness, and full ofa queer mixture of disappointment and relief that he could recover from such atremendous blow so soon. He carefully stirred up the embers of his lost love,but they refused to burst into a blaze. There was only a comfortable glow thatwarmed and did him good without putting him into a fever, and he wasreluctantly obliged to confess that the boyish passion was slowly subsidinginto a more tranquil sentiment, very tender, a little sad and resentful still,but that was sure to pass away in time, leaving a brotherly affection whichwould last unbroken to the end.As the word ‘brotherly’ passed through his mind in one of hisreveries, he smiled, and glanced up at the picture of Mozart that was beforehim...“Well, he was a great man, and when he couldn’t have one sister hetook the other, and was happy.”Laurie did not utter the words, but he thought them, and the next instantkissed the little old ring, saying to himself, “No, I won’t! Ihaven’t forgotten, I never can. I’ll try again, and if that fails,why then...”Leaving his sentence unfinished, he seized pen and paper and wrote to Jo,telling her that he could not settle to anything while there was the least hopeof her changing her mind. Couldn’t she, wouldn’t she—and lethim come home and be happy? While waiting for an answer he did nothing, but hedid it energetically, for he was in a fever of impatience. It came at last, andsettled his mind effectually on one point, for Jo decidedly couldn’t andwouldn’t. She was wrapped up in Beth, and never wished to hear the wordlove again. Then she begged him to be happy with somebody else, but always keepa little corner of his heart for his loving sister Jo. In a postscript shedesired him not to tell Amy that Beth was worse, she was coming home in thespring and there was no need of saddening the remainder of her stay. That wouldbe time enough, please God, but Laurie must write to her often, and not let herfeel lonely, homesick or anxious.“So I will, at once. Poor little girl, it will be a sad going home forher, I’m afraid,” and Laurie opened his desk, as if writing to Amyhad been the proper conclusion of the sentence left unfinished some weeksbefore.But he did not write the letter that day, for as he rummaged out his bestpaper, he came across something which changed his purpose. Tumbling about inone part of the desk among bills, passports, and business documents of variouskinds were several of Jo’s letters, and in another compartment were threenotes from Amy, carefully tied up with one of her blue ribbons and sweetlysuggestive of the little dead roses put away inside. With a half-repentant,half-amused expression, Laurie gathered up all Jo’s letters, smoothed,folded, and put them neatly into a small drawer of the desk, stood a minuteturning the ring thoughtfully on his finger, then slowly drew it off, laid itwith the letters, locked the drawer, and went out to hear High Mass at SaintStefan’s, feeling as if there had been a funeral, and though notoverwhelmed with affliction, this seemed a more proper way to spend the rest ofthe day than in writing letters to charming young ladies.The letter went very soon, however, and was promptly answered, for Amy washomesick, and confessed it in the most delightfully confiding manner. Thecorrespondence flourished famously, and letters flew to and fro with unfailingregularity all through the early spring. Laurie sold his busts, made allumettesof his opera, and went back to Paris, hoping somebody would arrive before long.He wanted desperately to go to Nice, but would not till he was asked, and Amywould not ask him, for just then she was having little experiences of her own,which made her rather wish to avoid the quizzical eyes of ‘ourboy’.Fred Vaughn had returned, and put the question to which she had once decided toanswer, “Yes, thank you,” but now she said, “No, thankyou,” kindly but steadily, for when the time came, her courage failedher, and she found that something more than money and position was needed tosatisfy the new longing that filled her heart so full of tender hopes andfears. The words, “Fred is a good fellow, but not at all the man Ifancied you would ever like,” and Laurie’s face when he utteredthem, kept returning to her as pertinaciously as her own did when she said inlook, if not in words, “I shall marry for money.” It troubled herto remember that now, she wished she could take it back, it sounded sounwomanly. She didn’t want Laurie to think her a heartless, worldlycreature. She didn’t care to be a queen of society now half so much asshe did to be a lovable woman. She was so glad he didn’t hate her for thedreadful things she said, but took them so beautifully and was kinder thanever. His letters were such a comfort, for the home letters were very irregularand not half so satisfactory as his when they did come. It was not only apleasure, but a duty to answer them, for the poor fellow was forlorn, andneeded petting, since Jo persisted in being stonyhearted. She ought to havemade an effort and tried to love him. It couldn’t be very hard, manypeople would be proud and glad to have such a dear boy care for them. But Jonever would act like other girls, so there was nothing to do but be very kindand treat him like a brother.If all brothers were treated as well as Laurie was at this period, they wouldbe a much happier race of beings than they are. Amy never lectured now. Sheasked his opinion on all subjects, she was interested in everything he did,made charming little presents for him, and sent him two letters a week, full oflively gossip, sisterly confidences, and captivating sketches of the lovelyscenes about her. As few brothers are complimented by having their letterscarried about in their sister’s pockets, read and reread diligently,cried over when short, kissed when long, and treasured carefully, we will nothint that Amy did any of these fond and foolish things. But she certainly didgrow a little pale and pensive that spring, lost much of her relish forsociety, and went out sketching alone a good deal. She never had much to showwhen she came home, but was studying nature, I dare say, while she sat forhours, with her hands folded, on the terrace at Valrosa, or absently sketchedany fancy that occurred to her, a stalwart knight carved on a tomb, a young manasleep in the grass, with his hat over his eyes, or a curly haired girl ingorgeous array, promenading down a ballroom on the arm of a tall gentleman,both faces being left a blur according to the last fashion in art, which wassafe but not altogether satisfactory.Her aunt thought that she regretted her answer to Fred, and finding denialsuseless and explanations impossible, Amy left her to think what she liked,taking care that Laurie should know that Fred had gone to Egypt. That was all,but he understood it, and looked relieved, as he said to himself, with avenerable air...“I was sure she would think better of it. Poor old fellow! I’vebeen through it all, and I can sympathize.”With that he heaved a great sigh, and then, as if he had discharged his duty tothe past, put his feet up on the sofa and enjoyed Amy’s letterluxuriously.While these changes were going on abroad, trouble had come at home. But theletter telling that Beth was failing never reached Amy, and when they nextfound her the grass was green above her sister. The sad news met her at atVevay, for the heat had driven them from Nice in May, and they had travelledslowly to Switzerland, by way of Genoa and the Italian lakes. She bore it verywell, and quietly submitted to the family decree that she should not shortenher visit, for since it was too late to say goodbye to Beth, she had betterstay, and let absence soften her sorrow. But her heart was very heavy, shelonged to be at home, and every day looked wistfully across the lake, waitingfor Laurie to come and comfort her.He did come very soon, for the same mail brought letters to them both, but hewas in Germany, and it took some days to reach him. The moment he read it, hepacked his knapsack, bade adieu to his fellow pedestrians, and was off to keephis promise, with a heart full of joy and sorrow, hope and suspense.He knew Vevay well, and as soon as the boat touched the little quay, he hurriedalong the shore to La Tour, where the Carrols were living en pension. Thegarcon was in despair that the whole family had gone to take a promenade on thelake, but no, the blonde mademoiselle might be in the chateau garden. Ifmonsieur would give himself the pain of sitting down, a flash of time shouldpresent her. But monsieur could not wait even a ‘flash of time’,and in the middle of the speech departed to find mademoiselle himself.A pleasant old garden on the borders of the lovely lake, with chestnutsrustling overhead, ivy climbing everywhere, and the black shadow of the towerfalling far across the sunny water. At one corner of the wide, low wall was aseat, and here Amy often came to read or work, or console herself with thebeauty all about her. She was sitting here that day, leaning her head on herhand, with a homesick heart and heavy eyes, thinking of Beth and wondering whyLaurie did not come. She did not hear him cross the courtyard beyond, nor seehim pause in the archway that led from the subterranean path into the garden.He stood a minute looking at her with new eyes, seeing what no one had everseen before, the tender side of Amy’s character. Everything about hermutely suggested love and sorrow, the blotted letters in her lap, the blackribbon that tied up her hair, the womanly pain and patience in her face, eventhe little ebony cross at her throat seemed pathetic to Laurie, for he hadgiven it to her, and she wore it as her only ornament. If he had any doubtsabout the reception she would give him, they were set at rest the minute shelooked up and saw him, for dropping everything, she ran to him, exclaiming in atone of unmistakable love and longing...“Oh, Laurie, Laurie, I knew you’d come to me!”I think everything was said and settled then, for as they stood together quitesilent for a moment, with the dark head bent down protectingly over the lightone, Amy felt that no one could comfort and sustain her so well as Laurie, andLaurie decided that Amy was the only woman in the world who could fillJo’s place and make him happy. He did not tell her so, but she was notdisappointed, for both felt the truth, were satisfied, and gladly left the restto silence.In a minute Amy went back to her place, and while she dried her tears, Lauriegathered up the scattered papers, finding in the sight of sundry well-wornletters and suggestive sketches good omens for the future. As he sat downbeside her, Amy felt shy again, and turned rosy red at the recollection of herimpulsive greeting.“I couldn’t help it, I felt so lonely and sad, and was so very gladto see you. It was such a surprise to look up and find you, just as I wasbeginning to fear you wouldn’t come,” she said, trying in vain tospeak quite naturally.“I came the minute I heard. I wish I could say something to comfort youfor the loss of dear little Beth, but I can only feel, and...” He couldnot get any further, for he too turned bashful all of a sudden, and did notquite know what to say. He longed to lay Amy’s head down on his shoulder,and tell her to have a good cry, but he did not dare, so took her hand instead,and gave it a sympathetic squeeze that was better than words.“You needn’t say anything, this comforts me,” she saidsoftly. “Beth is well and happy, and I mustn’t wish her back, but Idread the going home, much as I long to see them all. We won’t talk aboutit now, for it makes me cry, and I want to enjoy you while you stay. Youneedn’t go right back, need you?”“Not if you want me, dear.”“I do, so much. Aunt and Flo are very kind, but you seem like one of thefamily, and it would be so comfortable to have you for a little while.”Amy spoke and looked so like a homesick child whose heart was full that Laurieforgot his bashfulness all at once, and gave her just what she wanted—thepetting she was used to and the cheerful conversation she needed.“Poor little soul, you look as if you’d grieved yourself half sick!I’m going to take care of you, so don’t cry any more, but come andwalk about with me, the wind is too chilly for you to sit still,” hesaid, in the half-caressing, half-commanding way that Amy liked, as he tied onher hat, drew her arm through his, and began to pace up and down the sunny walkunder the new-leaved chestnuts. He felt more at ease upon his legs, and Amyfound it pleasant to have a strong arm to lean upon, a familiar face to smileat her, and a kind voice to talk delightfully for her alone.The quaint old garden had sheltered many pairs of lovers, and seemed expresslymade for them, so sunny and secluded was it, with nothing but the tower tooverlook them, and the wide lake to carry away the echo of their words, as itrippled by below. For an hour this new pair walked and talked, or rested on thewall, enjoying the sweet influences which gave such a charm to time and place,and when an unromantic dinner bell warned them away, Amy felt as if she lefther burden of loneliness and sorrow behind her in the chateau garden.The moment Mrs. Carrol saw the girl’s altered face, she was illuminatedwith a new idea, and exclaimed to herself, “Now I understand itall—the child has been pining for young Laurence. Bless my heart, I neverthought of such a thing!”With praiseworthy discretion, the good lady said nothing, and betrayed no signof enlightenment, but cordially urged Laurie to stay and begged Amy to enjoyhis society, for it would do her more good than so much solitude. Amy was amodel of docility, and as her aunt was a good deal occupied with Flo, she wasleft to entertain her friend, and did it with more than her usual success.At Nice, Laurie had lounged and Amy had scolded. At Vevay, Laurie was neveridle, but always walking, riding, boating, or studying in the most energeticmanner, while Amy admired everything he did and followed his example as far andas fast as she could. He said the change was owing to the climate, and she didnot contradict him, being glad of a like excuse for her own recovered healthand spirits.The invigorating air did them both good, and much exercise worked wholesomechanges in minds as well as bodies. They seemed to get clearer views of lifeand duty up there among the everlasting hills. The fresh winds blew awaydesponding doubts, delusive fancies, and moody mists. The warm spring sunshinebrought out all sorts of aspiring ideas, tender hopes, and happy thoughts. Thelake seemed to wash away the troubles of the past, and the grand old mountainsto look benignly down upon them saying, “Little children, love oneanother.”In spite of the new sorrow, it was a very happy time, so happy that Lauriecould not bear to disturb it by a word. It took him a little while to recoverfrom his surprise at the cure of his first, and as he had firmly believed, hislast and only love. He consoled himself for the seeming disloyalty by thethought that Jo’s sister was almost the same as Jo’s self, and theconviction that it would have been impossible to love any other woman but Amyso soon and so well. His first wooing had been of the tempestuous order, and helooked back upon it as if through a long vista of years with a feeling ofcompassion blended with regret. He was not ashamed of it, but put it away asone of the bitter-sweet experiences of his life, for which he could be gratefulwhen the pain was over. His second wooing, he resolved, should be as calm andsimple as possible. There was no need of having a scene, hardly any need oftelling Amy that he loved her, she knew it without words and had given him hisanswer long ago. It all came about so naturally that no one could complain, andhe knew that everybody would be pleased, even Jo. But when our first littlepassion has been crushed, we are apt to be wary and slow in making a secondtrial, so Laurie let the days pass, enjoying every hour, and leaving to chancethe utterance of the word that would put an end to the first and sweetest partof his new romance.He had rather imagined that the denoument would take place in the chateaugarden by moonlight, and in the most graceful and decorous manner, but itturned out exactly the reverse, for the matter was settled on the lake atnoonday in a few blunt words. They had been floating about all the morning,from gloomy St. Gingolf to sunny Montreux, with the Alps of Savoy on one side,Mont St. Bernard and the Dent du Midi on the other, pretty Vevay in the valley,and Lausanne upon the hill beyond, a cloudless blue sky overhead, and the bluerlake below, dotted with the picturesque boats that look like white-wingedgulls.They had been talking of Bonnivard, as they glided past Chillon, and ofRousseau, as they looked up at Clarens, where he wrote his Heloise. Neither hadread it, but they knew it was a love story, and each privately wondered if itwas half as interesting as their own. Amy had been dabbling her hand in thewater during the little pause that fell between them, and when she looked up,Laurie was leaning on his oars with an expression in his eyes that made her sayhastily, merely for the sake of saying something...“You must be tired. Rest a little, and let me row. It will do me good,for since you came I have been altogether lazy and luxurious.”“I’m not tired, but you may take an oar, if you like. There’sroom enough, though I have to sit nearly in the middle, else the boatwon’t trim,” returned Laurie, as if he rather liked thearrangement.Feeling that she had not mended matters much, Amy took the offered third of aseat, shook her hair over her face, and accepted an oar. She rowed as well asshe did many other things, and though she used both hands, and Laurie but one,the oars kept time, and the boat went smoothly through the water.“How well we pull together, don’t we?” said Amy, who objectedto silence just then.“So well that I wish we might always pull in the same boat. Will you,Amy?” very tenderly.“Yes, Laurie,” very low.Then they both stopped rowing, and unconsciously added a pretty little tableauof human love and happiness to the dissolving views reflected in the lake.CHAPTER FORTY-TWOALL ALONEIt was easy to promise self-abnegation when self was wrapped up in another, andheart and soul were purified by a sweet example. But when the helpful voice wassilent, the daily lesson over, the beloved presence gone, and nothing remainedbut loneliness and grief, then Jo found her promise very hard to keep. Howcould she ‘comfort Father and Mother’ when her own heart ached witha ceaseless longing for her sister, how could she ‘make the housecheerful’ when all its light and warmth and beauty seemed to havedeserted it when Beth left the old home for the new, and where in all the worldcould she ‘find some useful, happy work to do’, that would take theplace of the loving service which had been its own reward? She tried in ablind, hopeless way to do her duty, secretly rebelling against it all thewhile, for it seemed unjust that her few joys should be lessened, her burdensmade heavier, and life get harder and harder as she toiled along. Some peopleseemed to get all sunshine, and some all shadow. It was not fair, for she triedmore than Amy to be good, but never got any reward, only disappointment,trouble and hard work.Poor Jo, these were dark days to her, for something like despair came over herwhen she thought of spending all her life in that quiet house, devoted tohumdrum cares, a few small pleasures, and the duty that never seemed to growany easier. “I can’t do it. I wasn’t meant for a life likethis, and I know I shall break away and do something desperate if somebodydoesn’t come and help me,” she said to herself, when her firstefforts failed and she fell into the moody, miserable state of mind which oftencomes when strong wills have to yield to the inevitable.But someone did come and help her, though Jo did not recognize her good angelsat once because they wore familiar shapes and used the simple spells bestfitted to poor humanity. Often she started up at night, thinking Beth calledher, and when the sight of the little empty bed made her cry with the bittercry of unsubmissive sorrow, “Oh, Beth, come back! Come back!” shedid not stretch out her yearning arms in vain. For, as quick to hear hersobbing as she had been to hear her sister’s faintest whisper, her mothercame to comfort her, not with words only, but the patient tenderness thatsoothes by a touch, tears that were mute reminders of a greater grief thanJo’s, and broken whispers, more eloquent than prayers, because hopefulresignation went hand-in-hand with natural sorrow. Sacred moments, when hearttalked to heart in the silence of the night, turning affliction to a blessing,which chastened grief and strengthened love. Feeling this, Jo’s burdenseemed easier to bear, duty grew sweeter, and life looked more endurable, seenfrom the safe shelter of her mother’s arms.When aching heart was a little comforted, troubled mind likewise found help,for one day she went to the study, and leaning over the good gray head liftedto welcome her with a tranquil smile, she said very humbly, “Father, talkto me as you did to Beth. I need it more than she did, for I’m allwrong.”“My dear, nothing can comfort me like this,” he answered, with afalter in his voice, and both arms round her, as if he too, needed help, anddid not fear to ask for it.Then, sitting in Beth’s little chair close beside him, Jo told hertroubles, the resentful sorrow for her loss, the fruitless efforts thatdiscouraged her, the want of faith that made life look so dark, and all the sadbewilderment which we call despair. She gave him entire confidence, he gave herthe help she needed, and both found consolation in the act. For the time hadcome when they could talk together not only as father and daughter, but as manand woman, able and glad to serve each other with mutual sympathy as well asmutual love. Happy, thoughtful times there in the old study which Jo called‘the church of one member’, and from which she came with freshcourage, recovered cheerfulness, and a more submissive spirit. For the parentswho had taught one child to meet death without fear, were trying now to teachanother to accept life without despondency or distrust, and to use itsbeautiful opportunities with gratitude and power.Other helps had Jo—humble, wholesome duties and delights that would notbe denied their part in serving her, and which she slowly learned to see andvalue. Brooms and dishcloths never could be as distasteful as they once hadbeen, for Beth had presided over both, and something of her housewifely spiritseemed to linger around the little mop and the old brush, never thrown away. Asshe used them, Jo found herself humming the songs Beth used to hum, imitatingBeth’s orderly ways, and giving the little touches here and there thatkept everything fresh and cozy, which was the first step toward making homehappy, though she didn’t know it till Hannah said with an approvingsqueeze of the hand...“You thoughtful creeter, you’re determined we shan’t missthat dear lamb ef you can help it. We don’t say much, but we see it, andthe Lord will bless you for’t, see ef He don’t.”As they sat sewing together, Jo discovered how much improved her sister Megwas, how well she could talk, how much she knew about good, womanly impulses,thoughts, and feelings, how happy she was in husband and children, and how muchthey were all doing for each other.“Marriage is an excellent thing, after all. I wonder if I should blossomout half as well as you have, if I tried it?, always‘perwisin’ I could,” said Jo, as she constructed akite for Demi in the topsy-turvy nursery.“It’s just what you need to bring out the tender womanly half ofyour nature, Jo. You are like a chestnut burr, prickly outside, but silky-softwithin, and a sweet kernal, if one can only get at it. Love will make you showyour heart one day, and then the rough burr will fall off.”“Frost opens chestnut burrs, ma’am, and it takes a good shake tobring them down. Boys go nutting, and I don’t care to be bagged bythem,” returned Jo, pasting away at the kite which no wind that blowswould ever carry up, for Daisy had tied herself on as a bob.Meg laughed, for she was glad to see a glimmer of Jo’s old spirit, butshe felt it her duty to enforce her opinion by every argument in her power, andthe sisterly chats were not wasted, especially as two of Meg’s mosteffective arguments were the babies, whom Jo loved tenderly. Grief is the bestopener of some hearts, and Jo’s was nearly ready for the bag. A littlemore sunshine to ripen the nut, then, not a boy’s impatient shake, but aman’s hand reached up to pick it gently from the burr, and find thekernal sound and sweet. If she suspected this, she would have shut up tight,and been more prickly than ever, fortunately she wasn’t thinking aboutherself, so when the time came, down she dropped.Now, if she had been the heroine of a moral storybook, she ought at this periodof her life to have become quite saintly, renounced the world, and gone aboutdoing good in a mortified bonnet, with tracts in her pocket. But, you see, Jowasn’t a heroine, she was only a struggling human girl like hundreds ofothers, and she just acted out her nature, being sad, cross, listless, orenergetic, as the mood suggested. It’s highly virtuous to say we’llbe good, but we can’t do it all at once, and it takes a long pull, astrong pull, and a pull all together before some of us even get our feet set inthe right way. Jo had got so far, she was learning to do her duty, and to feelunhappy if she did not, but to do it cheerfully, ah, that was another thing!She had often said she wanted to do something splendid, no matter how hard, andnow she had her wish, for what could be more beautiful than to devote her lifeto Father and Mother, trying to make home as happy to them as they had to her?And if difficulties were necessary to increase the splendor of the effort, whatcould be harder for a restless, ambitious girl than to give up her own hopes,plans, and desires, and cheerfully live for others?Providence had taken her at her word. Here was the task, not what she hadexpected, but better because self had no part in it. Now, could she do it? Shedecided that she would try, and in her first attempt she found the helps I havesuggested. Still another was given her, and she took it, not as a reward, butas a comfort, as Christian took the refreshment afforded by the little arborwhere he rested, as he climbed the hill called Difficulty.“Why don’t you write? That always used to make you happy,”said her mother once, when the desponding fit over-shadowed Jo.“I’ve no heart to write, and if I had, nobody cares for mythings.”“We do. Write something for us, and never mind the rest of the world. Tryit, dear. I’m sure it would do you good, and please us very much.”“Don’t believe I can.” But Jo got out her desk and began tooverhaul her half-finished manuscripts.An hour afterward her mother peeped in and there she was, scratching away, withher black pinafore on, and an absorbed expression, which caused Mrs. March tosmile and slip away, well pleased with the success of her suggestion. Jo neverknew how it happened, but something got into that story that went straight tothe hearts of those who read it, for when her family had laughed and cried overit, her father sent it, much against her will, to one of the popular magazines,and to her utter surprise, it was not only paid for, but others requested.Letters from several persons, whose praise was honor, followed the appearanceof the little story, newspapers copied it, and strangers as well as friendsadmired it. For a small thing it was a great success, and Jo was moreastonished than when her novel was commended and condemned all at once.“I don’t understand it. What can there be in a simple little storylike that to make people praise it so?” she said, quite bewildered.“There is truth in it, Jo, that’s the secret. Humor and pathos makeit alive, and you have found your style at last. You wrote with no thoughts offame and money, and put your heart into it, my daughter. You have had thebitter, now comes the sweet. Do your best, and grow as happy as we are in yoursuccess.”“If there is anything good or true in what I write, it isn’t mine.I owe it all to you and Mother and Beth,” said Jo, more touched by herfather’s words than by any amount of praise from the world.So taught by love and sorrow, Jo wrote her little stories, and sent them awayto make friends for themselves and her, finding it a very charitable world tosuch humble wanderers, for they were kindly welcomed, and sent home comfortabletokens to their mother, like dutiful children whom good fortune overtakes.When Amy and Laurie wrote of their engagement, Mrs. March feared that Jo wouldfind it difficult to rejoice over it, but her fears were soon set at rest, forthough Jo looked grave at first, she took it very quietly, and was full ofhopes and plans for ‘the children’ before she read the lettertwice. It was a sort of written duet, wherein each glorified the other inloverlike fashion, very pleasant to read and satisfactory to think of, for noone had any objection to make.“You like it, Mother?” said Jo, as they laid down the closelywritten sheets and looked at one another.“Yes, I hoped it would be so, ever since Amy wrote that she had refusedFred. I felt sure then that something better than what you call the‘mercenary spirit’ had come over her, and a hint here and there inher letters made me suspect that love and Laurie would win the day.”“How sharp you are, Marmee, and how silent! You never said a word tome.”“Mothers have need of sharp eyes and discreet tongues when they havegirls to manage. I was half afraid to put the idea into your head, lest youshould write and congratulate them before the thing was settled.”“I’m not the scatterbrain I was. You may trust me. I’m soberand sensible enough for anyone’s confidante now.”“So you are, my dear, and I should have made you mine, only I fancied itmight pain you to learn that your Teddy loved someone else.”“Now, Mother, did you really think I could be so silly and selfish, afterI’d refused his love, when it was freshest, if not best?”“I knew you were sincere then, Jo, but lately I have thought that if hecame back, and asked again, you might perhaps, feel like giving another answer.Forgive me, dear, I can’t help seeing that you are very lonely, andsometimes there is a hungry look in your eyes that goes to my heart. So Ifancied that your boy might fill the empty place if he tried now.”“No, Mother, it is better as it is, and I’m glad Amy has learned tolove him. But you are right in one thing. I am lonely, and perhaps if Teddy hadtried again, I might have said ‘Yes’, not because I love him anymore, but because I care more to be loved than when he went away.”“I’m glad of that, Jo, for it shows that you are getting on. Thereare plenty to love you, so try to be satisfied with Father and Mother, sistersand brothers, friends and babies, till the best lover of all comes to give youyour reward.”“Mothers are the best lovers in the world, but I don’t mindwhispering to Marmee that I’d like to try all kinds. It’s verycurious, but the more I try to satisfy myself with all sorts of naturalaffections, the more I seem to want. I’d no idea hearts could take in somany. Mine is so elastic, it never seems full now, and I used to be quitecontented with my family. I don’t understand it.”“I do,” and Mrs. March smiled her wise smile, as Jo turned back theleaves to read what Amy said of Laurie.“It is so beautiful to be loved as Laurie loves me. He isn’tsentimental, doesn’t say much about it, but I see and feel it in all hesays and does, and it makes me so happy and so humble that I don’t seemto be the same girl I was. I never knew how good and generous and tender he wastill now, for he lets me read his heart, and I find it full of noble impulsesand hopes and purposes, and am so proud to know it’s mine. He says hefeels as if he ‘could make a prosperous voyage now with me aboard asmate, and lots of love for ballast’. I pray he may, and try to be all hebelieves me, for I love my gallant captain with all my heart and soul andmight, and never will desert him, while God lets us be together. Oh, Mother, Inever knew how much like heaven this world could be, when two people love andlive for one another!”“And that’s our cool, reserved, and worldly Amy! Truly, love doeswork miracles. How very, very happy they must be!” and Jo laid therustling sheets together with a careful hand, as one might shut the covers of alovely romance, which holds the reader fast till the end comes, and he findshimself alone in the workaday world again.By-and-by Jo roamed away upstairs, for it was rainy, and she could not walk. Arestless spirit possessed her, and the old feeling came again, not bitter as itonce was, but a sorrowfully patient wonder why one sister should have all sheasked, the other nothing. It was not true, she knew that and tried to put itaway, but the natural craving for affection was strong, and Amy’shappiness woke the hungry longing for someone to ‘love with heart andsoul, and cling to while God let them be together’. Up in the garret,where Jo’s unquiet wanderings ended stood four little wooden chests in arow, each marked with its owners name, and each filled with relics of thechildhood and girlhood ended now for all. Jo glanced into them, and when shecame to her own, leaned her chin on the edge, and stared absently at thechaotic collection, till a bundle of old exercise books caught her eye. Shedrew them out, turned them over, and relived that pleasant winter at kind Mrs.Kirke’s. She had smiled at first, then she looked thoughtful, next sad,and when she came to a little message written in the Professor’s hand,her lips began to tremble, the books slid out of her lap, and she sat lookingat the friendly words, as they took a new meaning, and touched a tender spot inher heart.“Wait for me, my friend. I may be a little late, but I shall surelycome.”“Oh, if he only would! So kind, so good, so patient with me always, mydear old Fritz. I didn’t value him half enough when I had him, but nowhow I should love to see him, for everyone seems going away from me, andI’m all alone.”And holding the little paper fast, as if it were a promise yet to be fulfilled,Jo laid her head down on a comfortable rag bag, and cried, as if in oppositionto the rain pattering on the roof.Was it all self-pity, loneliness, or low spirits? Or was it the waking up of asentiment which had bided its time as patiently as its inspirer? Who shall say?CHAPTER FORTY-THREESURPRISESJo was alone in the twilight, lying on the old sofa, looking at the fire, andthinking. It was her favorite way of spending the hour of dusk. No onedisturbed her, and she used to lie there on Beth’s little red pillow,planning stories, dreaming dreams, or thinking tender thoughts of the sisterwho never seemed far away. Her face looked tired, grave, and rather sad, fortomorrow was her birthday, and she was thinking how fast the years went by, howold she was getting, and how little she seemed to have accomplished. Almosttwenty-five, and nothing to show for it. Jo was mistaken in that. There was agood deal to show, and by-and-by she saw, and was grateful for it.“An old maid, that’s what I’m to be. A literary spinster,with a pen for a spouse, a family of stories for children, and twenty yearshence a morsel of fame, perhaps, when, like poor Johnson, I’m old andcan’t enjoy it, solitary, and can’t share it, independent, anddon’t need it. Well, I needn’t be a sour saint nor a selfishsinner, and, I dare say, old maids are very comfortable when they get used toit, but...” and there Jo sighed, as if the prospect was not inviting.It seldom is, at first, and thirty seems the end of all things tofive-and-twenty. But it’s not as bad as it looks, and one can get onquite happily if one has something in one’s self to fall back upon. Attwenty-five, girls begin to talk about being old maids, but secretly resolvethat they never will be. At thirty they say nothing about it, but quietlyaccept the fact, and if sensible, console themselves by remembering that theyhave twenty more useful, happy years, in which they may be learning to grow oldgracefully. Don’t laugh at the spinsters, dear girls, for often verytender, tragic romances are hidden away in the hearts that beat so quietlyunder the sober gowns, and many silent sacrifices of youth, health, ambition,love itself, make the faded faces beautiful in God’s sight. Even the sad,sour sisters should be kindly dealt with, because they have missed the sweetestpart of life, if for no other reason. And looking at them with compassion, notcontempt, girls in their bloom should remember that they too may miss theblossom time. That rosy cheeks don’t last forever, that silver threadswill come in the bonnie brown hair, and that, by-and-by, kindness and respectwill be as sweet as love and admiration now.Gentlemen, which means boys, be courteous to the old maids, no matter how poorand plain and prim, for the only chivalry worth having is that which is thereadiest to pay deference to the old, protect the feeble, and serve womankind,regardless of rank, age, or color. Just recollect the good aunts who have notonly lectured and fussed, but nursed and petted, too often without thanks, thescrapes they have helped you out of, the tips they have given you from theirsmall store, the stitches the patient old fingers have set for you, the stepsthe willing old feet have taken, and gratefully pay the dear old ladies thelittle attentions that women love to receive as long as they live. Thebright-eyed girls are quick to see such traits, and will like you all thebetter for them, and if death, almost the only power that can part mother andson, should rob you of yours, you will be sure to find a tender welcome andmaternal cherishing from some Aunt Priscilla, who has kept the warmest cornerof her lonely old heart for ‘the best nevvy in the world’.Jo must have fallen asleep (as I dare say my reader has during this littlehomily), for suddenly Laurie’s ghost seemed to stand before her, asubstantial, lifelike ghost, leaning over her with the very look he used towear when he felt a good deal and didn’t like to show it. But, like Jennyin the ballad...“She could not think it he,”and lay staring up at him in startled silence, till he stooped and kissed her.Then she knew him, and flew up, crying joyfully...“Oh my Teddy! Oh my Teddy!”“Dear Jo, you are glad to see me, then?”“Glad! My blessed boy, words can’t express my gladness.Where’s Amy?”“Your mother has got her down at Meg’s. We stopped there by theway, and there was no getting my wife out of their clutches.”“Your what?” cried Jo, for Laurie uttered those two words with anunconscious pride and satisfaction which betrayed him.“Oh, the dickens! Now I’ve done it,” and he looked so guiltythat Jo was down on him like a flash.“You’ve gone and got married!”“Yes, please, but I never will again,” and he went down upon hisknees, with a penitent clasping of hands, and a face full of mischief, mirth,and triumph.“Actually married?”“Very much so, thank you.”“Mercy on us. What dreadful thing will you do next?” and Jo fellinto her seat with a gasp.“A characteristic, but not exactly complimentary, congratulation,”returned Laurie, still in an abject attitude, but beaming with satisfaction.“What can you expect, when you take one’s breath away, creeping inlike a burglar, and letting cats out of bags like that? Get up, you ridiculousboy, and tell me all about it.”“Not a word, unless you let me come in my old place, and promise not tobarricade.”Jo laughed at that as she had not done for many a long day, and patted the sofainvitingly, as she said in a cordial tone, “The old pillow is up garret,and we don’t need it now. So, come and ’fess, Teddy.”“How good it sounds to hear you say ‘Teddy’! No one evercalls me that but you,” and Laurie sat down with an air of great content.“What does Amy call you?”“My lord.”“That’s like her. Well, you look it,” and Jo’s eyeplainly betrayed that she found her boy comelier than ever.The pillow was gone, but there was a barricade, nevertheless, a natural one,raised by time, absence, and change of heart. Both felt it, and for a minutelooked at one another as if that invisible barrier cast a little shadow overthem. It was gone directly however, for Laurie said, with a vain attempt atdignity...“Don’t I look like a married man and the head of a family?”“Not a bit, and you never will. You’ve grown bigger and bonnier,but you are the same scapegrace as ever.”“Now really, Jo, you ought to treat me with more respect,” beganLaurie, who enjoyed it all immensely.“How can I, when the mere idea of you, married and settled, is soirresistibly funny that I can’t keep sober!” answered Jo, smilingall over her face, so infectiously that they had another laugh, and thensettled down for a good talk, quite in the pleasant old fashion.“It’s no use your going out in the cold to get Amy, for they areall coming up presently. I couldn’t wait. I wanted to be the one to tellyou the grand surprise, and have ‘first skim’ as we used to saywhen we squabbled about the cream.”“Of course you did, and spoiled your story by beginning at the wrong end.Now, start right, and tell me how it all happened. I’m pining toknow.”“Well, I did it to please Amy,” began Laurie, with a twinkle thatmade Jo exclaim...“Fib number one. Amy did it to please you. Go on, and tell the truth, ifyou can, sir.”“Now she’s beginning to marm it. Isn’t it jolly to hearher?” said Laurie to the fire, and the fire glowed and sparkled as if itquite agreed. “It’s all the same, you know, she and I being one. Weplanned to come home with the Carrols, a month or more ago, but they suddenlychanged their minds, and decided to pass another winter in Paris. But Grandpawanted to come home. He went to please me, and I couldn’t let him goalone, neither could I leave Amy, and Mrs. Carrol had got English notions aboutchaperons and such nonsense, and wouldn’t let Amy come with us. So I justsettled the difficulty by saying, ‘Let’s be married, and then wecan do as we like’.”“Of course you did. You always have things to suit you.”“Not always,” and something in Laurie’s voice made Jo sayhastily...“How did you ever get Aunt to agree?”“It was hard work, but between us, we talked her over, for we had heapsof good reasons on our side. There wasn’t time to write and ask leave,but you all liked it, had consented to it by-and-by, and it was only‘taking time by the fetlock’, as my wife says.”“Aren’t we proud of those two words, and don’t we like to saythem?” interrupted Jo, addressing the fire in her turn, and watching withdelight the happy light it seemed to kindle in the eyes that had been sotragically gloomy when she saw them last.“A trifle, perhaps, she’s such a captivating little woman Ican’t help being proud of her. Well, then Uncle and Aunt were there toplay propriety. We were so absorbed in one another we were of no mortal useapart, and that charming arrangement would make everything easy all round, sowe did it.”“When, where, how?” asked Jo, in a fever of feminine interest andcuriosity, for she could not realize it a particle.“Six weeks ago, at the American consul’s, in Paris, a very quietwedding of course, for even in our happiness we didn’t forget dear littleBeth.”Jo put her hand in his as he said that, and Laurie gently smoothed the littlered pillow, which he remembered well.“Why didn’t you let us know afterward?” asked Jo, in aquieter tone, when they had sat quite still a minute.“We wanted to surprise you. We thought we were coming directly home, atfirst, but the dear old gentleman, as soon as we were married, found hecouldn’t be ready under a month, at least, and sent us off to spend ourhoneymoon wherever we liked. Amy had once called Valrosa a regular honeymoonhome, so we went there, and were as happy as people are but once in theirlives. My faith! Wasn’t it love among the roses!”Laurie seemed to forget Jo for a minute, and Jo was glad of it, for the factthat he told her these things so freely and so naturally assured her that hehad quite forgiven and forgotten. She tried to draw away her hand, but as if heguessed the thought that prompted the half-involuntary impulse, Laurie held itfast, and said, with a manly gravity she had never seen in him before...“Jo, dear, I want to say one thing, and then we’ll put it byforever. As I told you in my letter when I wrote that Amy had been so kind tome, I never shall stop loving you, but the love is altered, and I have learnedto see that it is better as it is. Amy and you changed places in my heart,that’s all. I think it was meant to be so, and would have come aboutnaturally, if I had waited, as you tried to make me, but I never could bepatient, and so I got a heartache. I was a boy then, headstrong and violent,and it took a hard lesson to show me my mistake. For it was one, Jo, as yousaid, and I found it out, after making a fool of myself. Upon my word, I was sotumbled up in my mind, at one time, that I didn’t know which I lovedbest, you or Amy, and tried to love you both alike. But I couldn’t, andwhen I saw her in Switzerland, everything seemed to clear up all at once. Youboth got into your right places, and I felt sure that it was well off with theold love before it was on with the new, that I could honestly share my heartbetween sister Jo and wife Amy, and love them dearly. Will you believe it, andgo back to the happy old times when we first knew one another?”“I’ll believe it, with all my heart, but, Teddy, we never can beboy and girl again. The happy old times can’t come back, and wemustn’t expect it. We are man and woman now, with sober work to do, forplaytime is over, and we must give up frolicking. I’m sure you feel this.I see the change in you, and you’ll find it in me. I shall miss my boy,but I shall love the man as much, and admire him more, because he means to bewhat I hoped he would. We can’t be little playmates any longer, but wewill be brother and sister, to love and help one another all our lives,won’t we, Laurie?”He did not say a word, but took the hand she offered him, and laid his facedown on it for a minute, feeling that out of the grave of a boyish passion,there had risen a beautiful, strong friendship to bless them both. Presently Josaid cheerfully, for she didn’t want the coming home to be a sad one,“I can’t make it true that you children are really married andgoing to set up housekeeping. Why, it seems only yesterday that I was buttoningAmy’s pinafore, and pulling your hair when you teased. Mercy me, how timedoes fly!”“As one of the children is older than yourself, you needn’t talk solike a grandma. I flatter myself I’m a ‘gentleman growed’ asPeggotty said of David, and when you see Amy, you’ll find her rather aprecocious infant,” said Laurie, looking amused at her maternal air.“You may be a little older in years, but I’m ever so much older infeeling, Teddy. Women always are, and this last year has been such a hard onethat I feel forty.”“Poor Jo! We left you to bear it alone, while we went pleasuring. You areolder. Here’s a line, and there’s another. Unless you smile, youreyes look sad, and when I touched the cushion, just now, I found a tear on it.You’ve had a great deal to bear, and had to bear it all alone. What aselfish beast I’ve been!” and Laurie pulled his own hair, with aremorseful look.But Jo only turned over the traitorous pillow, and answered, in a tone whichshe tried to make more cheerful, “No, I had Father and Mother to help me,and the dear babies to comfort me, and the thought that you and Amy were safeand happy, to make the troubles here easier to bear. I am lonely, sometimes,but I dare say it’s good for me, and...”“You never shall be again,” broke in Laurie, putting his arm abouther, as if to fence out every human ill. “Amy and I can’t get onwithout you, so you must come and teach ‘the children’ to keephouse, and go halves in everything, just as we used to do, and let us pet you,and all be blissfully happy and friendly together.”“If I shouldn’t be in the way, it would be very pleasant. I beginto feel quite young already, for somehow all my troubles seemed to fly awaywhen you came. You always were a comfort, Teddy,” and Jo leaned her headon his shoulder, just as she did years ago, when Beth lay ill and Laurie toldher to hold on to him.He looked down at her, wondering if she remembered the time, but Jo was smilingto herself, as if in truth her troubles had all vanished at his coming.“You are the same Jo still, dropping tears about one minute, and laughingthe next. You look a little wicked now. What is it, Grandma?”“I was wondering how you and Amy get on together.”“Like angels!”“Yes, of course, but which rules?”“I don’t mind telling you that she does now, at least I let herthink so, it pleases her, you know. By-and-by we shall take turns, formarriage, they say, halves one’s rights and doubles one’sduties.”“You’ll go on as you begin, and Amy will rule you all the days ofyour life.”“Well, she does it so imperceptibly that I don’t think I shall mindmuch. She is the sort of woman who knows how to rule well. In fact, I ratherlike it, for she winds one round her finger as softly and prettily as a skeinof silk, and makes you feel as if she was doing you a favor all thewhile.”“That ever I should live to see you a henpecked husband and enjoyingit!” cried Jo, with uplifted hands.It was good to see Laurie square his shoulders, and smile with masculine scornat that insinuation, as he replied, with his “high and mighty” air,“Amy is too well-bred for that, and I am not the sort of man to submit toit. My wife and I respect ourselves and one another too much ever to tyrannizeor quarrel.”Jo liked that, and thought the new dignity very becoming, but the boy seemedchanging very fast into the man, and regret mingled with her pleasure.“I am sure of that. Amy and you never did quarrel as we used to. She isthe sun and I the wind, in the fable, and the sun managed the man best, youremember.”“She can blow him up as well as shine on him,” laughed Laurie.“Such a lecture as I got at Nice! I give you my word it was a deal worsethan any of your scoldings, a regular rouser. I’ll tell you all about itsometime, she never will, because after telling me that she despised and wasashamed of me, she lost her heart to the despicable party and married thegood-for-nothing.”“What baseness! Well, if she abuses you, come to me, and I’lldefend you.”“I look as if I needed it, don’t I?” said Laurie, getting upand striking an attitude which suddenly changed from the imposing to therapturous, as Amy’s voice was heard calling, “Where is she?Where’s my dear old Jo?”In trooped the whole family, and everyone was hugged and kissed all over again,and after several vain attempts, the three wanderers were set down to be lookedat and exulted over. Mr. Laurence, hale and hearty as ever, was quite as muchimproved as the others by his foreign tour, for the crustiness seemed to benearly gone, and the old-fashioned courtliness had received a polish which madeit kindlier than ever. It was good to see him beam at ‘mychildren’, as he called the young pair. It was better still to see Amypay him the daughterly duty and affection which completely won his old heart,and best of all, to watch Laurie revolve about the two, as if never tired ofenjoying the pretty picture they made.The minute she put her eyes upon Amy, Meg became conscious that her own dresshadn’t a Parisian air, that young Mrs. Moffat would be entirely eclipsedby young Mrs. Laurence, and that ‘her ladyship’ was altogether amost elegant and graceful woman. Jo thought, as she watched the pair,“How well they look together! I was right, and Laurie has found thebeautiful, accomplished girl who will become his home better than clumsy oldJo, and be a pride, not a torment to him.” Mrs. March and her husbandsmiled and nodded at each other with happy faces, for they saw that theiryoungest had done well, not only in worldly things, but the better wealth oflove, confidence, and happiness.For Amy’s face was full of the soft brightness which betokens a peacefulheart, her voice had a new tenderness in it, and the cool, prim carriage waschanged to a gentle dignity, both womanly and winning. No little affectationsmarred it, and the cordial sweetness of her manner was more charming than thenew beauty or the old grace, for it stamped her at once with the unmistakablesign of the true gentlewoman she had hoped to become.“Love has done much for our little girl,” said her mother softly.“She has had a good example before her all her life, my dear,” Mr.March whispered back, with a loving look at the worn face and gray head besidehim.Daisy found it impossible to keep her eyes off her ‘pitty aunty’,but attached herself like a lap dog to the wonderful chatelaine full ofdelightful charms. Demi paused to consider the new relationship before hecompromised himself by the rash acceptance of a bribe, which took the temptingform of a family of wooden bears from Berne. A flank movement produced anunconditional surrender, however, for Laurie knew where to have him.“Young man, when I first had the honor of making your acquaintance youhit me in the face. Now I demand the satisfaction of a gentleman,” andwith that the tall uncle proceeded to toss and tousle the small nephew in a waythat damaged his philosophical dignity as much as it delighted his boyish soul.“Blest if she ain’t in silk from head to foot; ain’t it arelishin’ sight to see her settin’ there as fine as a fiddle, andhear folks calling little Amy ‘Mis. Laurence!’” muttered oldHannah, who could not resist frequent “peeks” through the slide asshe set the table in a most decidedly promiscuous manner.Mercy on us, how they did talk! first one, then the other, then all burst outtogether—trying to tell the history of three years in half an hour. Itwas fortunate that tea was at hand, to produce a lull and providerefreshment—for they would have been hoarse and faint if they had gone onmuch longer. Such a happy procession as filed away into the little dining room!Mr. March proudly escorted Mrs. Laurence. Mrs. March as proudly leaned on thearm of ‘my son’. The old gentleman took Jo, with a whispered,“You must be my girl now,” and a glance at the empty corner by thefire, that made Jo whisper back, “I’ll try to fill her place,sir.”The twins pranced behind, feeling that the millennium was at hand, for everyonewas so busy with the newcomers that they were left to revel at their own sweetwill, and you may be sure they made the most of the opportunity. Didn’tthey steal sips of tea, stuff gingerbread ad libitum, get a hot biscuit apiece,and as a crowning trespass, didn’t they each whisk a captivating littletart into their tiny pockets, there to stick and crumble treacherously,teaching them that both human nature and a pastry are frail? Burdened with theguilty consciousness of the sequestered tarts, and fearing that Dodo’ssharp eyes would pierce the thin disguise of cambric and merino which hid theirbooty, the little sinners attached themselves to ‘Dranpa’, whohadn’t his spectacles on. Amy, who was handed about like refreshments,returned to the parlor on Father Laurence’s arm. The others paired off asbefore, and this arrangement left Jo companionless. She did not mind it at theminute, for she lingered to answer Hannah’s eager inquiry.“Will Miss Amy ride in her coop (coupe), and use all them lovely silverdishes that’s stored away over yander?”“Shouldn’t wonder if she drove six white horses, ate off goldplate, and wore diamonds and point lace every day. Teddy thinks nothing toogood for her,” returned Jo with infinite satisfaction.“No more there is! Will you have hash or fishballs for breakfast?”asked Hannah, who wisely mingled poetry and prose.“I don’t care,” and Jo shut the door, feeling that food wasan uncongenial topic just then. She stood a minute looking at the partyvanishing above, and as Demi’s short plaid legs toiled up the last stair,a sudden sense of loneliness came over her so strongly that she looked abouther with dim eyes, as if to find something to lean upon, for even Teddy haddeserted her. If she had known what birthday gift was coming every minutenearer and nearer, she would not have said to herself, “I’ll weep alittle weep when I go to bed. It won’t do to be dismal now.” Thenshe drew her hand over her eyes, for one of her boyish habits was never to knowwhere her handkerchief was, and had just managed to call up a smile when therecame a knock at the porch door.She opened with hospitable haste, and started as if another ghost had come tosurprise her, for there stood a tall bearded gentleman, beaming on her from thedarkness like a midnight sun.“Oh, Mr. Bhaer, I am so glad to see you!” cried Jo, with a clutch,as if she feared the night would swallow him up before she could get him in.“And I to see Miss Marsch, but no, you haf a party,” and theProfessor paused as the sound of voices and the tap of dancing feet came downto them.“No, we haven’t, only the family. My sister and friends have justcome home, and we are all very happy. Come in, and make one of us.”Though a very social man, I think Mr. Bhaer would have gone decorously away,and come again another day, but how could he, when Jo shut the door behind him,and bereft him of his hat? Perhaps her face had something to do with it, forshe forgot to hide her joy at seeing him, and showed it with a frankness thatproved irresistible to the solitary man, whose welcome far exceeded his boldesthopes.“If I shall not be Monsieur de Trop, I will so gladly see them all. Youhaf been ill, my friend?”He put the question abruptly, for, as Jo hung up his coat, the light fell onher face, and he saw a change in it.“Not ill, but tired and sorrowful. We have had trouble since I saw youlast.”“Ah, yes, I know. My heart was sore for you when I heard that,” andhe shook hands again, with such a sympathetic face that Jo felt as if nocomfort could equal the look of the kind eyes, the grasp of the big, warm hand.“Father, Mother, this is my friend, Professor Bhaer,” she said,with a face and tone of such irrepressible pride and pleasure that she might aswell have blown a trumpet and opened the door with a flourish.If the stranger had any doubts about his reception, they were set at rest in aminute by the cordial welcome he received. Everyone greeted him kindly, forJo’s sake at first, but very soon they liked him for his own. They couldnot help it, for he carried the talisman that opens all hearts, and thesesimple people warmed to him at once, feeling even the more friendly because hewas poor. For poverty enriches those who live above it, and is a sure passportto truly hospitable spirits. Mr. Bhaer sat looking about him with the air of atraveler who knocks at a strange door, and when it opens, finds himself athome. The children went to him like bees to a honeypot, and establishingthemselves on each knee, proceeded to captivate him by rifling his pockets,pulling his beard, and investigating his watch, with juvenile audacity. Thewomen telegraphed their approval to one another, and Mr. March, feeling that hehad got a kindred spirit, opened his choicest stores for his guest’sbenefit, while silent John listened and enjoyed the talk, but said not a word,and Mr. Laurence found it impossible to go to sleep.If Jo had not been otherwise engaged, Laurie’s behavior would have amusedher, for a faint twinge, not of jealousy, but something like suspicion, causedthat gentleman to stand aloof at first, and observe the newcomer with brotherlycircumspection. But it did not last long. He got interested in spite ofhimself, and before he knew it, was drawn into the circle. For Mr. Bhaer talkedwell in this genial atmosphere, and did himself justice. He seldom spoke toLaurie, but he looked at him often, and a shadow would pass across his face, asif regretting his own lost youth, as he watched the young man in his prime.Then his eyes would turn to Jo so wistfully that she would have surely answeredthe mute inquiry if she had seen it. But Jo had her own eyes to take care of,and feeling that they could not be trusted, she prudently kept them on thelittle sock she was knitting, like a model maiden aunt.A stealthy glance now and then refreshed her like sips of fresh water after adusty walk, for the sidelong peeps showed her several propitious omens. Mr.Bhaer’s face had lost the absent-minded expression, and looked all alivewith interest in the present moment, actually young and handsome, she thought,forgetting to compare him with Laurie, as she usually did strange men, to theirgreat detriment. Then he seemed quite inspired, though the burial customs ofthe ancients, to which the conversation had strayed, might not be considered anexhilarating topic. Jo quite glowed with triumph when Teddy got quenched in anargument, and thought to herself, as she watched her father’s absorbedface, “How he would enjoy having such a man as my Professor to talk withevery day!” Lastly, Mr. Bhaer was dressed in a new suit of black, whichmade him look more like a gentleman than ever. His bushy hair had been cut andsmoothly brushed, but didn’t stay in order long, for in exciting moments,he rumpled it up in the droll way he used to do, and Jo liked it rampantlyerect better than flat, because she thought it gave his fine forehead aJove-like aspect. Poor Jo, how she did glorify that plain man, as she satknitting away so quietly, yet letting nothing escape her, not even the factthat Mr. Bhaer actually had gold sleeve-buttons in his immaculate wristbands.“Dear old fellow! He couldn’t have got himself up with more care ifhe’d been going a-wooing,” said Jo to herself, and then a suddenthought born of the words made her blush so dreadfully that she had to drop herball, and go down after it to hide her face.The maneuver did not succeed as well as she expected, however, for though justin the act of setting fire to a funeral pyre, the Professor dropped his torch,metaphorically speaking, and made a dive after the little blue ball. Of coursethey bumped their heads smartly together, saw stars, and both came up flushedand laughing, without the ball, to resume their seats, wishing they had notleft them.Nobody knew where the evening went to, for Hannah skillfully abstracted thebabies at an early hour, nodding like two rosy poppies, and Mr. Laurence wenthome to rest. The others sat round the fire, talking away, utterly regardlessof the lapse of time, till Meg, whose maternal mind was impressed with a firmconviction that Daisy had tumbled out of bed, and Demi set his nightgown afirestudying the structure of matches, made a move to go.“We must have our sing, in the good old way, for we are all togetheragain once more,” said Jo, feeling that a good shout would be a safe andpleasant vent for the jubilant emotions of her soul.They were not all there. But no one found the words thoughtless or untrue, forBeth still seemed among them, a peaceful presence, invisible, but dearer thanever, since death could not break the household league that love madedissoluble. The little chair stood in its old place. The tidy basket, with thebit of work she left unfinished when the needle grew ‘so heavy’,was still on its accustomed shelf. The beloved instrument, seldom touched nowhad not been moved, and above it Beth’s face, serene and smiling, as inthe early days, looked down upon them, seeming to say, “Be happy. I amhere.”“Play something, Amy. Let them hear how much you have improved,”said Laurie, with pardonable pride in his promising pupil.But Amy whispered, with full eyes, as she twirled the faded stool, “Nottonight, dear. I can’t show off tonight.”But she did show something better than brilliancy or skill, for she sangBeth’s songs with a tender music in her voice which the best master couldnot have taught, and touched the listener’s hearts with a sweeter powerthan any other inspiration could have given her. The room was very still, whenthe clear voice failed suddenly at the last line of Beth’s favorite hymn.It was hard to say...Earth hath no sorrow that heaven cannot heal;and Amy leaned against her husband, who stood behind her, feeling that herwelcome home was not quite perfect without Beth’s kiss.“Now, we must finish with Mignon’s song, for Mr. Bhaer singsthat,” said Jo, before the pause grew painful. And Mr. Bhaer cleared histhroat with a gratified “Hem!” as he stepped into the corner whereJo stood, saying...“You will sing with me? We go excellently well together.”A pleasing fiction, by the way, for Jo had no more idea of music than agrasshopper. But she would have consented if he had proposed to sing a wholeopera, and warbled away, blissfully regardless of time and tune. Itdidn’t much matter, for Mr. Bhaer sang like a true German, heartily andwell, and Jo soon subsided into a subdued hum, that she might listen to themellow voice that seemed to sing for her alone.Know’st thou the land where the citron blooms,used to be the Professor’s favorite line, for ‘das land’meant Germany to him, but now he seemed to dwell, with peculiar warmth andmelody, upon the words...There, oh there, might I with thee,O, my beloved, goand one listener was so thrilled by the tender invitation that she longed tosay she did know the land, and would joyfully depart thither whenever he liked.The song was considered a great success, and the singer retired covered withlaurels. But a few minutes afterward, he forgot his manners entirely, andstared at Amy putting on her bonnet, for she had been introduced simply as‘my sister’, and no one had called her by her new name since hecame. He forgot himself still further when Laurie said, in his most graciousmanner, at parting...“My wife and I are very glad to meet you, sir. Please remember that thereis always a welcome waiting for you over the way.”Then the Professor thanked him so heartily, and looked so suddenly illuminatedwith satisfaction, that Laurie thought him the most delightfully demonstrativeold fellow he ever met.“I too shall go, but I shall gladly come again, if you will gif me leave,dear madame, for a little business in the city will keep me here somedays.”He spoke to Mrs. March, but he looked at Jo, and the mother’s voice gaveas cordial an assent as did the daughter’s eyes, for Mrs. March was notso blind to her children’s interest as Mrs. Moffat supposed.“I suspect that is a wise man,” remarked Mr. March, with placidsatisfaction, from the hearthrug, after the last guest had gone.“I know he is a good one,” added Mrs. March, with decided approval,as she wound up the clock.“I thought you’d like him,” was all Jo said, as she slippedaway to her bed.She wondered what the business was that brought Mr. Bhaer to the city, andfinally decided that he had been appointed to some great honor, somewhere, buthad been too modest to mention the fact. If she had seen his face when, safe inhis own room, he looked at the picture of a severe and rigid young lady, with agood deal of hair, who appeared to be gazing darkly into futurity, it mighthave thrown some light upon the subject, especially when he turned off the gas,and kissed the picture in the dark.CHAPTER FORTY-FOURMY LORD AND LADY“Please, Madam Mother, could you lend me my wife for half an hour? Theluggage has come, and I’ve been making hay of Amy’s Paris finery,trying to find some things I want,” said Laurie, coming in the next dayto find Mrs. Laurence sitting in her mother’s lap, as if being made‘the baby’ again.“Certainly. Go, dear, I forgot that you have any home but this,”and Mrs. March pressed the white hand that wore the wedding ring, as if askingpardon for her maternal covetousness.“I shouldn’t have come over if I could have helped it, but Ican’t get on without my little woman any more than a...”“Weathercock can without the wind,” suggested Jo, as he paused fora simile. Jo had grown quite her own saucy self again since Teddy came home.“Exactly, for Amy keeps me pointing due west most of the time, with onlyan occasional whiffle round to the south, and I haven’t had an easterlyspell since I was married. Don’t know anything about the north, but amaltogether salubrious and balmy, hey, my lady?”“Lovely weather so far. I don’t know how long it will last, butI’m not afraid of storms, for I’m learning how to sail my ship.Come home, dear, and I’ll find your bootjack. I suppose that’s whatyou are rummaging after among my things. Men are so helpless, Mother,”said Amy, with a matronly air, which delighted her husband.“What are you going to do with yourselves after you get settled?”asked Jo, buttoning Amy’s cloak as she used to button her pinafores.“We have our plans. We don’t mean to say much about them yet,because we are such very new brooms, but we don’t intend to be idle.I’m going into business with a devotion that shall delight Grandfather,and prove to him that I’m not spoiled. I need something of the sort tokeep me steady. I’m tired of dawdling, and mean to work like aman.”“And Amy, what is she going to do?” asked Mrs. March, well pleasedat Laurie’s decision and the energy with which he spoke.“After doing the civil all round, and airing our best bonnet, we shallastonish you by the elegant hospitalities of our mansion, the brilliant societywe shall draw about us, and the beneficial influence we shall exert over theworld at large. That’s about it, isn’t it, Madame Recamier?”asked Laurie with a quizzical look at Amy.“Time will show. Come away, Impertinence, and don’t shock my familyby calling me names before their faces,” answered Amy, resolving thatthere should be a home with a good wife in it before she set up a salon as aqueen of society.“How happy those children seem together!” observed Mr. March,finding it difficult to become absorbed in his Aristotle after the young couplehad gone.“Yes, and I think it will last,” added Mrs. March, with the restfulexpression of a pilot who has brought a ship safely into port.“I know it will. Happy Amy!” and Jo sighed, then smiled brightly asProfessor Bhaer opened the gate with an impatient push.Later in the evening, when his mind had been set at rest about the bootjack,Laurie said suddenly to his wife, “Mrs. Laurence.”“My Lord!”“That man intends to marry our Jo!”“I hope so, don’t you, dear?”“Well, my love, I consider him a trump, in the fullest sense of thatexpressive word, but I do wish he was a little younger and a good dealricher.”“Now, Laurie, don’t be too fastidious and worldly-minded. If theylove one another it doesn’t matter a particle how old they are nor howpoor. Women never should marry for money...” Amy caught herself up shortas the words escaped her, and looked at her husband, who replied, withmalicious gravity...“Certainly not, though you do hear charming girls say that they intend todo it sometimes. If my memory serves me, you once thought it your duty to makea rich match. That accounts, perhaps, for your marrying a good-for-nothing likeme.”“Oh, my dearest boy, don’t, don’t say that! I forgot you wererich when I said ‘Yes’. I’d have married you if youhadn’t a penny, and I sometimes wish you were poor that I might show howmuch I love you.” And Amy, who was very dignified in public and very fondin private, gave convincing proofs of the truth of her words.“You don’t really think I am such a mercenary creature as I triedto be once, do you? It would break my heart if you didn’t believe thatI’d gladly pull in the same boat with you, even if you had to get yourliving by rowing on the lake.”“Am I an idiot and a brute? How could I think so, when you refused aricher man for me, and won’t let me give you half I want to now, when Ihave the right? Girls do it every day, poor things, and are taught to think itis their only salvation, but you had better lessons, and though I trembled foryou at one time, I was not disappointed, for the daughter was true to themother’s teaching. I told Mamma so yesterday, and she looked as glad andgrateful as if I’d given her a check for a million, to be spent incharity. You are not listening to my moral remarks, Mrs. Laurence,” andLaurie paused, for Amy’s eyes had an absent look, though fixed upon hisface.“Yes, I am, and admiring the mole in your chin at the same time. Idon’t wish to make you vain, but I must confess that I’m prouder ofmy handsome husband than of all his money. Don’t laugh, but your nose issuch a comfort to me,” and Amy softly caressed the well-cut feature withartistic satisfaction.Laurie had received many compliments in his life, but never one that suited himbetter, as he plainly showed though he did laugh at his wife’s peculiartaste, while she said slowly, “May I ask you a question, dear?”“Of course, you may.”“Shall you care if Jo does marry Mr. Bhaer?”“Oh, that’s the trouble is it? I thought there was something in thedimple that didn’t quite suit you. Not being a dog in the manger, but thehappiest fellow alive, I assure you I can dance at Jo’s wedding with aheart as light as my heels. Do you doubt it, my darling?”Amy looked up at him, and was satisfied. Her little jealous fear vanishedforever, and she thanked him, with a face full of love and confidence.“I wish we could do something for that capital old Professor.Couldn’t we invent a rich relation, who shall obligingly die out there inGermany, and leave him a tidy little fortune?” said Laurie, when theybegan to pace up and down the long drawing room, arm in arm, as they were fondof doing, in memory of the chateau garden.“Jo would find us out, and spoil it all. She is very proud of him, justas he is, and said yesterday that she thought poverty was a beautifulthing.”“Bless her dear heart! She won’t think so when she has a literaryhusband, and a dozen little professors and professorins to support. Wewon’t interfere now, but watch our chance, and do them a good turn inspite of themselves. I owe Jo for a part of my education, and she believes inpeople’s paying their honest debts, so I’ll get round her in thatway.”“How delightful it is to be able to help others, isn’t it? That wasalways one of my dreams, to have the power of giving freely, and thanks to you,the dream has come true.”“Ah, we’ll do quantities of good, won’t we? There’s onesort of poverty that I particularly like to help. Out-and-out beggars get takencare of, but poor gentle folks fare badly, because they won’t ask, andpeople don’t dare to offer charity. Yet there are a thousand ways ofhelping them, if one only knows how to do it so delicately that it does notoffend. I must say, I like to serve a decayed gentleman better than ablarnerying beggar. I suppose it’s wrong, but I do, though it isharder.”“Because it takes a gentleman to do it,” added the other member ofthe domestic admiration society.“Thank you, I’m afraid I don’t deserve that prettycompliment. But I was going to say that while I was dawdling about abroad, Isaw a good many talented young fellows making all sorts of sacrifices, andenduring real hardships, that they might realize their dreams. Splendidfellows, some of them, working like heros, poor and friendless, but so full ofcourage, patience, and ambition that I was ashamed of myself, and longed togive them a right good lift. Those are people whom it’s a satisfaction tohelp, for if they’ve got genius, it’s an honor to be allowed toserve them, and not let it be lost or delayed for want of fuel to keep the potboiling. If they haven’t, it’s a pleasure to comfort the poorsouls, and keep them from despair when they find it out.”“Yes, indeed, and there’s another class who can’t ask, andwho suffer in silence. I know something of it, for I belonged to it before youmade a princess of me, as the king does the beggarmaid in the old story.Ambitious girls have a hard time, Laurie, and often have to see youth, health,and precious opportunities go by, just for want of a little help at the rightminute. People have been very kind to me, and whenever I see girls strugglingalong, as we used to do, I want to put out my hand and help them, as I washelped.”“And so you shall, like an angel as you are!” cried Laurie,resolving, with a glow of philanthropic zeal, to found and endow an institutionfor the express benefit of young women with artistic tendencies. “Richpeople have no right to sit down and enjoy themselves, or let their moneyaccumulate for others to waste. It’s not half so sensible to leavelegacies when one dies as it is to use the money wisely while alive, and enjoymaking one’s fellow creatures happy with it. We’ll have a good timeourselves, and add an extra relish to our own pleasure by giving other people agenerous taste. Will you be a little Dorcas, going about emptying a big basketof comforts, and filling it up with good deeds?”“With all my heart, if you will be a brave St. Martin, stopping as youride gallantly through the world to share your cloak with the beggar.”“It’s a bargain, and we shall get the best of it!”So the young pair shook hands upon it, and then paced happily on again, feelingthat their pleasant home was more homelike because they hoped to brighten otherhomes, believing that their own feet would walk more uprightly along theflowery path before them, if they smoothed rough ways for other feet, andfeeling that their hearts were more closely knit together by a love which couldtenderly remember those less blest than they.CHAPTER FORTY-FIVEDAISY AND DEMII cannot feel that I have done my duty as humble historian of the March family,without devoting at least one chapter to the two most precious and importantmembers of it. Daisy and Demi had now arrived at years of discretion, for inthis fast age babies of three or four assert their rights, and get them, too,which is more than many of their elders do. If there ever were a pair of twinsin danger of being utterly spoiled by adoration, it was these prattlingBrookes. Of course they were the most remarkable children ever born, as will beshown when I mention that they walked at eight months, talked fluently attwelve months, and at two years they took their places at table, and behavedwith a propriety which charmed all beholders. At three, Daisy demanded a‘needler’, and actually made a bag with four stitches in it. Shelikewise set up housekeeping in the sideboard, and managed a microscopiccooking stove with a skill that brought tears of pride to Hannah’s eyes,while Demi learned his letters with his grandfather, who invented a new mode ofteaching the alphabet by forming letters with his arms and legs, thus unitinggymnastics for head and heels. The boy early developed a mechanical geniuswhich delighted his father and distracted his mother, for he tried to imitateevery machine he saw, and kept the nursery in a chaotic condition, with his‘sewinsheen’, a mysterious structure of string, chairs,clothespins, and spools, for wheels to go ‘wound and wound’. Also abasket hung over the back of a chair, in which he vainly tried to hoist his tooconfiding sister, who, with feminine devotion, allowed her little head to bebumped till rescued, when the young inventor indignantly remarked, “Why,Marmar, dat’s my lellywaiter, and me’s trying to pull herup.”Though utterly unlike in character, the twins got on remarkably well together,and seldom quarreled more than thrice a day. Of course, Demi tyrannized overDaisy, and gallantly defended her from every other aggressor, while Daisy madea galley slave of herself, and adored her brother as the one perfect being inthe world. A rosy, chubby, sunshiny little soul was Daisy, who found her way toeverybody’s heart, and nestled there. One of the captivating children,who seem made to be kissed and cuddled, adorned and adored like littlegoddesses, and produced for general approval on all festive occasions. Hersmall virtues were so sweet that she would have been quite angelic if a fewsmall naughtinesses had not kept her delightfully human. It was all fairweather in her world, and every morning she scrambled up to the window in herlittle nightgown to look out, and say, no matter whether it rained or shone,“Oh, pitty day, oh, pitty day!” Everyone was a friend, and sheoffered kisses to a stranger so confidingly that the most inveterate bachelorrelented, and baby-lovers became faithful worshipers.“Me loves evvybody,” she once said, opening her arms, with herspoon in one hand, and her mug in the other, as if eager to embrace and nourishthe whole world.As she grew, her mother began to feel that the Dovecote would be blessed by thepresence of an inmate as serene and loving as that which had helped to make theold house home, and to pray that she might be spared a loss like that which hadlately taught them how long they had entertained an angel unawares. Hergrandfather often called her ‘Beth’, and her grandmother watchedover her with untiring devotion, as if trying to atone for some past mistake,which no eye but her own could see.Demi, like a true Yankee, was of an inquiring turn, wanting to know everything,and often getting much disturbed because he could not get satisfactory answersto his perpetual “What for?”He also possessed a philosophic bent, to the great delight of his grandfather,who used to hold Socratic conversations with him, in which the precocious pupiloccasionally posed his teacher, to the undisguised satisfaction of thewomenfolk.“What makes my legs go, Dranpa?” asked the young philosopher,surveying those active portions of his frame with a meditative air, whileresting after a go-to-bed frolic one night.“It’s your little mind, Demi,” replied the sage, stroking theyellow head respectfully.“What is a little mine?”“It is something which makes your body move, as the spring made thewheels go in my watch when I showed it to you.”“Open me. I want to see it go wound.”“I can’t do that any more than you could open the watch. God windsyou up, and you go till He stops you.”“Does I?” and Demi’s brown eyes grew big and bright as hetook in the new thought. “Is I wounded up like the watch?”“Yes, but I can’t show you how, for it is done when we don’tsee.”Demi felt his back, as if expecting to find it like that of the watch, and thengravely remarked, “I dess Dod does it when I’s asleep.”A careful explanation followed, to which he listened so attentively that hisanxious grandmother said, “My dear, do you think it wise to talk aboutsuch things to that baby? He’s getting great bumps over his eyes, andlearning to ask the most unanswerable questions.”“If he is old enough to ask the question he is old enough to receive trueanswers. I am not putting the thoughts into his head, but helping him unfoldthose already there. These children are wiser than we are, and I have no doubtthe boy understands every word I have said to him. Now, Demi, tell me where youkeep your mind.”If the boy had replied like Alcibiades, “By the gods, Socrates, I cannottell,” his grandfather would not have been surprised, but when, afterstanding a moment on one leg, like a meditative young stork, he answered, in atone of calm conviction, “In my little belly,” the old gentlemancould only join in Grandma’s laugh, and dismiss the class in metaphysics.There might have been cause for maternal anxiety, if Demi had not givenconvincing proofs that he was a true boy, as well as a budding philosopher, foroften, after a discussion which caused Hannah to prophesy, with ominous nods,“That child ain’t long for this world,” he would turn aboutand set her fears at rest by some of the pranks with which dear, dirty, naughtylittle rascals distract and delight their parent’s souls.Meg made many moral rules, and tried to keep them, but what mother was everproof against the winning wiles, the ingenious evasions, or the tranquilaudacity of the miniature men and women who so early show themselvesaccomplished Artful Dodgers?“No more raisins, Demi. They’ll make you sick,” says Mamma tothe young person who offers his services in the kitchen with unfailingregularity on plum-pudding day.“Me likes to be sick.”“I don’t want to have you, so run away and help Daisy make pattycakes.”He reluctantly departs, but his wrongs weigh upon his spirit, and by-and-bywhen an opportunity comes to redress them, he outwits Mamma by a shrewdbargain.“Now you have been good children, and I’ll play anything youlike,” says Meg, as she leads her assistant cooks upstairs, when thepudding is safely bouncing in the pot.“Truly, Marmar?” asks Demi, with a brilliant idea in hiswell-powdered head.“Yes, truly. Anything you say,” replies the shortsighted parent,preparing herself to sing, “The Three Little Kittens” half a dozentimes over, or to take her family to “Buy a penny bun,” regardlessof wind or limb. But Demi corners her by the cool reply...“Then we’ll go and eat up all the raisins.”Aunt Dodo was chief playmate and confidante of both children, and the trioturned the little house topsy-turvy. Aunt Amy was as yet only a name to them,Aunt Beth soon faded into a pleasantly vague memory, but Aunt Dodo was a livingreality, and they made the most of her, for which compliment she was deeplygrateful. But when Mr. Bhaer came, Jo neglected her playfellows, and dismay anddesolation fell upon their little souls. Daisy, who was fond of going aboutpeddling kisses, lost her best customer and became bankrupt. Demi, withinfantile penetration, soon discovered that Dodo like to play with ‘thebear-man’ better than she did him, but though hurt, he concealed hisanguish, for he hadn’t the heart to insult a rival who kept a mine ofchocolate drops in his waistcoat pocket, and a watch that could be taken out ofits case and freely shaken by ardent admirers.Some persons might have considered these pleasing liberties as bribes, but Demididn’t see it in that light, and continued to patronize the ‘thebear-man’ with pensive affability, while Daisy bestowed her smallaffections upon him at the third call, and considered his shoulder her throne,his arm her refuge, his gifts treasures surpassing worth.Gentlemen are sometimes seized with sudden fits of admiration for the youngrelatives of ladies whom they honor with their regard, but this counterfeitphiloprogenitiveness sits uneasily upon them, and does not deceive anybody aparticle. Mr. Bhaer’s devotion was sincere, however likewiseeffective—for honesty is the best policy in love as in law. He was one ofthe men who are at home with children, and looked particularly well when littlefaces made a pleasant contrast with his manly one. His business, whatever itwas, detained him from day to day, but evening seldom failed to bring him outto see—well, he always asked for Mr. March, so I suppose he was theattraction. The excellent papa labored under the delusion that he was, andreveled in long discussions with the kindred spirit, till a chance remark ofhis more observing grandson suddenly enlightened him.Mr. Bhaer came in one evening to pause on the threshold of the study,astonished by the spectacle that met his eye. Prone upon the floor lay Mr.March, with his respectable legs in the air, and beside him, likewise prone,was Demi, trying to imitate the attitude with his own short, scarlet-stockingedlegs, both grovelers so seriously absorbed that they were unconscious ofspectators, till Mr. Bhaer laughed his sonorous laugh, and Jo cried out, with ascandalized face...“Father, Father, here’s the Professor!”Down went the black legs and up came the gray head, as the preceptor said, withundisturbed dignity, “Good evening, Mr. Bhaer. Excuse me for a moment. Weare just finishing our lesson. Now, Demi, make the letter and tell itsname.”“I knows him!” and, after a few convulsive efforts, the red legstook the shape of a pair of compasses, and the intelligent pupil triumphantlyshouted, “It’s a We, Dranpa, it’s a We!”“He’s a born Weller,” laughed Jo, as her parent gatheredhimself up, and her nephew tried to stand on his head, as the only mode ofexpressing his satisfaction that school was over.“What have you been at today, bubchen?” asked Mr. Bhaer, picking upthe gymnast.“Me went to see little Mary.”“And what did you there?”“I kissed her,” began Demi, with artless frankness.“Prut! Thou beginnest early. What did the little Mary say to that?”asked Mr. Bhaer, continuing to confess the young sinner, who stood upon theknee, exploring the waistcoat pocket.“Oh, she liked it, and she kissed me, and I liked it. Don’t littleboys like little girls?” asked Demi, with his mouth full, and an air ofbland satisfaction.“You precocious chick! Who put that into your head?” said Jo,enjoying the innocent revelation as much as the Professor.“’Tisn’t in mine head, it’s in mine mouf,”answered literal Demi, putting out his tongue, with a chocolate drop on it,thinking she alluded to confectionery, not ideas.“Thou shouldst save some for the little friend. Sweets to the sweet,mannling,” and Mr. Bhaer offered Jo some, with a look that made herwonder if chocolate was not the nectar drunk by the gods. Demi also saw thesmile, was impressed by it, and artlessy inquired. ..“Do great boys like great girls, to, ’Fessor?”Like young Washington, Mr. Bhaer ‘couldn’t tell a lie’, so hegave the somewhat vague reply that he believed they did sometimes, in a tonethat made Mr. March put down his clothesbrush, glance at Jo’s retiringface, and then sink into his chair, looking as if the ‘precociouschick’ had put an idea into his head that was both sweet and sour.Why Dodo, when she caught him in the china closet half an hour afterward,nearly squeezed the breath out of his little body with a tender embrace,instead of shaking him for being there, and why she followed up this novelperformance by the unexpected gift of a big slice of bread and jelly, remainedone of the problems over which Demi puzzled his small wits, and was forced toleave unsolved forever.CHAPTER FORTY-SIXUNDER THE UMBRELLAWhile Laurie and Amy were taking conjugal strolls over velvet carpets, as theyset their house in order, and planned a blissful future, Mr. Bhaer and Jo wereenjoying promenades of a different sort, along muddy roads and sodden fields.“I always do take a walk toward evening, and I don’t know why Ishould give it up, just because I happen to meet the Professor on his wayout,” said Jo to herself, after two or three encounters, for though therewere two paths to Meg’s whichever one she took she was sure to meet him,either going or returning. He was always walking rapidly, and never seemed tosee her until quite close, when he would look as if his short-sighted eyes hadfailed to recognize the approaching lady till that moment. Then, if she wasgoing to Meg’s he always had something for the babies. If her face wasturned homeward, he had merely strolled down to see the river, and was justreturning, unless they were tired of his frequent calls.Under the circumstances, what could Jo do but greet him civilly, and invite himin? If she was tired of his visits, she concealed her weariness with perfectskill, and took care that there should be coffee for supper, “asFriedrich—I mean Mr. Bhaer—doesn’t like tea.”By the second week, everyone knew perfectly well what was going on, yeteveryone tried to look as if they were stone-blind to the changes in Jo’sface. They never asked why she sang about her work, did up her hair three timesa day, and got so blooming with her evening exercise. And no one seemed to havethe slightest suspicion that Professor Bhaer, while talking philosophy with thefather, was giving the daughter lessons in love.Jo couldn’t even lose her heart in a decorous manner, but sternly triedto quench her feelings, and failing to do so, led a somewhat agitated life. Shewas mortally afraid of being laughed at for surrendering, after her many andvehement declarations of independence. Laurie was her especial dread, butthanks to the new manager, he behaved with praiseworthy propriety, never calledMr. Bhaer ‘a capital old fellow’ in public, never alluded, in theremotest manner, to Jo’s improved appearance, or expressed the leastsurprise at seeing the Professor’s hat on the Marches’ table nearlyevery evening. But he exulted in private and longed for the time to come whenhe could give Jo a piece of plate, with a bear and a ragged staff on it as anappropriate coat of arms.For a fortnight, the Professor came and went with lover-like regularity. Thenhe stayed away for three whole days, and made no sign, a proceeding whichcaused everybody to look sober, and Jo to become pensive, at first, andthen—alas for romance—very cross.“Disgusted, I dare say, and gone home as suddenly as he came. It’snothing to me, of course, but I should think he would have come and bid usgoodbye like a gentleman,” she said to herself, with a despairing look atthe gate, as she put on her things for the customary walk one dull afternoon.“You’d better take the little umbrella, dear. It looks likerain,” said her mother, observing that she had on her new bonnet, but notalluding to the fact.“Yes, Marmee, do you want anything in town? I’ve got to run in andget some paper,” returned Jo, pulling out the bow under her chin beforethe glass as an excuse for not looking at her mother.“Yes, I want some twilled silesia, a paper of number nine needles, andtwo yards of narrow lavender ribbon. Have you got your thick boots on, andsomething warm under your cloak?”“I believe so,” answered Jo absently.“If you happen to meet Mr. Bhaer, bring him home to tea. I quite long tosee the dear man,” added Mrs. March.Jo heard that, but made no answer, except to kiss her mother, and walk rapidlyaway, thinking with a glow of gratitude, in spite of her heartache, “Howgood she is to me! What do girls do who haven’t any mothers to help themthrough their troubles?”The dry-goods stores were not down among the counting-houses, banks, andwholesale warerooms, where gentlemen most do congregate, but Jo found herselfin that part of the city before she did a single errand, loitering along as ifwaiting for someone, examining engineering instruments in one window andsamples of wool in another, with most unfeminine interest, tumbling overbarrels, being half-smothered by descending bales, and hustled unceremoniouslyby busy men who looked as if they wondered ‘how the deuce she gotthere’. A drop of rain on her cheek recalled her thoughts from baffledhopes to ruined ribbons. For the drops continued to fall, and being a woman aswell as a lover, she felt that, though it was too late to save her heart, shemight her bonnet. Now she remembered the little umbrella, which she hadforgotten to take in her hurry to be off, but regret was unavailing, andnothing could be done but borrow one or submit to a drenching. She looked up atthe lowering sky, down at the crimson bow already flecked with black, forwardalong the muddy street, then one long, lingering look behind, at a certaingrimy warehouse, with ‘Hoffmann, Swartz, & Co.’ over the door,and said to herself, with a sternly reproachful air...“It serves me right! what business had I to put on all my best things andcome philandering down here, hoping to see the Professor? Jo, I’m ashamedof you! No, you shall not go there to borrow an umbrella, or find out where heis, from his friends. You shall trudge away, and do your errands in the rain,and if you catch your death and ruin your bonnet, it’s no more than youdeserve. Now then!”With that she rushed across the street so impetuously that she narrowly escapedannihilation from a passing truck, and precipitated herself into the arms of astately old gentleman, who said, “I beg pardon, ma’am,” andlooked mortally offended. Somewhat daunted, Jo righted herself, spread herhandkerchief over the devoted ribbons, and putting temptation behind her,hurried on, with increasing dampness about the ankles, and much clashing ofumbrellas overhead. The fact that a somewhat dilapidated blue one remainedstationary above the unprotected bonnet attracted her attention, and lookingup, she saw Mr. Bhaer looking down.“I feel to know the strong-minded lady who goes so bravely under manyhorse noses, and so fast through much mud. What do you down here, myfriend?”“I’m shopping.”Mr. Bhaer smiled, as he glanced from the pickle factory on one side to thewholesale hide and leather concern on the other, but he only said politely,“You haf no umbrella. May I go also, and take for you the bundles?”“Yes, thank you.”Jo’s cheeks were as red as her ribbon, and she wondered what he thoughtof her, but she didn’t care, for in a minute she found herself walkingaway arm in arm with her Professor, feeling as if the sun had suddenly burstout with uncommon brilliancy, that the world was all right again, and that onethoroughly happy woman was paddling through the wet that day.“We thought you had gone,” said Jo hastily, for she knew he waslooking at her. Her bonnet wasn’t big enough to hide her face, and shefeared he might think the joy it betrayed unmaidenly.“Did you believe that I should go with no farewell to those who haf beenso heavenly kind to me?” he asked so reproachfully that she felt as ifshe had insulted him by the suggestion, and answered heartily...“No, I didn’t. I knew you were busy about your own affairs, but werather missed you, Father and Mother especially.”“And you?”“I’m always glad to see you, sir.”In her anxiety to keep her voice quite calm, Jo made it rather cool, and thefrosty little monosyllable at the end seemed to chill the Professor, for hissmile vanished, as he said gravely...“I thank you, and come one more time before I go.”“You are going, then?”“I haf no longer any business here, it is done.”“Successfully, I hope?” said Jo, for the bitterness ofdisappointment was in that short reply of his.“I ought to think so, for I haf a way opened to me by which I can make mybread and gif my Junglings much help.”“Tell me, please! I like to know all about the—the boys,”said Jo eagerly.“That is so kind, I gladly tell you. My friends find for me a place in acollege, where I teach as at home, and earn enough to make the way smooth forFranz and Emil. For this I should be grateful, should I not?”“Indeed you should. How splendid it will be to have you doing what youlike, and be able to see you often, and the boys!” cried Jo, clinging tothe lads as an excuse for the satisfaction she could not help betraying.“Ah! But we shall not meet often, I fear, this place is at theWest.”“So far away!” and Jo left her skirts to their fate, as if itdidn’t matter now what became of her clothes or herself.Mr. Bhaer could read several languages, but he had not learned to read womenyet. He flattered himself that he knew Jo pretty well, and was, therefore, muchamazed by the contradictions of voice, face, and manner, which she showed himin rapid succession that day, for she was in half a dozen different moods inthe course of half an hour. When she met him she looked surprised, though itwas impossible to help suspecting that she had come for that express purpose.When he offered her his arm, she took it with a look that filled him withdelight, but when he asked if she missed him, she gave such a chilly, formalreply that despair fell upon him. On learning his good fortune she almostclapped her hands. Was the joy all for the boys? Then on hearing hisdestination, she said, “So far away!” in a tone of despair thatlifted him on to a pinnacle of hope, but the next minute she tumbled him downagain by observing, like one entirely absorbed in the matter...“Here’s the place for my errands. Will you come in? It won’ttake long.”Jo rather prided herself upon her shopping capabilities, and particularlywished to impress her escort with the neatness and dispatch with which shewould accomplish the business. But owing to the flutter she was in, everythingwent amiss. She upset the tray of needles, forgot the silesia was to be‘twilled’ till it was cut off, gave the wrong change, and coveredherself with confusion by asking for lavender ribbon at the calico counter. Mr.Bhaer stood by, watching her blush and blunder, and as he watched, his ownbewilderment seemed to subside, for he was beginning to see that on someoccasions, women, like dreams, go by contraries.When they came out, he put the parcel under his arm with a more cheerfulaspect, and splashed through the puddles as if he rather enjoyed it on thewhole.“Should we no do a little what you call shopping for the babies, and hafa farewell feast tonight if I go for my last call at your so pleasanthome?” he asked, stopping before a window full of fruit and flowers.“What will we buy?” asked Jo, ignoring the latter part of hisspeech, and sniffing the mingled odors with an affectation of delight as theywent in.“May they haf oranges and figs?” asked Mr. Bhaer, with a paternalair.“They eat them when they can get them.”“Do you care for nuts?”“Like a squirrel.”“Hamburg grapes. Yes, we shall drink to the Fatherland in those?”Jo frowned upon that piece of extravagance, and asked why he didn’t buy afrail of dates, a cask of raisins, and a bag of almonds, and be done with it?Whereat Mr. Bhaer confiscated her purse, produced his own, and finished themarketing by buying several pounds of grapes, a pot of rosy daisies, and apretty jar of honey, to be regarded in the light of a demijohn. Then distortinghis pockets with knobby bundles, and giving her the flowers to hold, he put upthe old umbrella, and they traveled on again.“Miss Marsch, I haf a great favor to ask of you,” began theProfessor, after a moist promenade of half a block.“Yes, sir?” and Jo’s heart began to beat so hard she wasafraid he would hear it.“I am bold to say it in spite of the rain, because so short a timeremains to me.”“Yes, sir,” and Jo nearly crushed the small flowerpot with thesudden squeeze she gave it.“I wish to get a little dress for my Tina, and I am too stupid to goalone. Will you kindly gif me a word of taste and help?”“Yes, sir,” and Jo felt as calm and cool all of a sudden as if shehad stepped into a refrigerator.“Perhaps also a shawl for Tina’s mother, she is so poor and sick,and the husband is such a care. Yes, yes, a thick, warm shawl would be afriendly thing to take the little mother.”“I’ll do it with pleasure, Mr. Bhaer.” “I’m goingvery fast, and he’s getting dearer every minute,” added Jo toherself, then with a mental shake she entered into the business with an energythat was pleasant to behold.Mr. Bhaer left it all to her, so she chose a pretty gown for Tina, and thenordered out the shawls. The clerk, being a married man, condescended to take aninterest in the couple, who appeared to be shopping for their family.“Your lady may prefer this. It’s a superior article, a mostdesirable color, quite chaste and genteel,” he said, shaking out acomfortable gray shawl, and throwing it over Jo’s shoulders.“Does this suit you, Mr. Bhaer?” she asked, turning her back tohim, and feeling deeply grateful for the chance of hiding her face.“Excellently well, we will haf it,” answered the Professor, smilingto himself as he paid for it, while Jo continued to rummage the counters like aconfirmed bargain-hunter.“Now shall we go home?” he asked, as if the words were verypleasant to him.“Yes, it’s late, and I’m so tired.” Jo’svoice was more pathetic than she knew. For now the sun seemed to have gone inas suddenly as it came out, and the world grew muddy and miserable again, andfor the first time she discovered that her feet were cold, her head ached, andthat her heart was colder than the former, fuller of pain than the latter. Mr.Bhaer was going away, he only cared for her as a friend, it was all a mistake,and the sooner it was over the better. With this idea in her head, she hailedan approaching omnibus with such a hasty gesture that the daisies flew out ofthe pot and were badly damaged.“This is not our omniboos,” said the Professor, waving the loadedvehicle away, and stopping to pick up the poor little flowers.“I beg your pardon. I didn’t see the name distinctly. Never mind, Ican walk. I’m used to plodding in the mud,” returned Jo, winkinghard, because she would have died rather than openly wipe her eyes.Mr. Bhaer saw the drops on her cheeks, though she turned her head away. Thesight seemed to touch him very much, for suddenly stooping down, he asked in atone that meant a great deal, “Heart’s dearest, why do youcry?”Now, if Jo had not been new to this sort of thing she would have said shewasn’t crying, had a cold in her head, or told any other feminine fibproper to the occasion. Instead of which, that undignified creature answered,with an irrepressible sob, “Because you are going away.”“Ach, mein Gott, that is so good!” cried Mr. Bhaer, managing toclasp his hands in spite of the umbrella and the bundles, “Jo, I hafnothing but much love to gif you. I came to see if you could care for it, and Iwaited to be sure that I was something more than a friend. Am I? Can you make alittle place in your heart for old Fritz?” he added, all in one breath.“Oh, yes!” said Jo, and he was quite satisfied, for she folded bothhands over his arm, and looked up at him with an expression that plainly showedhow happy she would be to walk through life beside him, even though she had nobetter shelter than the old umbrella, if he carried it.It was certainly proposing under difficulties, for even if he had desired to doso, Mr. Bhaer could not go down upon his knees, on account of the mud. Neithercould he offer Jo his hand, except figuratively, for both were full. Much lesscould he indulge in tender remonstrations in the open street, though he wasnear it. So the only way in which he could express his rapture was to look ather, with an expression which glorified his face to such a degree that thereactually seemed to be little rainbows in the drops that sparkled on his beard.If he had not loved Jo very much, I don’t think he could have done itthen, for she looked far from lovely, with her skirts in a deplorable state,her rubber boots splashed to the ankle, and her bonnet a ruin. Fortunately, Mr.Bhaer considered her the most beautiful woman living, and she found him more“Jove-like” than ever, though his hatbrim was quite limp with thelittle rills trickling thence upon his shoulders (for he held the umbrella allover Jo), and every finger of his gloves needed mending.Passers-by probably thought them a pair of harmless lunatics, for they entirelyforgot to hail a bus, and strolled leisurely along, oblivious of deepening duskand fog. Little they cared what anybody thought, for they were enjoying thehappy hour that seldom comes but once in any life, the magical moment whichbestows youth on the old, beauty on the plain, wealth on the poor, and giveshuman hearts a foretaste of heaven. The Professor looked as if he had conquereda kingdom, and the world had nothing more to offer him in the way of bliss.While Jo trudged beside him, feeling as if her place had always been there, andwondering how she ever could have chosen any other lot. Of course, she was thefirst to speak—intelligibly, I mean, for the emotional remarks whichfollowed her impetuous “Oh, yes!” were not of a coherent orreportable character.“Friedrich, why didn’t you...”“Ah, heaven, she gifs me the name that no one speaks since Minnadied!” cried the Professor, pausing in a puddle to regard her withgrateful delight.“I always call you so to myself—I forgot, but I won’t unlessyou like it.”“Like it? It is more sweet to me than I can tell. Say ‘thou’,also, and I shall say your language is almost as beautiful as mine.”“Isn’t ‘thou’ a little sentimental?” asked Jo,privately thinking it a lovely monosyllable.“Sentimental? Yes. Thank Gott, we Germans believe in sentiment, and keepourselves young mit it. Your English ‘you’ is so cold, say‘thou’, heart’s dearest, it means so much to me,”pleaded Mr. Bhaer, more like a romantic student than a grave professor.“Well, then, why didn’t thou tell me all this sooner?” askedJo bashfully.“Now I shall haf to show thee all my heart, and I so gladly will, becausethou must take care of it hereafter. See, then, my Jo—ah, the dear, funnylittle name—I had a wish to tell something the day I said goodbye in NewYork, but I thought the handsome friend was betrothed to thee, and so I spokenot. Wouldst thou have said ‘Yes’, then, if I had spoken?”“I don’t know. I’m afraid not, for I didn’t have anyheart just then.”“Prut! That I do not believe. It was asleep till the fairy prince camethrough the wood, and waked it up. Ah, well, ‘Die erste Liebe ist diebeste’, but that I should not expect.”“Yes, the first love is the best, but be so contented, for I never hadanother. Teddy was only a boy, and soon got over his little fancy,” saidJo, anxious to correct the Professor’s mistake.“Good! Then I shall rest happy, and be sure that thou givest me all. Ihaf waited so long, I am grown selfish, as thou wilt find, Professorin.”“I like that,” cried Jo, delighted with her new name. “Nowtell me what brought you, at last, just when I wanted you?”“This,” and Mr. Bhaer took a little worn paper out of his waistcoatpocket.Jo unfolded it, and looked much abashed, for it was one of her owncontributions to a paper that paid for poetry, which accounted for her sendingit an occasional attempt.“How could that bring you?” she asked, wondering what he meant.“I found it by chance. I knew it by the names and the initials, and in itthere was one little verse that seemed to call me. Read and find him. I willsee that you go not in the wet.”IN THE GARRETFour little chests all in a row,Dim with dust, and worn by time,All fashioned and filled, long ago,By children now in their prime.Four little keys hung side by side,With faded ribbons, brave and gayWhen fastened there, with childish pride,Long ago, on a rainy day.Four little names, one on each lid,Carved out by a boyish hand,And underneath there lieth hidHistories of the happy bandOnce playing here, and pausing oftTo hear the sweet refrain,That came and went on the roof aloft,In the falling summer rain.“Meg” on the first lid, smooth and fair.I look in with loving eyes,For folded here, with well-known care,A goodly gathering lies,The record of a peaceful life—Gifts to gentle child and girl,A bridal gown, lines to a wife,A tiny shoe, a baby curl.No toys in this first chest remain,For all are carried away,In their old age, to join againIn another small Meg’s play.Ah, happy mother! Well I knowYou hear, like a sweet refrain,Lullabies ever soft and lowIn the falling summer rain.“Jo” on the next lid, scratched and worn,And within a motley storeOf headless dolls, of schoolbooks torn,Birds and beasts that speak no more,Spoils brought home from the fairy groundOnly trod by youthful feet,Dreams of a future never found,Memories of a past still sweet,Half-writ poems, stories wild,April letters, warm and cold,Diaries of a wilful child,Hints of a woman early old,A woman in a lonely home,Hearing, like a sad refrain—“Be worthy, love, and love will come,”In the falling summer rain.My Beth! the dust is always sweptFrom the lid that bears your name,As if by loving eyes that wept,By careful hands that often came.Death canonized for us one saint,Ever less human than divine,And still we lay, with tender plaint,Relics in this household shrine—The silver bell, so seldom rung,The little cap which last she wore,The fair, dead Catherine that hungBy angels borne above her door.The songs she sang, without lament,In her prison-house of pain,Forever are they sweetly blentWith the falling summer rain.Upon the last lid’s polished field—Legend now both fair and trueA gallant knight bears on his shield,“Amy” in letters gold and blue.Within lie snoods that bound her hair,Slippers that have danced their last,Faded flowers laid by with care,Fans whose airy toils are past,Gay valentines, all ardent flames,Trifles that have borne their partIn girlish hopes and fears and shames,The record of a maiden heartNow learning fairer, truer spells,Hearing, like a blithe refrain,The silver sound of bridal bellsIn the falling summer rain.Four little chests all in a row,Dim with dust, and worn by time,Four women, taught by weal and woeTo love and labor in their prime.Four sisters, parted for an hour,None lost, one only gone before,Made by love’s immortal power,Nearest and dearest evermore.Oh, when these hidden stores of oursLie open to the Father’s sight,May they be rich in golden hours,Deeds that show fairer for the light,Lives whose brave music long shall ring,Like a spirit-stirring strain,Souls that shall gladly soar and singIn the long sunshine after rain.“It’s very bad poetry, but I felt it when I wrote it, one day whenI was very lonely, and had a good cry on a rag bag. I never thought it would gowhere it could tell tales,” said Jo, tearing up the verses the Professorhad treasured so long.“Let it go, it has done its duty, and I will haf a fresh one when I readall the brown book in which she keeps her little secrets,” said Mr. Bhaerwith a smile as he watched the fragments fly away on the wind.“Yes,” he added earnestly, “I read that, and I think tomyself, She has a sorrow, she is lonely, she would find comfort in true love. Ihaf a heart full, full for her. Shall I not go and say, ‘If this is nottoo poor a thing to gif for what I shall hope to receive, take it inGott’s name?’”“And so you came to find that it was not too poor, but the one preciousthing I needed,” whispered Jo.“I had no courage to think that at first, heavenly kind as was yourwelcome to me. But soon I began to hope, and then I said, ‘I will haf herif I die for it,’ and so I will!” cried Mr. Bhaer, with a defiantnod, as if the walls of mist closing round them were barriers which he was tosurmount or valiantly knock down.Jo thought that was splendid, and resolved to be worthy of her knight, thoughhe did not come prancing on a charger in gorgeous array.“What made you stay away so long?” she asked presently, finding itso pleasant to ask confidential questions and get delightful answers that shecould not keep silent.“It was not easy, but I could not find the heart to take you from that sohappy home until I could haf a prospect of one to gif you, after much time,perhaps, and hard work. How could I ask you to gif up so much for a poor oldfellow, who has no fortune but a little learning?”“I’m glad you are poor. I couldn’t bear a richhusband,” said Jo decidedly, adding in a softer tone, “Don’tfear poverty. I’ve known it long enough to lose my dread and be happyworking for those I love, and don’t call yourself old—forty is theprime of life. I couldn’t help loving you if you were seventy!”The Professor found that so touching that he would have been glad of hishandkerchief, if he could have got at it. As he couldn’t, Jo wiped hiseyes for him, and said, laughing, as she took away a bundle or two...“I may be strong-minded, but no one can say I’m out of my spherenow, for woman’s special mission is supposed to be drying tears andbearing burdens. I’m to carry my share, Friedrich, and help to earn thehome. Make up your mind to that, or I’ll never go,” she addedresolutely, as he tried to reclaim his load.“We shall see. Haf you patience to wait a long time, Jo? I must go awayand do my work alone. I must help my boys first, because, even for you, I maynot break my word to Minna. Can you forgif that, and be happy while we hope andwait?”“Yes, I know I can, for we love one another, and that makes all the resteasy to bear. I have my duty, also, and my work. I couldn’t enjoy myselfif I neglected them even for you, so there’s no need of hurry orimpatience. You can do your part out West, I can do mine here, and both behappy hoping for the best, and leaving the future to be as God wills.”“Ah! Thou gifest me such hope and courage, and I haf nothing to gif backbut a full heart and these empty hands,” cried the Professor, quiteovercome.Jo never, never would learn to be proper, for when he said that as they stoodupon the steps, she just put both hands into his, whispering tenderly,“Not empty now,” and stooping down, kissed her Friedrich under theumbrella. It was dreadful, but she would have done it if the flock ofdraggle-tailed sparrows on the hedge had been human beings, for she was veryfar gone indeed, and quite regardless of everything but her own happiness.Though it came in such a very simple guise, that was the crowning moment ofboth their lives, when, turning from the night and storm and loneliness to thehousehold light and warmth and peace waiting to receive them, with a glad“Welcome home!” Jo led her lover in, and shut the door.CHAPTER FORTY-SEVENHARVEST TIMEFor a year Jo and her Professor worked and waited, hoped and loved, metoccasionally, and wrote such voluminous letters that the rise in the price ofpaper was accounted for, Laurie said. The second year began rather soberly, fortheir prospects did not brighten, and Aunt March died suddenly. But when theirfirst sorrow was over—for they loved the old lady in spite of her sharptongue—they found they had cause for rejoicing, for she had leftPlumfield to Jo, which made all sorts of joyful things possible.“It’s a fine old place, and will bring a handsome sum, for ofcourse you intend to sell it,” said Laurie, as they were all talking thematter over some weeks later.“No, I don’t,” was Jo’s decided answer, as she pettedthe fat poodle, whom she had adopted, out of respect to his former mistress.“You don’t mean to live there?”“Yes, I do.”“But, my dear girl, it’s an immense house, and will take a power ofmoney to keep it in order. The garden and orchard alone need two or three men,and farming isn’t in Bhaer’s line, I take it.”“He’ll try his hand at it there, if I propose it.”“And you expect to live on the produce of the place? Well, that soundsparadisiacal, but you’ll find it desperate hard work.”“The crop we are going to raise is a profitable one,” and Jolaughed.“Of what is this fine crop to consist, ma’am?”“Boys. I want to open a school for little lads—a good, happy,homelike school, with me to take care of them and Fritz to teach them.”“That’s a truly Joian plan for you! Isn’t that just likeher?” cried Laurie, appealing to the family, who looked as much surprisedas he.“I like it,” said Mrs. March decidedly.“So do I,” added her husband, who welcomed the thought of a chancefor trying the Socratic method of education on modern youth.“It will be an immense care for Jo,” said Meg, stroking the head ofher one all-absorbing son.“Jo can do it, and be happy in it. It’s a splendid idea. Tell usall about it,” cried Mr. Laurence, who had been longing to lend thelovers a hand, but knew that they would refuse his help.“I knew you’d stand by me, sir. Amy does too—I see it in hereyes, though she prudently waits to turn it over in her mind before she speaks.Now, my dear people,” continued Jo earnestly, “just understand thatthis isn’t a new idea of mine, but a long cherished plan. Before my Fritzcame, I used to think how, when I’d made my fortune, and no one needed meat home, I’d hire a big house, and pick up some poor, forlorn little ladswho hadn’t any mothers, and take care of them, and make life jolly forthem before it was too late. I see so many going to ruin for want of help atthe right minute, I love so to do anything for them, I seem to feel theirwants, and sympathize with their troubles, and oh, I should so like to be amother to them!”Mrs. March held out her hand to Jo, who took it, smiling, with tears in hereyes, and went on in the old enthusiastic way, which they had not seen for along while.“I told my plan to Fritz once, and he said it was just what he wouldlike, and agreed to try it when we got rich. Bless his dear heart, he’sbeen doing it all his life—helping poor boys, I mean, not getting rich,that he’ll never be. Money doesn’t stay in his pocket long enoughto lay up any. But now, thanks to my good old aunt, who loved me better than Iever deserved, I’m rich, at least I feel so, and we can live at Plumfieldperfectly well, if we have a flourishing school. It’s just the place forboys, the house is big, and the furniture strong and plain. There’splenty of room for dozens inside, and splendid grounds outside. They could helpin the garden and orchard. Such work is healthy, isn’t it, sir? ThenFritz could train and teach in his own way, and Father will help him. I canfeed and nurse and pet and scold them, and Mother will be my stand-by.I’ve always longed for lots of boys, and never had enough, now I can fillthe house full and revel in the little dears to my heart’s content. Thinkwhat luxury— Plumfield my own, and a wilderness of boys to enjoy it withme.”As Jo waved her hands and gave a sigh of rapture, the family went off into agale of merriment, and Mr. Laurence laughed till they thought he’d havean apoplectic fit.“I don’t see anything funny,” she said gravely, when shecould be heard. “Nothing could be more natural and proper than for myProfessor to open a school, and for me to prefer to reside in my ownestate.”“She is putting on airs already,” said Laurie, who regarded theidea in the light of a capital joke. “But may I inquire how you intend tosupport the establishment? If all the pupils are little ragamuffins, I’mafraid your crop won’t be profitable in a worldly sense, Mrs.Bhaer.”“Now don’t be a wet-blanket, Teddy. Of course I shall have richpupils, also—perhaps begin with such altogether. Then, when I’vegot a start, I can take in a ragamuffin or two, just for a relish. Richpeople’s children often need care and comfort, as well as poor.I’ve seen unfortunate little creatures left to servants, or backward onespushed forward, when it’s real cruelty. Some are naughty throughmismanagment or neglect, and some lose their mothers. Besides, the best have toget through the hobbledehoy age, and that’s the very time they need mostpatience and kindness. People laugh at them, and hustle them about, try to keepthem out of sight, and expect them to turn all at once from pretty childreninto fine young men. They don’t complain much—plucky littlesouls—but they feel it. I’ve been through something of it, and Iknow all about it. I’ve a special interest in such young bears, and liketo show them that I see the warm, honest, well-meaning boys’ hearts, inspite of the clumsy arms and legs and the topsy-turvy heads. I’ve hadexperience, too, for haven’t I brought up one boy to be a pride and honorto his family?”“I’ll testify that you tried to do it,” said Laurie with agrateful look.“And I’ve succeeded beyond my hopes, for here you are, a steady,sensible businessman, doing heaps of good with your money, and laying up theblessings of the poor, instead of dollars. But you are not merely abusinessman, you love good and beautiful things, enjoy them yourself, and letothers go halves, as you always did in the old times. I am proud of you, Teddy,for you get better every year, and everyone feels it, though you won’tlet them say so. Yes, and when I have my flock, I’ll just point to you,and say ‘There’s your model, my lads’.”Poor Laurie didn’t know where to look, for, man though he was, somethingof the old bashfulness came over him as this burst of praise made all facesturn approvingly upon him.“I say, Jo, that’s rather too much,” he began, just in hisold boyish way. “You have all done more for me than I can ever thank youfor, except by doing my best not to disappoint you. You have rather cast me offlately, Jo, but I’ve had the best of help, nevertheless. So, ifI’ve got on at all, you may thank these two for it,” and he laidone hand gently on his grandfather’s head, and the other on Amy’sgolden one, for the three were never far apart.“I do think that families are the most beautiful things in all theworld!” burst out Jo, who was in an unusually up-lifted frame of mindjust then. “When I have one of my own, I hope it will be as happy as thethree I know and love the best. If John and my Fritz were only here, it wouldbe quite a little heaven on earth,” she added more quietly. And thatnight when she went to her room after a blissful evening of family counsels,hopes, and plans, her heart was so full of happiness that she could only calmit by kneeling beside the empty bed always near her own, and thinking tenderthoughts of Beth.It was a very astonishing year altogether, for things seemed to happen in anunusually rapid and delightful manner. Almost before she knew where she was, Jofound herself married and settled at Plumfield. Then a family of six or sevenboys sprung up like mushrooms, and flourished surprisingly, poor boys as wellas rich, for Mr. Laurence was continually finding some touching case ofdestitution, and begging the Bhaers to take pity on the child, and he wouldgladly pay a trifle for its support. In this way, the sly old gentleman gotround proud Jo, and furnished her with the style of boy in which she mostdelighted.Of course it was uphill work at first, and Jo made queer mistakes, but the wiseProfessor steered her safely into calmer waters, and the most rampantragamuffin was conquered in the end. How Jo did enjoy her ‘wilderness ofboys’, and how poor, dear Aunt March would have lamented had she beenthere to see the sacred precincts of prim, well-ordered Plumfield overrun withToms, Dicks, and Harrys! There was a sort of poetic justice about it, afterall, for the old lady had been the terror of the boys for miles around, and nowthe exiles feasted freely on forbidden plums, kicked up the gravel with profaneboots unreproved, and played cricket in the big field where the irritable‘cow with a crumpled horn’ used to invite rash youths to come andbe tossed. It became a sort of boys’ paradise, and Laurie suggested thatit should be called the ‘Bhaer-garten’, as a compliment to itsmaster and appropriate to its inhabitants.It never was a fashionable school, and the Professor did not lay up a fortune,but it was just what Jo intended it to be—‘a happy, homelike placefor boys, who needed teaching, care, and kindness’. Every room in the bighouse was soon full. Every little plot in the garden soon had its owner. Aregular menagerie appeared in barn and shed, for pet animals were allowed. Andthree times a day, Jo smiled at her Fritz from the head of a long table linedon either side with rows of happy young faces, which all turned to her withaffectionate eyes, confiding words, and grateful hearts, full of love for‘Mother Bhaer’. She had boys enough now, and did not tire of them,though they were not angels, by any means, and some of them caused bothProfessor and Professorin much trouble and anxiety. But her faith in the goodspot which exists in the heart of the naughtiest, sauciest, most tantalizinglittle ragamuffin gave her patience, skill, and in time success, for no mortalboy could hold out long with Father Bhaer shining on him as benevolently as thesun, and Mother Bhaer forgiving him seventy times seven. Very precious to Jowas the friendship of the lads, their penitent sniffs and whispers afterwrongdoing, their droll or touching little confidences, their pleasantenthusiasms, hopes, and plans, even their misfortunes, for they only endearedthem to her all the more. There were slow boys and bashful boys, feeble boysand riotous boys, boys that lisped and boys that stuttered, one or two lameones, and a merry little quadroon, who could not be taken in elsewhere, but whowas welcome to the ‘Bhaer-garten’, though some people predictedthat his admission would ruin the school.Yes, Jo was a very happy woman there, in spite of hard work, much anxiety, anda perpetual racket. She enjoyed it heartily and found the applause of her boysmore satisfying than any praise of the world, for now she told no storiesexcept to her flock of enthusiastic believers and admirers. As the years wenton, two little lads of her own came to increase her happiness—Rob, namedfor Grandpa, and Teddy, a happy-go-lucky baby, who seemed to have inherited hispapa’s sunshiny temper as well as his mother’s lively spirit. Howthey ever grew up alive in that whirlpool of boys was a mystery to theirgrandma and aunts, but they flourished like dandelions in spring, and theirrough nurses loved and served them well.There were a great many holidays at Plumfield, and one of the most delightfulwas the yearly apple-picking. For then the Marches, Laurences, Brookes andBhaers turned out in full force and made a day of it. Five years afterJo’s wedding, one of these fruitful festivals occurred, a mellow Octoberday, when the air was full of an exhilarating freshness which made the spiritsrise and the blood dance healthily in the veins. The old orchard wore itsholiday attire. Goldenrod and asters fringed the mossy walls. Grasshoppersskipped briskly in the sere grass, and crickets chirped like fairy pipers at afeast. Squirrels were busy with their small harvesting. Birds twittered theiradieux from the alders in the lane, and every tree stood ready to send down itsshower of red or yellow apples at the first shake. Everybody was there.Everybody laughed and sang, climbed up and tumbled down. Everybody declaredthat there never had been such a perfect day or such a jolly set to enjoy it,and everyone gave themselves up to the simple pleasures of the hour as freelyas if there were no such things as care or sorrow in the world.Mr. March strolled placidly about, quoting Tusser, Cowley, and Columella to Mr.Laurence, while enjoying...The gentle apple’s winey juice.The Professor charged up and down the green aisles like a stout Teutonicknight, with a pole for a lance, leading on the boys, who made a hook andladder company of themselves, and performed wonders in the way of ground andlofty tumbling. Laurie devoted himself to the little ones, rode his smalldaughter in a bushel-basket, took Daisy up among the bird’s nests, andkept adventurous Rob from breaking his neck. Mrs. March and Meg sat among theapple piles like a pair of Pomonas, sorting the contributions that kept pouringin, while Amy with a beautiful motherly expression in her face sketched thevarious groups, and watched over one pale lad, who sat adoring her with hislittle crutch beside him.Jo was in her element that day, and rushed about, with her gown pinned up, andher hat anywhere but on her head, and her baby tucked under her arm, ready forany lively adventure which might turn up. Little Teddy bore a charmed life, fornothing ever happened to him, and Jo never felt any anxiety when he was whiskedup into a tree by one lad, galloped off on the back of another, or suppliedwith sour russets by his indulgent papa, who labored under the Germanicdelusion that babies could digest anything, from pickled cabbage to buttons,nails, and their own small shoes. She knew that little Ted would turn up againin time, safe and rosy, dirty and serene, and she always received him back witha hearty welcome, for Jo loved her babies tenderly.At four o’clock a lull took place, and baskets remained empty, while theapple pickers rested and compared rents and bruises. Then Jo and Meg, with adetachment of the bigger boys, set forth the supper on the grass, for anout-of-door tea was always the crowning joy of the day. The land literallyflowed with milk and honey on such occasions, for the lads were not required tosit at table, but allowed to partake of refreshment as they liked—freedombeing the sauce best beloved by the boyish soul. They availed themselves of therare privilege to the fullest extent, for some tried the pleasing experiment ofdrinking milk while standing on their heads, others lent a charm to leapfrog byeating pie in the pauses of the game, cookies were sown broadcast over thefield, and apple turnovers roosted in the trees like a new style of bird. Thelittle girls had a private tea party, and Ted roved among the edibles at hisown sweet will.When no one could eat any more, the Professor proposed the first regular toast,which was always drunk at such times—“Aunt March, God blessher!” A toast heartily given by the good man, who never forgot how muchhe owed her, and quietly drunk by the boys, who had been taught to keep hermemory green.“Now, Grandma’s sixtieth birthday! Long life to her, with threetimes three!”That was given with a will, as you may well believe, and the cheering oncebegun, it was hard to stop it. Everybody’s health was proposed, from Mr.Laurence, who was considered their special patron, to the astonished guineapig, who had strayed from its proper sphere in search of its young master.Demi, as the oldest grandchild, then presented the queen of the day withvarious gifts, so numerous that they were transported to the festive scene in awheelbarrow. Funny presents, some of them, but what would have been defects toother eyes were ornaments to Grandma’s—for the children’sgifts were all their own. Every stitch Daisy’s patient little fingers hadput into the handkerchiefs she hemmed was better than embroidery to Mrs. March.Demi’s miracle of mechanical skill, though the cover wouldn’t shut,Rob’s footstool had a wiggle in its uneven legs that she declared wassoothing, and no page of the costly book Amy’s child gave her was so fairas that on which appeared in tipsy capitals, the words—“To dearGrandma, from her little Beth.”During the ceremony the boys had mysteriously disappeared, and when Mrs. Marchhad tried to thank her children, and broken down, while Teddy wiped her eyes onhis pinafore, the Professor suddenly began to sing. Then, from above him, voiceafter voice took up the words, and from tree to tree echoed the music of theunseen choir, as the boys sang with all their hearts the little song that Johad written, Laurie set to music, and the Professor trained his lads to givewith the best effect. This was something altogether new, and it proved a grandsuccess, for Mrs. March couldn’t get over her surprise, and insisted onshaking hands with every one of the featherless birds, from tall Franz and Emilto the little quadroon, who had the sweetest voice of all.After this, the boys dispersed for a final lark, leaving Mrs. March and herdaughters under the festival tree.“I don’t think I ever ought to call myself ‘unlucky Jo’again, when my greatest wish has been so beautifully gratified,” saidMrs. Bhaer, taking Teddy’s little fist out of the milk pitcher, in whichhe was rapturously churning.“And yet your life is very different from the one you pictured so longago. Do you remember our castles in the air?” asked Amy, smiling as shewatched Laurie and John playing cricket with the boys.“Dear fellows! It does my heart good to see them forget business andfrolic for a day,” answered Jo, who now spoke in a maternal way of allmankind. “Yes, I remember, but the life I wanted then seems selfish,lonely, and cold to me now. I haven’t given up the hope that I may writea good book yet, but I can wait, and I’m sure it will be all the betterfor such experiences and illustrations as these,” and Jo pointed from thelively lads in the distance to her father, leaning on the Professor’sarm, as they walked to and fro in the sunshine, deep in one of theconversations which both enjoyed so much, and then to her mother, sittingenthroned among her daughters, with their children in her lap and at her feet,as if all found help and happiness in the face which never could grow old tothem.“My castle was the most nearly realized of all. I asked for splendidthings, to be sure, but in my heart I knew I should be satisfied, if I had alittle home, and John, and some dear children like these. I’ve got themall, thank God, and am the happiest woman in the world,” and Meg laid herhand on her tall boy’s head, with a face full of tender and devoutcontent.“My castle is very different from what I planned, but I would not alterit, though, like Jo, I don’t relinquish all my artistic hopes, or confinemyself to helping others fulfill their dreams of beauty. I’ve begun tomodel a figure of baby, and Laurie says it is the best thing I’ve everdone. I think so, myself, and mean to do it in marble, so that, whateverhappens, I may at least keep the image of my little angel.”As Amy spoke, a great tear dropped on the golden hair of the sleeping child inher arms, for her one well-beloved daughter was a frail little creature and thedread of losing her was the shadow over Amy’s sunshine. This cross wasdoing much for both father and mother, for one love and sorrow bound themclosely together. Amy’s nature was growing sweeter, deeper, and moretender. Laurie was growing more serious, strong, and firm, and both werelearning that beauty, youth, good fortune, even love itself, cannot keep careand pain, loss and sorrow, from the most blessed for ...Into each life some rain must fall,Some days must be dark and sad and dreary.“She is growing better, I am sure of it, my dear. Don’t despond,but hope and keep happy,” said Mrs. March, as tenderhearted Daisy stoopedfrom her knee to lay her rosy cheek against her little cousin’s pale one.“I never ought to, while I have you to cheer me up, Marmee, and Laurie totake more than half of every burden,” replied Amy warmly. “He neverlets me see his anxiety, but is so sweet and patient with me, so devoted toBeth, and such a stay and comfort to me always that I can’t love himenough. So, in spite of my one cross, I can say with Meg, ‘Thank God,I’m a happy woman.’”“There’s no need for me to say it, for everyone can see thatI’m far happier than I deserve,” added Jo, glancing from her goodhusband to her chubby children, tumbling on the grass beside her. “Fritzis getting gray and stout. I’m growing as thin as a shadow, and amthirty. We never shall be rich, and Plumfield may burn up any night, for thatincorrigible Tommy Bangs will smoke sweet-fern cigars under the bed-clothes,though he’s set himself afire three times already. But in spite of theseunromantic facts, I have nothing to complain of, and never was so jolly in mylife. Excuse the remark, but living among boys, I can’t help using theirexpressions now and then.”“Yes, Jo, I think your harvest will be a good one,” began Mrs.March, frightening away a big black cricket that was staring Teddy out ofcountenance.“Not half so good as yours, Mother. Here it is, and we never can thankyou enough for the patient sowing and reaping you have done,” cried Jo,with the loving impetuosity which she never would outgrow.“I hope there will be more wheat and fewer tares every year,” saidAmy softly.“A large sheaf, but I know there’s room in your heart for it,Marmee dear,” added Meg’s tender voice.Touched to the heart, Mrs. March could only stretch out her arms, as if togather children and grandchildren to herself, and say, with face and voice fullof motherly love, gratitude, and humility...“Oh, my girls, however long you may live, I never can wish you a greaterhappiness than this!”*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE WOMEN ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.