START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW ***The Legend of Sleepy Hollowby Washington IrvingFOUND AMONG THE PAPERSOF THE LATE DIEDRICH KNICKERBOCKER.A pleasing land of drowsy head it was,    Of dreams that wave before the half-shut eye;And of gay castles in the clouds that pass,    Forever flushing round a summer sky.                    CASTLE OF INDOLENCE.In the bosom of one of those spacious coves which indent the eastern shore ofthe Hudson, at that broad expansion of the river denominated by the ancientDutch navigators the Tappan Zee, and where they always prudently shortened sailand implored the protection of St. Nicholas when they crossed, there lies asmall market town or rural port, which by some is called Greensburgh, but whichis more generally and properly known by the name of Tarry Town. This name wasgiven, we are told, in former days, by the good housewives of the adjacentcountry, from the inveterate propensity of their husbands to linger about thevillage tavern on market days. Be that as it may, I do not vouch for the fact,but merely advert to it, for the sake of being precise and authentic. Not farfrom this village, perhaps about two miles, there is a little valley or ratherlap of land among high hills, which is one of the quietest places in the wholeworld. A small brook glides through it, with just murmur enough to lull one torepose; and the occasional whistle of a quail or tapping of a woodpecker isalmost the only sound that ever breaks in upon the uniform tranquillity.I recollect that, when a stripling, my first exploit in squirrel-shooting wasin a grove of tall walnut-trees that shades one side of the valley. I hadwandered into it at noontime, when all nature is peculiarly quiet, and wasstartled by the roar of my own gun, as it broke the Sabbath stillness aroundand was prolonged and reverberated by the angry echoes. If ever I should wishfor a retreat whither I might steal from the world and its distractions, anddream quietly away the remnant of a troubled life, I know of none morepromising than this little valley.From the listless repose of the place, and the peculiar character of itsinhabitants, who are descendants from the original Dutch settlers, thissequestered glen has long been known by the name of SLEEPY HOLLOW, and itsrustic lads are called the Sleepy Hollow Boys throughout all the neighboringcountry. A drowsy, dreamy influence seems to hang over the land, and to pervadethe very atmosphere. Some say that the place was bewitched by a High Germandoctor, during the early days of the settlement; others, that an old Indianchief, the prophet or wizard of his tribe, held his powwows there before thecountry was discovered by Master Hendrick Hudson. Certain it is, the placestill continues under the sway of some witching power, that holds a spell overthe minds of the good people, causing them to walk in a continual reverie. Theyare given to all kinds of marvellous beliefs, are subject to trances andvisions, and frequently see strange sights, and hear music and voices in theair. The whole neighborhood abounds with local tales, haunted spots, andtwilight superstitions; stars shoot and meteors glare oftener across the valleythan in any other part of the country, and the nightmare, with her wholeninefold, seems to make it the favorite scene of her gambols.The dominant spirit, however, that haunts this enchanted region, and seems tobe commander-in-chief of all the powers of the air, is the apparition of afigure on horseback, without a head. It is said by some to be the ghost of aHessian trooper, whose head had been carried away by a cannon-ball, in somenameless battle during the Revolutionary War, and who is ever and anon seen bythe country folk hurrying along in the gloom of night, as if on the wings ofthe wind. His haunts are not confined to the valley, but extend at times to theadjacent roads, and especially to the vicinity of a church at no greatdistance. Indeed, certain of the most authentic historians of those parts, whohave been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerningthis spectre, allege that the body of the trooper having been buried in thechurchyard, the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly quest ofhis head, and that the rushing speed with which he sometimes passes along theHollow, like a midnight blast, is owing to his being belated, and in a hurry toget back to the churchyard before daybreak.Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition, which has furnishedmaterials for many a wild story in that region of shadows; and the spectre isknown at all the country firesides, by the name of the Headless Horseman ofSleepy Hollow.It is remarkable that the visionary propensity I have mentioned is not confinedto the native inhabitants of the valley, but is unconsciously imbibed by everyone who resides there for a time. However wide awake they may have been beforethey entered that sleepy region, they are sure, in a little time, to inhale thewitching influence of the air, and begin to grow imaginative, to dream dreams,and see apparitions.I mention this peaceful spot with all possible laud, for it is in such littleretired Dutch valleys, found here and there embosomed in the great State of NewYork, that population, manners, and customs remain fixed, while the greattorrent of migration and improvement, which is making such incessant changes inother parts of this restless country, sweeps by them unobserved. They are likethose little nooks of still water, which border a rapid stream, where we maysee the straw and bubble riding quietly at anchor, or slowly revolving in theirmimic harbor, undisturbed by the rush of the passing current. Though many yearshave elapsed since I trod the drowsy shades of Sleepy Hollow, yet I questionwhether I should not still find the same trees and the same families vegetatingin its sheltered bosom.In this by-place of nature there abode, in a remote period of American history,that is to say, some thirty years since, a worthy wight of the name of IchabodCrane, who sojourned, or, as he expressed it, “tarried,” in SleepyHollow, for the purpose of instructing the children of the vicinity. He was anative of Connecticut, a State which supplies the Union with pioneers for themind as well as for the forest, and sends forth yearly its legions of frontierwoodmen and country schoolmasters. The cognomen of Crane was not inapplicableto his person. He was tall, but exceedingly lank, with narrow shoulders, longarms and legs, hands that dangled a mile out of his sleeves, feet that mighthave served for shovels, and his whole frame most loosely hung together. Hishead was small, and flat at top, with huge ears, large green glassy eyes, and along snipe nose, so that it looked like a weather-cock perched upon his spindleneck to tell which way the wind blew. To see him striding along the profile ofa hill on a windy day, with his clothes bagging and fluttering about him, onemight have mistaken him for the genius of famine descending upon the earth, orsome scarecrow eloped from a cornfield.His schoolhouse was a low building of one large room, rudely constructed oflogs; the windows partly glazed, and partly patched with leaves of oldcopybooks. It was most ingeniously secured at vacant hours, by a withe twistedin the handle of the door, and stakes set against the window shutters; so thatthough a thief might get in with perfect ease, he would find some embarrassmentin getting out,—an idea most probably borrowed by the architect, Yost VanHouten, from the mystery of an eelpot. The schoolhouse stood in a rather lonelybut pleasant situation, just at the foot of a woody hill, with a brook runningclose by, and a formidable birch-tree growing at one end of it. From hence thelow murmur of his pupils’ voices, conning over their lessons, might beheard in a drowsy summer’s day, like the hum of a beehive; interruptednow and then by the authoritative voice of the master, in the tone of menace orcommand, or, peradventure, by the appalling sound of the birch, as he urgedsome tardy loiterer along the flowery path of knowledge. Truth to say, he was aconscientious man, and ever bore in mind the golden maxim, “Spare the rodand spoil the child.” Ichabod Crane’s scholars certainly were notspoiled.I would not have it imagined, however, that he was one of those cruelpotentates of the school who joy in the smart of their subjects; on thecontrary, he administered justice with discrimination rather than severity;taking the burden off the backs of the weak, and laying it on those of thestrong. Your mere puny stripling, that winced at the least flourish of the rod,was passed by with indulgence; but the claims of justice were satisfied byinflicting a double portion on some little tough wrong-headed, broad-skirtedDutch urchin, who sulked and swelled and grew dogged and sullen beneath thebirch. All this he called “doing his duty by their parents;” and henever inflicted a chastisement without following it by the assurance, soconsolatory to the smarting urchin, that “he would remember it and thankhim for it the longest day he had to live.”When school hours were over, he was even the companion and playmate of thelarger boys; and on holiday afternoons would convoy some of the smaller oneshome, who happened to have pretty sisters, or good housewives for mothers,noted for the comforts of the cupboard. Indeed, it behooved him to keep on goodterms with his pupils. The revenue arising from his school was small, and wouldhave been scarcely sufficient to furnish him with daily bread, for he was ahuge feeder, and, though lank, had the dilating powers of an anaconda; but tohelp out his maintenance, he was, according to country custom in those parts,boarded and lodged at the houses of the farmers whose children he instructed.With these he lived successively a week at a time, thus going the rounds of theneighborhood, with all his worldly effects tied up in a cotton handkerchief.That all this might not be too onerous on the purses of his rustic patrons, whoare apt to consider the costs of schooling a grievous burden, and schoolmastersas mere drones, he had various ways of rendering himself both useful andagreeable. He assisted the farmers occasionally in the lighter labors of theirfarms, helped to make hay, mended the fences, took the horses to water, drovethe cows from pasture, and cut wood for the winter fire. He laid aside, too,all the dominant dignity and absolute sway with which he lorded it in hislittle empire, the school, and became wonderfully gentle and ingratiating. Hefound favor in the eyes of the mothers by petting the children, particularlythe youngest; and like the lion bold, which whilom so magnanimously the lambdid hold, he would sit with a child on one knee, and rock a cradle with hisfoot for whole hours together.In addition to his other vocations, he was the singing-master of theneighborhood, and picked up many bright shillings by instructing the youngfolks in psalmody. It was a matter of no little vanity to him on Sundays, totake his station in front of the church gallery, with a band of chosen singers;where, in his own mind, he completely carried away the palm from the parson.Certain it is, his voice resounded far above all the rest of the congregation;and there are peculiar quavers still to be heard in that church, and which mayeven be heard half a mile off, quite to the opposite side of the millpond, on astill Sunday morning, which are said to be legitimately descended from the noseof Ichabod Crane. Thus, by divers little makeshifts, in that ingenious waywhich is commonly denominated “by hook and by crook,” the worthypedagogue got on tolerably enough, and was thought, by all who understoodnothing of the labor of headwork, to have a wonderfully easy life of it.The schoolmaster is generally a man of some importance in the female circle ofa rural neighborhood; being considered a kind of idle, gentlemanlike personage,of vastly superior taste and accomplishments to the rough country swains, and,indeed, inferior in learning only to the parson. His appearance, therefore, isapt to occasion some little stir at the tea-table of a farmhouse, and theaddition of a supernumerary dish of cakes or sweetmeats, or, peradventure, theparade of a silver teapot. Our man of letters, therefore, was peculiarly happyin the smiles of all the country damsels. How he would figure among them in thechurchyard, between services on Sundays; gathering grapes for them from thewild vines that overran the surrounding trees; reciting for their amusement allthe epitaphs on the tombstones; or sauntering, with a whole bevy of them, alongthe banks of the adjacent millpond; while the more bashful country bumpkinshung sheepishly back, envying his superior elegance and address.From his half-itinerant life, also, he was a kind of travelling gazette,carrying the whole budget of local gossip from house to house, so that hisappearance was always greeted with satisfaction. He was, moreover, esteemed bythe women as a man of great erudition, for he had read several books quitethrough, and was a perfect master of Cotton Mather’s “History ofNew England Witchcraft,” in which, by the way, he most firmly andpotently believed.He was, in fact, an odd mixture of small shrewdness and simple credulity. Hisappetite for the marvellous, and his powers of digesting it, were equallyextraordinary; and both had been increased by his residence in this spell-boundregion. No tale was too gross or monstrous for his capacious swallow. It wasoften his delight, after his school was dismissed in the afternoon, to stretchhimself on the rich bed of clover bordering the little brook that whimpered byhis schoolhouse, and there con over old Mather’s direful tales, until thegathering dusk of evening made the printed page a mere mist before his eyes.Then, as he wended his way by swamp and stream and awful woodland, to thefarmhouse where he happened to be quartered, every sound of nature, at thatwitching hour, fluttered his excited imagination,—the moan of thewhip-poor-will from the hillside, the boding cry of the tree toad, thatharbinger of storm, the dreary hooting of the screech owl, or the suddenrustling in the thicket of birds frightened from their roost. The fireflies,too, which sparkled most vividly in the darkest places, now and then startledhim, as one of uncommon brightness would stream across his path; and if, bychance, a huge blockhead of a beetle came winging his blundering flight againsthim, the poor varlet was ready to give up the ghost, with the idea that he wasstruck with a witch’s token. His only resource on such occasions, eitherto drown thought or drive away evil spirits, was to sing psalm tunes and thegood people of Sleepy Hollow, as they sat by their doors of an evening, wereoften filled with awe at hearing his nasal melody, “in linked sweetnesslong drawn out,” floating from the distant hill, or along the dusky road.Another of his sources of fearful pleasure was to pass long winter eveningswith the old Dutch wives, as they sat spinning by the fire, with a row ofapples roasting and spluttering along the hearth, and listen to theirmarvellous tales of ghosts and goblins, and haunted fields, and haunted brooks,and haunted bridges, and haunted houses, and particularly of the headlesshorseman, or Galloping Hessian of the Hollow, as they sometimes called him. Hewould delight them equally by his anecdotes of witchcraft, and of the direfulomens and portentous sights and sounds in the air, which prevailed in theearlier times of Connecticut; and would frighten them woefully withspeculations upon comets and shooting stars; and with the alarming fact thatthe world did absolutely turn round, and that they were half the timetopsy-turvy!But if there was a pleasure in all this, while snugly cuddling in the chimneycorner of a chamber that was all of a ruddy glow from the crackling wood fire,and where, of course, no spectre dared to show its face, it was dearlypurchased by the terrors of his subsequent walk homewards. What fearful shapesand shadows beset his path, amidst the dim and ghastly glare of a snowy night!With what wistful look did he eye every trembling ray of light streaming acrossthe waste fields from some distant window! How often was he appalled by someshrub covered with snow, which, like a sheeted spectre, beset his very path!How often did he shrink with curdling awe at the sound of his own steps on thefrosty crust beneath his feet; and dread to look over his shoulder, lest heshould behold some uncouth being tramping close behind him! And how often washe thrown into complete dismay by some rushing blast, howling among the trees,in the idea that it was the Galloping Hessian on one of his nightly scourings!All these, however, were mere terrors of the night, phantoms of the mind thatwalk in darkness; and though he had seen many spectres in his time, and beenmore than once beset by Satan in divers shapes, in his lonely perambulations,yet daylight put an end to all these evils; and he would have passed a pleasantlife of it, in despite of the Devil and all his works, if his path had not beencrossed by a being that causes more perplexity to mortal man than ghosts,goblins, and the whole race of witches put together, and that was—awoman.Among the musical disciples who assembled, one evening in each week, to receivehis instructions in psalmody, was Katrina Van Tassel, the daughter and onlychild of a substantial Dutch farmer. She was a blooming lass of fresh eighteen;plump as a partridge; ripe and melting and rosy-cheeked as one of herfather’s peaches, and universally famed, not merely for her beauty, buther vast expectations. She was withal a little of a coquette, as might beperceived even in her dress, which was a mixture of ancient and modernfashions, as most suited to set off her charms. She wore the ornaments of pureyellow gold, which her great-great-grandmother had brought over from Saardam;the tempting stomacher of the olden time, and withal a provokingly shortpetticoat, to display the prettiest foot and ankle in the country round.Ichabod Crane had a soft and foolish heart towards the sex; and it is not to bewondered at that so tempting a morsel soon found favor in his eyes, moreespecially after he had visited her in her paternal mansion. Old Baltus VanTassel was a perfect picture of a thriving, contented, liberal-hearted farmer.He seldom, it is true, sent either his eyes or his thoughts beyond theboundaries of his own farm; but within those everything was snug, happy andwell-conditioned. He was satisfied with his wealth, but not proud of it; andpiqued himself upon the hearty abundance, rather than the style in which helived. His stronghold was situated on the banks of the Hudson, in one of thosegreen, sheltered, fertile nooks in which the Dutch farmers are so fond ofnestling. A great elm tree spread its broad branches over it, at the foot ofwhich bubbled up a spring of the softest and sweetest water, in a little wellformed of a barrel; and then stole sparkling away through the grass, to aneighboring brook, that babbled along among alders and dwarf willows. Hard bythe farmhouse was a vast barn, that might have served for a church; everywindow and crevice of which seemed bursting forth with the treasures of thefarm; the flail was busily resounding within it from morning to night; swallowsand martins skimmed twittering about the eaves; and rows of pigeons, some withone eye turned up, as if watching the weather, some with their heads undertheir wings or buried in their bosoms, and others swelling, and cooing, andbowing about their dames, were enjoying the sunshine on the roof. Sleekunwieldy porkers were grunting in the repose and abundance of their pens, fromwhence sallied forth, now and then, troops of sucking pigs, as if to snuff theair. A stately squadron of snowy geese were riding in an adjoining pond,convoying whole fleets of ducks; regiments of turkeys were gobbling through thefarmyard, and Guinea fowls fretting about it, like ill-tempered housewives,with their peevish, discontented cry. Before the barn door strutted the gallantcock, that pattern of a husband, a warrior and a fine gentleman, clapping hisburnished wings and crowing in the pride and gladness of hisheart,—sometimes tearing up the earth with his feet, and then generouslycalling his ever-hungry family of wives and children to enjoy the rich morselwhich he had discovered.The pedagogue’s mouth watered as he looked upon this sumptuous promise ofluxurious winter fare. In his devouring mind’s eye, he pictured tohimself every roasting-pig running about with a pudding in his belly, and anapple in his mouth; the pigeons were snugly put to bed in a comfortable pie,and tucked in with a coverlet of crust; the geese were swimming in their owngravy; and the ducks pairing cosily in dishes, like snug married couples, witha decent competency of onion sauce. In the porkers he saw carved out the futuresleek side of bacon, and juicy relishing ham; not a turkey but he behelddaintily trussed up, with its gizzard under its wing, and, peradventure, anecklace of savory sausages; and even bright chanticleer himself lay sprawlingon his back, in a side dish, with uplifted claws, as if craving that quarterwhich his chivalrous spirit disdained to ask while living.As the enraptured Ichabod fancied all this, and as he rolled his great greeneyes over the fat meadow lands, the rich fields of wheat, of rye, of buckwheat,and Indian corn, and the orchards burdened with ruddy fruit, which surroundedthe warm tenement of Van Tassel, his heart yearned after the damsel who was toinherit these domains, and his imagination expanded with the idea, how theymight be readily turned into cash, and the money invested in immense tracts ofwild land, and shingle palaces in the wilderness. Nay, his busy fancy alreadyrealized his hopes, and presented to him the blooming Katrina, with a wholefamily of children, mounted on the top of a wagon loaded with householdtrumpery, with pots and kettles dangling beneath; and he beheld himselfbestriding a pacing mare, with a colt at her heels, setting out for Kentucky,Tennessee,—or the Lord knows where!When he entered the house, the conquest of his heart was complete. It was oneof those spacious farmhouses, with high-ridged but lowly sloping roofs, builtin the style handed down from the first Dutch settlers; the low projectingeaves forming a piazza along the front, capable of being closed up in badweather. Under this were hung flails, harness, various utensils of husbandry,and nets for fishing in the neighboring river. Benches were built along thesides for summer use; and a great spinning-wheel at one end, and a churn at theother, showed the various uses to which this important porch might be devoted.From this piazza the wondering Ichabod entered the hall, which formed thecentre of the mansion, and the place of usual residence. Here rows ofresplendent pewter, ranged on a long dresser, dazzled his eyes. In one cornerstood a huge bag of wool, ready to be spun; in another, a quantity oflinsey-woolsey just from the loom; ears of Indian corn, and strings of driedapples and peaches, hung in gay festoons along the walls, mingled with the gaudof red peppers; and a door left ajar gave him a peep into the best parlor,where the claw-footed chairs and dark mahogany tables shone like mirrors;andirons, with their accompanying shovel and tongs, glistened from their covertof asparagus tops; mock-oranges and conch-shells decorated the mantelpiece;strings of various-colored birds eggs were suspended above it; a great ostrichegg was hung from the centre of the room, and a corner cupboard, knowingly leftopen, displayed immense treasures of old silver and well-mended china.From the moment Ichabod laid his eyes upon these regions of delight, the peaceof his mind was at an end, and his only study was how to gain the affections ofthe peerless daughter of Van Tassel. In this enterprise, however, he had morereal difficulties than generally fell to the lot of a knight-errant of yore,who seldom had anything but giants, enchanters, fiery dragons, and such likeeasily conquered adversaries, to contend with and had to make his way merelythrough gates of iron and brass, and walls of adamant to the castle keep, wherethe lady of his heart was confined; all which he achieved as easily as a manwould carve his way to the centre of a Christmas pie; and then the lady gavehim her hand as a matter of course. Ichabod, on the contrary, had to win hisway to the heart of a country coquette, beset with a labyrinth of whims andcaprices, which were forever presenting new difficulties and impediments; andhe had to encounter a host of fearful adversaries of real flesh and blood, thenumerous rustic admirers, who beset every portal to her heart, keeping awatchful and angry eye upon each other, but ready to fly out in the commoncause against any new competitor.Among these, the most formidable was a burly, roaring, roystering blade, of thename of Abraham, or, according to the Dutch abbreviation, Brom Van Brunt, thehero of the country round, which rang with his feats of strength and hardihood.He was broad-shouldered and double-jointed, with short curly black hair, and abluff but not unpleasant countenance, having a mingled air of fun andarrogance. From his Herculean frame and great powers of limb he had receivedthe nickname of BROM BONES, by which he was universally known. He was famed forgreat knowledge and skill in horsemanship, being as dexterous on horseback as aTartar. He was foremost at all races and cock fights; and, with the ascendancywhich bodily strength always acquires in rustic life, was the umpire in alldisputes, setting his hat on one side, and giving his decisions with an air andtone that admitted of no gainsay or appeal. He was always ready for either afight or a frolic; but had more mischief than ill-will in his composition; andwith all his overbearing roughness, there was a strong dash of waggish goodhumor at bottom. He had three or four boon companions, who regarded him astheir model, and at the head of whom he scoured the country, attending everyscene of feud or merriment for miles round. In cold weather he wasdistinguished by a fur cap, surmounted with a flaunting fox’s tail; andwhen the folks at a country gathering descried this well-known crest at adistance, whisking about among a squad of hard riders, they always stood by fora squall. Sometimes his crew would be heard dashing along past the farmhousesat midnight, with whoop and halloo, like a troop of Don Cossacks; and the olddames, startled out of their sleep, would listen for a moment till thehurry-scurry had clattered by, and then exclaim, “Ay, there goes BromBones and his gang!” The neighbors looked upon him with a mixture of awe,admiration, and good-will; and, when any madcap prank or rustic brawl occurredin the vicinity, always shook their heads, and warranted Brom Bones was at thebottom of it.This rantipole hero had for some time singled out the blooming Katrina for theobject of his uncouth gallantries, and though his amorous toyings weresomething like the gentle caresses and endearments of a bear, yet it waswhispered that she did not altogether discourage his hopes. Certain it is, hisadvances were signals for rival candidates to retire, who felt no inclinationto cross a lion in his amours; insomuch, that when his horse was seen tied toVan Tassel’s paling, on a Sunday night, a sure sign that his master wascourting, or, as it is termed, “sparking,” within, all othersuitors passed by in despair, and carried the war into other quarters.Such was the formidable rival with whom Ichabod Crane had to contend, and,considering all things, a stouter man than he would have shrunk from thecompetition, and a wiser man would have despaired. He had, however, a happymixture of pliability and perseverance in his nature; he was in form and spiritlike a supple-jack—yielding, but tough; though he bent, he never broke;and though he bowed beneath the slightest pressure, yet, the moment it wasaway—jerk!—he was as erect, and carried his head as high as ever.To have taken the field openly against his rival would have been madness; forhe was not a man to be thwarted in his amours, any more than that stormy lover,Achilles. Ichabod, therefore, made his advances in a quiet and gentlyinsinuating manner. Under cover of his character of singing-master, he madefrequent visits at the farmhouse; not that he had anything to apprehend fromthe meddlesome interference of parents, which is so often a stumbling-block inthe path of lovers. Balt Van Tassel was an easy indulgent soul; he loved hisdaughter better even than his pipe, and, like a reasonable man and an excellentfather, let her have her way in everything. His notable little wife, too, hadenough to do to attend to her housekeeping and manage her poultry; for, as shesagely observed, ducks and geese are foolish things, and must be looked after,but girls can take care of themselves. Thus, while the busy dame bustled aboutthe house, or plied her spinning-wheel at one end of the piazza, honest Baltwould sit smoking his evening pipe at the other, watching the achievements of alittle wooden warrior, who, armed with a sword in each hand, was most valiantlyfighting the wind on the pinnacle of the barn. In the mean time, Ichabod wouldcarry on his suit with the daughter by the side of the spring under the greatelm, or sauntering along in the twilight, that hour so favorable to thelover’s eloquence.I profess not to know how women’s hearts are wooed and won. To me theyhave always been matters of riddle and admiration. Some seem to have but onevulnerable point, or door of access; while others have a thousand avenues, andmay be captured in a thousand different ways. It is a great triumph of skill togain the former, but a still greater proof of generalship to maintainpossession of the latter, for man must battle for his fortress at every doorand window. He who wins a thousand common hearts is therefore entitled to somerenown; but he who keeps undisputed sway over the heart of a coquette is indeeda hero. Certain it is, this was not the case with the redoubtable Brom Bones;and from the moment Ichabod Crane made his advances, the interests of theformer evidently declined: his horse was no longer seen tied to the palings onSunday nights, and a deadly feud gradually arose between him and the preceptorof Sleepy Hollow.Brom, who had a degree of rough chivalry in his nature, would fain have carriedmatters to open warfare and have settled their pretensions to the lady,according to the mode of those most concise and simple reasoners, theknights-errant of yore,—by single combat; but Ichabod was too consciousof the superior might of his adversary to enter the lists against him; he hadoverheard a boast of Bones, that he would “double the schoolmaster up,and lay him on a shelf of his own schoolhouse;” and he was too wary togive him an opportunity. There was something extremely provoking in thisobstinately pacific system; it left Brom no alternative but to draw upon thefunds of rustic waggery in his disposition, and to play off boorish practicaljokes upon his rival. Ichabod became the object of whimsical persecution toBones and his gang of rough riders. They harried his hitherto peaceful domains;smoked out his singing school by stopping up the chimney; broke into theschoolhouse at night, in spite of its formidable fastenings of withe and windowstakes, and turned everything topsy-turvy, so that the poor schoolmaster beganto think all the witches in the country held their meetings there. But what wasstill more annoying, Brom took all opportunities of turning him into ridiculein presence of his mistress, and had a scoundrel dog whom he taught to whine inthe most ludicrous manner, and introduced as a rival of Ichabod’s, toinstruct her in psalmody.In this way matters went on for some time, without producing any materialeffect on the relative situations of the contending powers. On a fine autumnalafternoon, Ichabod, in pensive mood, sat enthroned on the lofty stool fromwhence he usually watched all the concerns of his little literary realm. In hishand he swayed a ferule, that sceptre of despotic power; the birch of justicereposed on three nails behind the throne, a constant terror to evil doers,while on the desk before him might be seen sundry contraband articles andprohibited weapons, detected upon the persons of idle urchins, such ashalf-munched apples, popguns, whirligigs, fly-cages, and whole legions oframpant little paper gamecocks. Apparently there had been some appalling act ofjustice recently inflicted, for his scholars were all busily intent upon theirbooks, or slyly whispering behind them with one eye kept upon the master; and akind of buzzing stillness reigned throughout the schoolroom. It was suddenlyinterrupted by the appearance of a negro in tow-cloth jacket and trowsers, around-crowned fragment of a hat, like the cap of Mercury, and mounted on theback of a ragged, wild, half-broken colt, which he managed with a rope by wayof halter. He came clattering up to the school door with an invitation toIchabod to attend a merry-making or “quilting frolic,” to be heldthat evening at Mynheer Van Tassel’s; and having delivered his messagewith that air of importance, and effort at fine language, which a negro is aptto display on petty embassies of the kind, he dashed over the brook, and wasseen scampering away up the hollow, full of the importance and hurry of hismission.All was now bustle and hubbub in the late quiet schoolroom. The scholars werehurried through their lessons without stopping at trifles; those who werenimble skipped over half with impunity, and those who were tardy had a smartapplication now and then in the rear, to quicken their speed or help them overa tall word. Books were flung aside without being put away on the shelves,inkstands were overturned, benches thrown down, and the whole school was turnedloose an hour before the usual time, bursting forth like a legion of youngimps, yelping and racketing about the green in joy at their early emancipation.The gallant Ichabod now spent at least an extra half hour at his toilet,brushing and furbishing up his best, and indeed only suit of rusty black, andarranging his locks by a bit of broken looking-glass that hung up in theschoolhouse. That he might make his appearance before his mistress in the truestyle of a cavalier, he borrowed a horse from the farmer with whom he wasdomiciliated, a choleric old Dutchman of the name of Hans Van Ripper, and, thusgallantly mounted, issued forth like a knight-errant in quest of adventures.But it is meet I should, in the true spirit of romantic story, give someaccount of the looks and equipments of my hero and his steed. The animal hebestrode was a broken-down plow-horse, that had outlived almost everything butits viciousness. He was gaunt and shagged, with a ewe neck, and a head like ahammer; his rusty mane and tail were tangled and knotted with burs; one eye hadlost its pupil, and was glaring and spectral, but the other had the gleam of agenuine devil in it. Still he must have had fire and mettle in his day, if wemay judge from the name he bore of Gunpowder. He had, in fact, been a favoritesteed of his master’s, the choleric Van Ripper, who was a furious rider,and had infused, very probably, some of his own spirit into the animal; for,old and broken-down as he looked, there was more of the lurking devil in himthan in any young filly in the country.Ichabod was a suitable figure for such a steed. He rode with short stirrups,which brought his knees nearly up to the pommel of the saddle; his sharp elbowsstuck out like grasshoppers’; he carried his whip perpendicularly in hishand, like a sceptre, and as his horse jogged on, the motion of his arms wasnot unlike the flapping of a pair of wings. A small wool hat rested on the topof his nose, for so his scanty strip of forehead might be called, and theskirts of his black coat fluttered out almost to the horses tail. Such was theappearance of Ichabod and his steed as they shambled out of the gate of HansVan Ripper, and it was altogether such an apparition as is seldom to be metwith in broad daylight.It was, as I have said, a fine autumnal day; the sky was clear and serene, andnature wore that rich and golden livery which we always associate with the ideaof abundance. The forests had put on their sober brown and yellow, while sometrees of the tenderer kind had been nipped by the frosts into brilliant dyes oforange, purple, and scarlet. Streaming files of wild ducks began to make theirappearance high in the air; the bark of the squirrel might be heard from thegroves of beech and hickory-nuts, and the pensive whistle of the quail atintervals from the neighboring stubble field.The small birds were taking their farewell banquets. In the fullness of theirrevelry, they fluttered, chirping and frolicking from bush to bush, and tree totree, capricious from the very profusion and variety around them. There was thehonest cock robin, the favorite game of stripling sportsmen, with its loudquerulous note; and the twittering blackbirds flying in sable clouds; and thegolden-winged woodpecker with his crimson crest, his broad black gorget, andsplendid plumage; and the cedar bird, with its red-tipt wings and yellow-tipttail and its little monteiro cap of feathers; and the blue jay, that noisycoxcomb, in his gay light blue coat and white underclothes, screaming andchattering, nodding and bobbing and bowing, and pretending to be on good termswith every songster of the grove.As Ichabod jogged slowly on his way, his eye, ever open to every symptom ofculinary abundance, ranged with delight over the treasures of jolly autumn. Onall sides he beheld vast store of apples; some hanging in oppressive opulenceon the trees; some gathered into baskets and barrels for the market; othersheaped up in rich piles for the cider-press. Farther on he beheld great fieldsof Indian corn, with its golden ears peeping from their leafy coverts, andholding out the promise of cakes and hasty-pudding; and the yellow pumpkinslying beneath them, turning up their fair round bellies to the sun, and givingample prospects of the most luxurious of pies; and anon he passed the fragrantbuckwheat fields breathing the odor of the beehive, and as he beheld them, softanticipations stole over his mind of dainty slapjacks, well buttered, andgarnished with honey or treacle, by the delicate little dimpled hand of KatrinaVan Tassel.Thus feeding his mind with many sweet thoughts and “sugaredsuppositions,” he journeyed along the sides of a range of hills whichlook out upon some of the goodliest scenes of the mighty Hudson. The sungradually wheeled his broad disk down in the west. The wide bosom of the TappanZee lay motionless and glassy, excepting that here and there a gentleundulation waved and prolonged the blue shadow of the distant mountain. A fewamber clouds floated in the sky, without a breath of air to move them. Thehorizon was of a fine golden tint, changing gradually into a pure apple green,and from that into the deep blue of the mid-heaven. A slanting ray lingered onthe woody crests of the precipices that overhung some parts of the river,giving greater depth to the dark gray and purple of their rocky sides. A sloopwas loitering in the distance, dropping slowly down with the tide, her sailhanging uselessly against the mast; and as the reflection of the sky gleamedalong the still water, it seemed as if the vessel was suspended in the air.It was toward evening that Ichabod arrived at the castle of the Heer VanTassel, which he found thronged with the pride and flower of the adjacentcountry. Old farmers, a spare leathern-faced race, in homespun coats andbreeches, blue stockings, huge shoes, and magnificent pewter buckles. Theirbrisk, withered little dames, in close-crimped caps, long-waisted short gowns,homespun petticoats, with scissors and pincushions, and gay calico pocketshanging on the outside. Buxom lasses, almost as antiquated as their mothers,excepting where a straw hat, a fine ribbon, or perhaps a white frock, gavesymptoms of city innovation. The sons, in short square-skirted coats, with rowsof stupendous brass buttons, and their hair generally queued in the fashion ofthe times, especially if they could procure an eel-skin for the purpose, itbeing esteemed throughout the country as a potent nourisher and strengthener ofthe hair.Brom Bones, however, was the hero of the scene, having come to the gathering onhis favorite steed Daredevil, a creature, like himself, full of mettle andmischief, and which no one but himself could manage. He was, in fact, noted forpreferring vicious animals, given to all kinds of tricks which kept the riderin constant risk of his neck, for he held a tractable, well-broken horse asunworthy of a lad of spirit.Fain would I pause to dwell upon the world of charms that burst upon theenraptured gaze of my hero, as he entered the state parlor of VanTassel’s mansion. Not those of the bevy of buxom lasses, with theirluxurious display of red and white; but the ample charms of a genuine Dutchcountry tea-table, in the sumptuous time of autumn. Such heaped up platters ofcakes of various and almost indescribable kinds, known only to experiencedDutch housewives! There was the doughty doughnut, the tender oly koek, and thecrisp and crumbling cruller; sweet cakes and short cakes, ginger cakes andhoney cakes, and the whole family of cakes. And then there were apple pies, andpeach pies, and pumpkin pies; besides slices of ham and smoked beef; andmoreover delectable dishes of preserved plums, and peaches, and pears, andquinces; not to mention broiled shad and roasted chickens; together with bowlsof milk and cream, all mingled higgledy-piggledy, pretty much as I haveenumerated them, with the motherly teapot sending up its clouds of vapor fromthe midst—Heaven bless the mark! I want breath and time to discuss thisbanquet as it deserves, and am too eager to get on with my story. Happily,Ichabod Crane was not in so great a hurry as his historian, but did amplejustice to every dainty.He was a kind and thankful creature, whose heart dilated in proportion as hisskin was filled with good cheer, and whose spirits rose with eating, as somemen’s do with drink. He could not help, too, rolling his large eyes roundhim as he ate, and chuckling with the possibility that he might one day be lordof all this scene of almost unimaginable luxury and splendor. Then, he thought,how soon he’d turn his back upon the old schoolhouse; snap his fingers inthe face of Hans Van Ripper, and every other niggardly patron, and kick anyitinerant pedagogue out of doors that should dare to call him comrade!Old Baltus Van Tassel moved about among his guests with a face dilated withcontent and good humor, round and jolly as the harvest moon. His hospitableattentions were brief, but expressive, being confined to a shake of the hand, aslap on the shoulder, a loud laugh, and a pressing invitation to “fallto, and help themselves.”And now the sound of the music from the common room, or hall, summoned to thedance. The musician was an old gray-headed negro, who had been the itinerantorchestra of the neighborhood for more than half a century. His instrument wasas old and battered as himself. The greater part of the time he scraped on twoor three strings, accompanying every movement of the bow with a motion of thehead; bowing almost to the ground, and stamping with his foot whenever a freshcouple were to start.Ichabod prided himself upon his dancing as much as upon his vocal powers. Not alimb, not a fibre about him was idle; and to have seen his loosely hung framein full motion, and clattering about the room, you would have thought St. Vitushimself, that blessed patron of the dance, was figuring before you in person.He was the admiration of all the negroes; who, having gathered, of all ages andsizes, from the farm and the neighborhood, stood forming a pyramid of shiningblack faces at every door and window, gazing with delight at the scene, rollingtheir white eyeballs, and showing grinning rows of ivory from ear to ear. Howcould the flogger of urchins be otherwise than animated and joyous? The lady ofhis heart was his partner in the dance, and smiling graciously in reply to allhis amorous oglings; while Brom Bones, sorely smitten with love and jealousy,sat brooding by himself in one corner.When the dance was at an end, Ichabod was attracted to a knot of the sagerfolks, who, with Old Van Tassel, sat smoking at one end of the piazza,gossiping over former times, and drawing out long stories about the war.This neighborhood, at the time of which I am speaking, was one of those highlyfavored places which abound with chronicle and great men. The British andAmerican line had run near it during the war; it had, therefore, been the sceneof marauding and infested with refugees, cowboys, and all kinds of borderchivalry. Just sufficient time had elapsed to enable each storyteller to dressup his tale with a little becoming fiction, and, in the indistinctness of hisrecollection, to make himself the hero of every exploit.There was the story of Doffue Martling, a large blue-bearded Dutchman, who hadnearly taken a British frigate with an old iron nine-pounder from a mudbreastwork, only that his gun burst at the sixth discharge. And there was anold gentleman who shall be nameless, being too rich a mynheer to be lightlymentioned, who, in the battle of White Plains, being an excellent master ofdefence, parried a musket-ball with a small sword, insomuch that he absolutelyfelt it whiz round the blade, and glance off at the hilt; in proof of which hewas ready at any time to show the sword, with the hilt a little bent. Therewere several more that had been equally great in the field, not one of whom butwas persuaded that he had a considerable hand in bringing the war to a happytermination.But all these were nothing to the tales of ghosts and apparitions thatsucceeded. The neighborhood is rich in legendary treasures of the kind. Localtales and superstitions thrive best in these sheltered, long-settled retreats;but are trampled under foot by the shifting throng that forms the population ofmost of our country places. Besides, there is no encouragement for ghosts inmost of our villages, for they have scarcely had time to finish their first napand turn themselves in their graves, before their surviving friends havetravelled away from the neighborhood; so that when they turn out at night towalk their rounds, they have no acquaintance left to call upon. This is perhapsthe reason why we so seldom hear of ghosts except in our long-established Dutchcommunities.The immediate cause, however, of the prevalence of supernatural stories inthese parts, was doubtless owing to the vicinity of Sleepy Hollow. There was acontagion in the very air that blew from that haunted region; it breathed forthan atmosphere of dreams and fancies infecting all the land. Several of theSleepy Hollow people were present at Van Tassel’s, and, as usual, weredoling out their wild and wonderful legends. Many dismal tales were told aboutfuneral trains, and mourning cries and wailings heard and seen about the greattree where the unfortunate Major André was taken, and which stood in theneighborhood. Some mention was made also of the woman in white, that hauntedthe dark glen at Raven Rock, and was often heard to shriek on winter nightsbefore a storm, having perished there in the snow. The chief part of thestories, however, turned upon the favorite spectre of Sleepy Hollow, theHeadless Horseman, who had been heard several times of late, patrolling thecountry; and, it was said, tethered his horse nightly among the graves in thechurchyard.The sequestered situation of this church seems always to have made it afavorite haunt of troubled spirits. It stands on a knoll, surrounded bylocust-trees and lofty elms, from among which its decent, whitewashed wallsshine modestly forth, like Christian purity beaming through the shades ofretirement. A gentle slope descends from it to a silver sheet of water,bordered by high trees, between which, peeps may be caught at the blue hills ofthe Hudson. To look upon its grass-grown yard, where the sunbeams seem to sleepso quietly, one would think that there at least the dead might rest in peace.On one side of the church extends a wide woody dell, along which raves a largebrook among broken rocks and trunks of fallen trees. Over a deep black part ofthe stream, not far from the church, was formerly thrown a wooden bridge; theroad that led to it, and the bridge itself, were thickly shaded by overhangingtrees, which cast a gloom about it, even in the daytime; but occasioned afearful darkness at night. Such was one of the favorite haunts of the HeadlessHorseman, and the place where he was most frequently encountered. The tale wastold of old Brouwer, a most heretical disbeliever in ghosts, how he met theHorseman returning from his foray into Sleepy Hollow, and was obliged to get upbehind him; how they galloped over bush and brake, over hill and swamp, untilthey reached the bridge; when the Horseman suddenly turned into a skeleton,threw old Brouwer into the brook, and sprang away over the tree-tops with aclap of thunder.This story was immediately matched by a thrice marvellous adventure of BromBones, who made light of the Galloping Hessian as an arrant jockey. He affirmedthat on returning one night from the neighboring village of Sing Sing, he hadbeen overtaken by this midnight trooper; that he had offered to race with himfor a bowl of punch, and should have won it too, for Daredevil beat the goblinhorse all hollow, but just as they came to the church bridge, the Hessianbolted, and vanished in a flash of fire.All these tales, told in that drowsy undertone with which men talk in the dark,the countenances of the listeners only now and then receiving a casual gleamfrom the glare of a pipe, sank deep in the mind of Ichabod. He repaid them inkind with large extracts from his invaluable author, Cotton Mather, and addedmany marvellous events that had taken place in his native State of Connecticut,and fearful sights which he had seen in his nightly walks about Sleepy Hollow.The revel now gradually broke up. The old farmers gathered together theirfamilies in their wagons, and were heard for some time rattling along thehollow roads, and over the distant hills. Some of the damsels mounted onpillions behind their favorite swains, and their light-hearted laughter,mingling with the clatter of hoofs, echoed along the silent woodlands, soundingfainter and fainter, until they gradually died away,—and the late sceneof noise and frolic was all silent and deserted. Ichabod only lingered behind,according to the custom of country lovers, to have a tête-à-tête with theheiress; fully convinced that he was now on the high road to success. Whatpassed at this interview I will not pretend to say, for in fact I do not know.Something, however, I fear me, must have gone wrong, for he certainly salliedforth, after no very great interval, with an air quite desolate and chapfallen.Oh, these women! these women! Could that girl have been playing off any of hercoquettish tricks? Was her encouragement of the poor pedagogue all a mere shamto secure her conquest of his rival? Heaven only knows, not I! Let it sufficeto say, Ichabod stole forth with the air of one who had been sacking ahenroost, rather than a fair lady’s heart. Without looking to the rightor left to notice the scene of rural wealth, on which he had so often gloated,he went straight to the stable, and with several hearty cuffs and kicks rousedhis steed most uncourteously from the comfortable quarters in which he wassoundly sleeping, dreaming of mountains of corn and oats, and whole valleys oftimothy and clover.It was the very witching time of night that Ichabod, heavy-hearted andcrestfallen, pursued his travels homewards, along the sides of the lofty hillswhich rise above Tarry Town, and which he had traversed so cheerily in theafternoon. The hour was as dismal as himself. Far below him the Tappan Zeespread its dusky and indistinct waste of waters, with here and there the tallmast of a sloop, riding quietly at anchor under the land. In the dead hush ofmidnight, he could even hear the barking of the watchdog from the oppositeshore of the Hudson; but it was so vague and faint as only to give an idea ofhis distance from this faithful companion of man. Now and then, too, thelong-drawn crowing of a cock, accidentally awakened, would sound far, far off,from some farmhouse away among the hills—but it was like a dreaming soundin his ear. No signs of life occurred near him, but occasionally the melancholychirp of a cricket, or perhaps the guttural twang of a bullfrog from aneighboring marsh, as if sleeping uncomfortably and turning suddenly in hisbed.All the stories of ghosts and goblins that he had heard in the afternoon nowcame crowding upon his recollection. The night grew darker and darker; thestars seemed to sink deeper in the sky, and driving clouds occasionally hidthem from his sight. He had never felt so lonely and dismal. He was, moreover,approaching the very place where many of the scenes of the ghost stories hadbeen laid. In the centre of the road stood an enormous tulip-tree, whichtowered like a giant above all the other trees of the neighborhood, and formeda kind of landmark. Its limbs were gnarled and fantastic, large enough to formtrunks for ordinary trees, twisting down almost to the earth, and rising againinto the air. It was connected with the tragical story of the unfortunateAndré, who had been taken prisoner hard by; and was universally known by thename of Major André’s tree. The common people regarded it with a mixtureof respect and superstition, partly out of sympathy for the fate of itsill-starred namesake, and partly from the tales of strange sights, and dolefullamentations, told concerning it.As Ichabod approached this fearful tree, he began to whistle; he thought hiswhistle was answered; it was but a blast sweeping sharply through the drybranches. As he approached a little nearer, he thought he saw something white,hanging in the midst of the tree: he paused and ceased whistling but, onlooking more narrowly, perceived that it was a place where the tree had beenscathed by lightning, and the white wood laid bare. Suddenly he heard agroan—his teeth chattered, and his knees smote against the saddle: it wasbut the rubbing of one huge bough upon another, as they were swayed about bythe breeze. He passed the tree in safety, but new perils lay before him.About two hundred yards from the tree, a small brook crossed the road, and raninto a marshy and thickly-wooded glen, known by the name of Wiley’sSwamp. A few rough logs, laid side by side, served for a bridge over thisstream. On that side of the road where the brook entered the wood, a group ofoaks and chestnuts, matted thick with wild grape-vines, threw a cavernous gloomover it. To pass this bridge was the severest trial. It was at this identicalspot that the unfortunate André was captured, and under the covert of thosechestnuts and vines were the sturdy yeomen concealed who surprised him. Thishas ever since been considered a haunted stream, and fearful are the feelingsof the schoolboy who has to pass it alone after dark.As he approached the stream, his heart began to thump; he summoned up, however,all his resolution, gave his horse half a score of kicks in the ribs, andattempted to dash briskly across the bridge; but instead of starting forward,the perverse old animal made a lateral movement, and ran broadside against thefence. Ichabod, whose fears increased with the delay, jerked the reins on theother side, and kicked lustily with the contrary foot: it was all in vain; hissteed started, it is true, but it was only to plunge to the opposite side ofthe road into a thicket of brambles and alder bushes. The schoolmaster nowbestowed both whip and heel upon the starveling ribs of old Gunpowder, whodashed forward, snuffling and snorting, but came to a stand just by the bridge,with a suddenness that had nearly sent his rider sprawling over his head. Justat this moment a plashy tramp by the side of the bridge caught the sensitiveear of Ichabod. In the dark shadow of the grove, on the margin of the brook, hebeheld something huge, misshapen and towering. It stirred not, but seemedgathered up in the gloom, like some gigantic monster ready to spring upon thetraveller.The hair of the affrighted pedagogue rose upon his head with terror. What wasto be done? To turn and fly was now too late; and besides, what chance wasthere of escaping ghost or goblin, if such it was, which could ride upon thewings of the wind? Summoning up, therefore, a show of courage, he demanded instammering accents, “Who are you?” He received no reply. Herepeated his demand in a still more agitated voice. Still there was no answer.Once more he cudgelled the sides of the inflexible Gunpowder, and, shutting hiseyes, broke forth with involuntary fervor into a psalm tune. Just then theshadowy object of alarm put itself in motion, and with a scramble and a boundstood at once in the middle of the road. Though the night was dark and dismal,yet the form of the unknown might now in some degree be ascertained. Heappeared to be a horseman of large dimensions, and mounted on a black horse ofpowerful frame. He made no offer of molestation or sociability, but kept aloofon one side of the road, jogging along on the blind side of old Gunpowder, whohad now got over his fright and waywardness.Ichabod, who had no relish for this strange midnight companion, and bethoughthimself of the adventure of Brom Bones with the Galloping Hessian, nowquickened his steed in hopes of leaving him behind. The stranger, however,quickened his horse to an equal pace. Ichabod pulled up, and fell into a walk,thinking to lag behind,—the other did the same. His heart began to sinkwithin him; he endeavored to resume his psalm tune, but his parched tongueclove to the roof of his mouth, and he could not utter a stave. There wassomething in the moody and dogged silence of this pertinacious companion thatwas mysterious and appalling. It was soon fearfully accounted for. On mountinga rising ground, which brought the figure of his fellow-traveller in reliefagainst the sky, gigantic in height, and muffled in a cloak, Ichabod washorror-struck on perceiving that he was headless!—but his horror wasstill more increased on observing that the head, which should have rested onhis shoulders, was carried before him on the pommel of his saddle! His terrorrose to desperation; he rained a shower of kicks and blows upon Gunpowder,hoping by a sudden movement to give his companion the slip; but the spectrestarted full jump with him. Away, then, they dashed through thick and thin;stones flying and sparks flashing at every bound. Ichabod’s flimsygarments fluttered in the air, as he stretched his long lank body away over hishorse’s head, in the eagerness of his flight.They had now reached the road which turns off to Sleepy Hollow; but Gunpowder,who seemed possessed with a demon, instead of keeping up it, made an oppositeturn, and plunged headlong downhill to the left. This road leads through asandy hollow shaded by trees for about a quarter of a mile, where it crossesthe bridge famous in goblin story; and just beyond swells the green knoll onwhich stands the whitewashed church.As yet the panic of the steed had given his unskilful rider an apparentadvantage in the chase, but just as he had got half way through the hollow, thegirths of the saddle gave way, and he felt it slipping from under him. Heseized it by the pommel, and endeavored to hold it firm, but in vain; and hadjust time to save himself by clasping old Gunpowder round the neck, when thesaddle fell to the earth, and he heard it trampled under foot by his pursuer.For a moment the terror of Hans Van Ripper’s wrath passed across hismind,—for it was his Sunday saddle; but this was no time for petty fears;the goblin was hard on his haunches; and (unskilful rider that he was!) he hadmuch ado to maintain his seat; sometimes slipping on one side, sometimes onanother, and sometimes jolted on the high ridge of his horse’s backbone,with a violence that he verily feared would cleave him asunder.An opening in the trees now cheered him with the hopes that the church bridgewas at hand. The wavering reflection of a silver star in the bosom of the brooktold him that he was not mistaken. He saw the walls of the church dimly glaringunder the trees beyond. He recollected the place where Brom Bones’sghostly competitor had disappeared. “If I can but reach thatbridge,” thought Ichabod, “I am safe.” Just then he heard theblack steed panting and blowing close behind him; he even fancied that he felthis hot breath. Another convulsive kick in the ribs, and old Gunpowder sprangupon the bridge; he thundered over the resounding planks; he gained theopposite side; and now Ichabod cast a look behind to see if his pursuer shouldvanish, according to rule, in a flash of fire and brimstone. Just then he sawthe goblin rising in his stirrups, and in the very act of hurling his head athim. Ichabod endeavored to dodge the horrible missile, but too late. Itencountered his cranium with a tremendous crash,—he was tumbled headlonginto the dust, and Gunpowder, the black steed, and the goblin rider, passed bylike a whirlwind.The next morning the old horse was found without his saddle, and with thebridle under his feet, soberly cropping the grass at his master’s gate.Ichabod did not make his appearance at breakfast; dinner-hour came, but noIchabod. The boys assembled at the schoolhouse, and strolled idly about thebanks of the brook; but no schoolmaster. Hans Van Ripper now began to feel someuneasiness about the fate of poor Ichabod, and his saddle. An inquiry was seton foot, and after diligent investigation they came upon his traces. In onepart of the road leading to the church was found the saddle trampled in thedirt; the tracks of horses’ hoofs deeply dented in the road, andevidently at furious speed, were traced to the bridge, beyond which, on thebank of a broad part of the brook, where the water ran deep and black, wasfound the hat of the unfortunate Ichabod, and close beside it a shatteredpumpkin.The brook was searched, but the body of the schoolmaster was not to bediscovered. Hans Van Ripper as executor of his estate, examined the bundlewhich contained all his worldly effects. They consisted of two shirts and ahalf; two stocks for the neck; a pair or two of worsted stockings; an old pairof corduroy small-clothes; a rusty razor; a book of psalm tunes full ofdog’s-ears; and a broken pitch-pipe. As to the books and furniture of theschoolhouse, they belonged to the community, excepting Cotton Mather’s“History of Witchcraft,” a “New England Almanac,” and abook of dreams and fortune-telling; in which last was a sheet of foolscap muchscribbled and blotted in several fruitless attempts to make a copy of verses inhonor of the heiress of Van Tassel. These magic books and the poetic scrawlwere forthwith consigned to the flames by Hans Van Ripper; who, from that timeforward, determined to send his children no more to school, observing that henever knew any good come of this same reading and writing. Whatever money theschoolmaster possessed, and he had received his quarter’s pay but a dayor two before, he must have had about his person at the time of hisdisappearance.The mysterious event caused much speculation at the church on the followingSunday. Knots of gazers and gossips were collected in the churchyard, at thebridge, and at the spot where the hat and pumpkin had been found. The storiesof Brouwer, of Bones, and a whole budget of others were called to mind; andwhen they had diligently considered them all, and compared them with thesymptoms of the present case, they shook their heads, and came to theconclusion that Ichabod had been carried off by the Galloping Hessian. As hewas a bachelor, and in nobody’s debt, nobody troubled his head any moreabout him; the school was removed to a different quarter of the hollow, andanother pedagogue reigned in his stead.It is true, an old farmer, who had been down to New York on a visit severalyears after, and from whom this account of the ghostly adventure was received,brought home the intelligence that Ichabod Crane was still alive; that he hadleft the neighborhood partly through fear of the goblin and Hans Van Ripper,and partly in mortification at having been suddenly dismissed by the heiress;that he had changed his quarters to a distant part of the country; had keptschool and studied law at the same time; had been admitted to the bar; turnedpolitician; electioneered; written for the newspapers; and finally had beenmade a justice of the Ten Pound Court. Brom Bones, too, who, shortly after hisrival’s disappearance conducted the blooming Katrina in triumph to thealtar, was observed to look exceedingly knowing whenever the story of Ichabodwas related, and always burst into a hearty laugh at the mention of thepumpkin; which led some to suspect that he knew more about the matter than hechose to tell.The old country wives, however, who are the best judges of these matters,maintain to this day that Ichabod was spirited away by supernatural means; andit is a favorite story often told about the neighborhood round the winterevening fire. The bridge became more than ever an object of superstitious awe;and that may be the reason why the road has been altered of late years, so asto approach the church by the border of the millpond. The schoolhouse beingdeserted soon fell to decay, and was reported to be haunted by the ghost of theunfortunate pedagogue and the plowboy, loitering homeward of a still summerevening, has often fancied his voice at a distance, chanting a melancholy psalmtune among the tranquil solitudes of Sleepy Hollow.POSTSCRIPT.FOUND IN THE HANDWRITING OF MR. KNICKERBOCKER.The preceding tale is given almost in the precise words in which I heard itrelated at a Corporation meeting at the ancient city of Manhattoes, at whichwere present many of its sagest and most illustrious burghers. The narrator wasa pleasant, shabby, gentlemanly old fellow, in pepper-and-salt clothes, with asadly humourous face, and one whom I strongly suspected of being poor—hemade such efforts to be entertaining. When his story was concluded, there wasmuch laughter and approbation, particularly from two or three deputy aldermen,who had been asleep the greater part of the time. There was, however, one tall,dry-looking old gentleman, with beetling eyebrows, who maintained a grave andrather severe face throughout, now and then folding his arms, inclining hishead, and looking down upon the floor, as if turning a doubt over in his mind.He was one of your wary men, who never laugh but upon good grounds—whenthey have reason and law on their side. When the mirth of the rest of thecompany had subsided, and silence was restored, he leaned one arm on the elbowof his chair, and sticking the other akimbo, demanded, with a slight, butexceedingly sage motion of the head, and contraction of the brow, what was themoral of the story, and what it went to prove?The story-teller, who was just putting a glass of wine to his lips, as arefreshment after his toils, paused for a moment, looked at his inquirer withan air of infinite deference, and, lowering the glass slowly to the table,observed that the story was intended most logically to prove—“That there is no situation in life but has its advantages andpleasures—provided we will but take a joke as we find it:“That, therefore, he that runs races with goblin troopers is likely tohave rough riding of it.“Ergo, for a country schoolmaster to be refused the hand of a Dutchheiress is a certain step to high preferment in the state.”The cautious old gentleman knit his brows tenfold closer after thisexplanation, being sorely puzzled by the ratiocination of the syllogism, while,methought, the one in pepper-and-salt eyed him with something of a triumphantleer. At length he observed that all this was very well, but still he thoughtthe story a little on the extravagant—there were one or two points onwhich he had his doubts.“Faith, sir,” replied the story-teller, “as to that matter, Idon’t believe one-half of it myself.” D. K.THE END.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LEGEND OF SLEEPY HOLLOW ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks. 