START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CALL OF CTHULHU ***The CALL of CTHULHUBy H.P. LOVECRAFT[Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced fromWeird Tales, February 1928.Extensive research did not uncover any evidence thatthe U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]"Of such great powers or beings there may be conceivably a survival... a survival of a hugely remote period when ... consciousness wasmanifested, perhaps, in shapes and forms long since withdrawn beforethe tide of advancing humanity ... forms of which poetry and legendalone have caught a flying memory and called them gods, monsters,mythical beings of all sorts and kinds...."—Algernon Blackwood.   "The ring of worshipers moved in endless bacchanalebetween the ring of bodies and the ring of fire."[1] 1. The Horror in Clay.The most merciful thing in the world, I think, is the inability of thehuman mind to correlate all its contents. We live on a placid islandof ignorance in the midst of black seas of infinity, and it was notmeant that we should voyage far. The sciences, each straining in itsown direction, have hitherto harmed us little; but some day the piecingtogether of dissociated knowledge will open up such terrifying vistasof reality, and of our frightful position therein, that we shall eithergo mad from the revelation or flee from the deadly light into the peaceand safety of a new dark age.Theosophists have guessed at the awesome grandeur of the cosmic cyclewherein our world and human race form transient incidents. They havehinted at strange survivals in terms which would freeze the blood ifnot masked by a bland optimism. But it is not from them that therecame the single glimpse of forbidden eons which chills me when I thinkof it and maddens me when I dream of it. That glimpse, like all dreadglimpses of truth, flashed out from an accidental piecing together ofseparated things—in this case an old newspaper item and the notes ofa dead professor. I hope that no one else will accomplish this piecingout; certainly, if I live, I shall never knowingly supply a link inso hideous a chain. I think that the professor, too, intended to keepsilent regarding the part he knew, and that he would have destroyed hisnotes had not sudden death seized him.My knowledge of the thing began in the winter of 1926-27 with the deathof my grand-uncle, George Gammell Angell, Professor Emeritus of Semiticlanguages in Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island. ProfessorAngell was widely known as an authority on ancient inscriptions, andhad frequently been resorted to by the heads of prominent museums; sothat his passing at the age of ninety-two may be recalled by many.Locally, interest was intensified by the obscurity of the cause ofdeath. The professor had been stricken whilst returning from theNewport boat; falling suddenly, as witnesses said, after having beenjostled by a nautical-looking negro who had come from one of the queerdark courts on the precipitous hillside which formed a short cut fromthe waterfront to the deceased's home in Williams Street. Physicianswere unable to find any visible disorder, but concluded after perplexeddebate that some obscure lesion of the heart, induced by the briskascent of so steep a hill by so elderly a man, was responsible forthe end. At the time I saw no reason to dissent from this dictum, butlatterly I am inclined to wonder—and more than wonder.As my granduncle's heir and executor, for he died a childless widower,I was expected to go over his papers with some thoroughness; and forthat purpose moved his entire set of files and boxes to my quarters inBoston. Much of the material which I correlated will be later publishedby the American Archeological Society, but there was one box which Ifound exceedingly puzzling, and which I felt much averse from showingto other eyes. It had been locked, and I did not find the key tillit occurred to me to examine the personal ring which the professorcarried always in his pocket. Then, indeed, I succeeded in opening it,but when I did so seemed only to be confronted by a greater and moreclosely locked barrier. For what could be the meaning of the queer claybas-relief and the disjointed jottings, ramblings, and cuttings which Ifound? Had my uncle, in his latter years, become credulous of the mostsuperficial impostures? I resolved to search out the eccentric sculptorresponsible for this apparent disturbance of an old man's peace of mind.The bas-relief was a rough rectangle less than an inch thick and aboutfive by six inches in area; obviously of modern origin. Its designs,however, were far from modern in atmosphere and suggestion; for,although the vagaries of cubism and futurism are many and wild, they donot often reproduce that cryptic regularity which lurks in prehistoricwriting. And writing of some kind the bulk of these designs seemedcertainly to be; though my memory, despite much familiarity with thepapers and collections of my uncle, failed in any way to identify thisparticular species, or even hint at its remotest affiliations.Above these apparent hieroglyphics was a figure of evidently pictorialintent, though its impressionistic execution forbade a very clearidea of its nature. It seemed to be a sort of monster, or symbolrepresenting a monster, of a form which only a diseased fancy couldconceive. If I say that my somewhat extravagant imagination yieldedsimultaneous pictures of an octopus, a dragon, and a human caricature,I shall not be unfaithful to the spirit of the thing. A pulpy,tentacled head surmounted a grotesque and scaly body with rudimentarywings; but it was the general outline of the whole which made it mostshockingly frightful. Behind the figure was a vague suggestion of aCyclopean architectural background.The writing accompanying this oddity was, aside from a stack ofpress cuttings, in Professor Angell's most recent hand; and made nopretense to literary style. What seemed to be the main document washeaded "CTHULHU CULT" in characters painstakingly printed to avoidthe erroneous reading of a word so unheard-of. This manuscript wasdivided into two sections, the first of which was headed "1925—Dreamand Dream Work of H. A. Wilcox, 7 Thomas St., Providence, R. I.," andthe second, "Narrative of Inspector John R. Legrasse, 121 BienvilleSt., New Orleans, La., at 1908 A. A. S. Mtg—Notes on Same, & Prof.Webb's Acct." The other manuscript papers were all brief notes, someof them accounts of the queer dreams of different persons, some ofthem citations from theosophical books and magazines (notably W.Scott-Eliott's Atlantis and the Lost Lemuria), and the rest commentson long-surviving secret societies and hidden cults, with referencesto passages in such mythological and anthropological source-booksas Frazer's Golden Bough and Miss Murray's Witch-Cult in WesternEurope. The cuttings largely alluded to outré mental illnesses andoutbreaks of group folly or mania in the spring of 1925.The first half of the principal manuscript told a very peculiartale. It appears that on March 1st, 1925, a thin, dark young man ofneurotic and excited aspect had called upon Professor Angell bearingthe singular clay bas-relief, which was then exceedingly damp andfresh. His card bore the name of Henry Anthony Wilcox, and my unclehad recognized him as the youngest son of an excellent family slightlyknown to him, who had latterly been studying sculpture at the RhodeIsland School of Design and living alone at the Fleur-de-Lys Buildingnear that institution. Wilcox was a precocious youth of known geniusbut great eccentricity, and had from childhood excited attentionthrough the strange stories and odd dreams he was in the habit ofrelating. He called himself "psychically hypersensitive", but the staidfolk of the ancient commercial city dismissed him as merely "queer".Never mingling much with his kind, he had dropped gradually from socialvisibility, and was now known only to a small group of esthetes fromother towns. Even the Providence Art Club, anxious to preserve itsconservatism, had found him quite hopeless.On the occasion of the visit, ran the professor's manuscript, thesculptor abruptly asked for the benefit of his host's archeologicalknowledge in identifying the hieroglyphics on the bas-relief. Hespoke in a dreamy, stilted manner which suggested pose and alienatedsympathy; and my uncle showed some sharpness in replying, for theconspicuous freshness of the tablet implied kinship with anything butarcheology. Young Wilcox's rejoinder, which impressed my uncle enoughto make him recall and record it verbatim, was of a fantasticallypoetic cast which must have typified his whole conversation, and whichI have since found highly characteristic of him. He said, "It is new,indeed, for I made it last night in a dream of strange cities; anddreams are older than brooding Tyre, or the contemplative Sphinx, orgarden-girdled Babylon."It was then that he began that rambling tale which suddenly played upona sleeping memory and won the fevered interest of my uncle. There hadbeen a slight earthquake tremor the night before, the most considerablefelt in New England for some years; and Wilcox's imagination had beenkeenly affected. Upon retiring, he had had an unprecedented dream ofgreat Cyclopean cities of Titan blocks and sky-flung monoliths, alldripping with green ooze and sinister with latent horror. Hieroglyphicshad covered the walls and pillars, and from some undetermined pointbelow had come a voice that was not a voice; a chaotic sensation whichonly fancy could transmute into sound, but which he attempted to renderby the almost unpronounceable jumble of letters, "Cthulhu fhtagn".This verbal jumble was the key to the recollection which excited anddisturbed Professor Angell. He questioned the sculptor with scientificminuteness; and studied with almost frantic intensity the bas-reliefon which the youth had found himself working, chilled and clad onlyin his nightclothes, when waking had stolen bewilderingly over him.My uncle blamed his old age, Wilcox afterward said, for his slownessin recognizing both hieroglyphics and pictorial design. Many of hisquestions seemed highly out of place to his visitor, especially thosewhich tried to connect the latter with strange cults or societies;and Wilcox could not understand the repeated promises of silencewhich he was offered in exchange for an admission of membership insome widespread mystical or paganly religious body. When ProfessorAngell became convinced that the sculptor was indeed ignorant of anycult or system of cryptic lore, he besieged his visitor with demandsfor future reports of dreams. This bore regular fruit, for after thefirst interview the manuscript records daily calls of the young man,during which he related startling fragments of nocturnal imagery whoseburden was always some terrible Cyclopean vista of dark and drippingstone, with a subterrene voice or intelligence shouting monotonouslyin enigmatical sense-impacts uninscribable save as gibberish. The twosounds most frequently repeated are those rendered by the letters"Cthulhu" and "R'lyeh".On March 23rd, the manuscript continued, Wilcox failed to appear; andinquiries at his quarters revealed that he had been stricken with anobscure sort of fever and taken to the home of his family in WatermanStreet. He had cried out in the night, arousing several other artistsin the building, and had manifested since then only alternations ofunconsciousness and delirium. My uncle at once telephoned the family,and from that time forward kept close watch of the case; callingoften at the Thayer Street office of Dr. Tobey, whom he learned tobe in charge. The youth's febrile mind, apparently, was dwelling onstrange things; and the doctor shuddered now and then as he spoke ofthem. They included not only a repetition of what he had formerlydreamed, but touched wildly on a gigantic thing "miles high" whichwalked or lumbered about. He at no time fully described this object,but occasional frantic words, as repeated by Dr. Tobey, convinced theprofessor that it must be identical with the nameless monstrosityhe had sought to depict in his dream-sculpture. Reference to thisobject, the doctor added, was invariably a prelude to the young man'ssubsidence into lethargy. His temperature, oddly enough, was notgreatly above normal; but the whole condition was otherwise such as tosuggest true fever rather than mental disorder.On April 2nd at about 3 p. m. every trace of Wilcox's malady suddenlyceased. He sat upright in bed, astonished to find himself at home andcompletely ignorant of what had happened in dream or reality since thenight of March 22nd. Pronounced well by his physician, he returnedto his quarters in three days; but to Professor Angell he was of nofurther assistance. All traces of strange dreaming had vanished withhis recovery, and my uncle kept no record of his night-thoughts after aweek of pointless and irrelevant accounts of thoroughly usual visions.Here the first part of the manuscript ended, but references to certainof the scattered notes gave me much material for thought—so much, infact, that only the ingrained skepticism then forming my philosophycan account for my continued distrust of the artist. The notes inquestion were those descriptive of the dreams of various personscovering the same period as that in which young Wilcox had had hisstrange visitations. My uncle, it seems, had quickly instituted aprodigiously far-flung body of inquiries amongst nearly all the friendswhom he could question without impertinence, asking for nightly reportsof their dreams, and the dates of any notable visions for some timepast. The reception of his request seems to have been varied; buthe must, at the very least, have received more responses than anyordinary man could have handled without a secretary. This originalcorrespondence was not preserved, but his notes formed a thorough andreally significant digest. Average people in society and business—NewEngland's traditional "salt of the earth"—gave an almost completelynegative result, though scattered cases of uneasy but formlessnocturnal impressions appear here and there, always between March23rd and April 2nd—the period of young Wilcox's delirium. Scientificmen were little more affected, though four cases of vague descriptionsuggest fugitive glimpses of strange landscapes, and in one case thereis mentioned a dread of something abnormal.It was from the artists and poets that the pertinent answers came,and I know that panic would have broken loose had they been able tocompare notes. As it was, lacking their original letters, I halfsuspected the compiler of having asked leading questions, or of havingedited the correspondence in corroboration of what he had latentlyresolved to see. That is why I continued to feel that Wilcox, somehowcognizant of the old data which my uncle had possessed, had beenimposing on the veteran scientist. These responses from esthetes tolda disturbing tale. From February 28th to April 2nd a large proportionof them had dreamed very bizarre things, the intensity of the dreamsbeing immeasurably the stronger during the period of the sculptor'sdelirium. Over a fourth of those who reported anything, reportedscenes and half-sounds not unlike those which Wilcox had described;and some of the dreamers confessed acute fear of the gigantic namelessthing visible toward the last. One case, which the note describes withemphasis, was very sad. The subject, a widely known architect withleanings toward theosophy and occultism, went violently insane onthe date of young Wilcox's seizure, and expired several months laterafter incessant screamings to be saved from some escaped denizen ofhell. Had my uncle referred to these cases by name instead of merelyby number, I should have attempted some corroboration and personalinvestigation; but as it was, I succeeded in tracing down only afew. All of these, however, bore out the notes in full. I have oftenwondered if all the objects of the professor's questioning felt aspuzzled as did this fraction. It is well that no explanation shall everreach them.The press cuttings, as I have intimated, touched on cases of panic,mania, and eccentricity during the given period. Professor Angellmust have employed a cutting bureau, for the number of extracts wastremendous, and the sources scattered throughout the globe. Herewas a nocturnal suicide in London, where a lone sleeper had leapedfrom a window after a shocking cry. Here likewise a rambling letterto the editor of a paper in South America, where a fanatic deducesa dire future from visions he has seen. A dispatch from Californiadescribes a theosophist colony as donning white robes en masse for some"glorious fulfilment" which never arrives, whilst items from Indiaspeak guardedly of serious native unrest toward the end of March.Voodoo orgies multiply in Haiti, and African outposts report ominousmutterings. American officers in the Philippines find certain tribesbothersome about this time, and New York policemen are mobbed byhysterical Levantines on the night of March 22-23. The west of Ireland,too, is full of wild rumor and legendry, and a fantastic painter namedArdois-Bonnot hangs a blasphemous Dream Landscape in the Paris springsalon of 1926. And so numerous are the recorded troubles in insaneasylums that only a miracle can have stopped the medical fraternityfrom noting strange parallelisms and drawing mystified conclusions.A weird bunch of cuttings, all told; and I can at this date scarcelyenvisage the callous rationalism with which I set them aside. But Iwas then convinced that young Wilcox had known of the older mattersmentioned by the professor.2. The Tale of Inspector Legrasse.The older matters which had made the sculptor's dream and bas-relief sosignificant to my uncle formed the subject of the second half of hislong manuscript. Once before, it appears, Professor Angell had seen thehellish outlines of the nameless monstrosity, puzzled over the unknownhieroglyphics, and heard the ominous syllables which can be renderedonly as "Cthulhu"; and all this in so stirring and horrible aconnection that it is small wonder he pursued young Wilcox with queriesand demands for data.This earlier experience had come in 1908, seventeen years before,when the American Archeological Society held its annual meeting inSt. Louis. Professor Angell, as befitted one of his authority andattainments, had had a prominent part in all the deliberations; and wasone of the first to be approached by the several outsiders who tookadvantage of the convocation to offer questions for correct answeringand problems for expert solution.The chief of these outsiders, and in a short time the focus of interestfor the entire meeting, was a commonplace-looking middle-aged manwho had traveled all the way from New Orleans for certain specialinformation unobtainable from any local source. His name was JohnRaymond Legrasse, and he was by profession an inspector of police. Withhim he bore the subject of his visit, a grotesque, repulsive, andapparently very ancient stone statuette whose origin he was at a lossto determine.It must not be fancied that Inspector Legrasse had the least interestin archeology. On the contrary, his wish for enlightenment was promptedby purely professional considerations. The statuette, idol, fetish,or whatever it was, had been captured some months before in thewooded swamps south of New Orleans during a raid on a supposed voodoomeeting; and so singular and hideous were the rites connected withit, that the police could not but realize that they had stumbled on adark cult totally unknown to them, and infinitely more diabolic thaneven the blackest of the African voodoo circles. Of its origin, apartfrom the erratic and unbelievable tales extorted from the capturedmembers, absolutely nothing was to be discovered; hence the anxietyof the police for any antiquarian lore which might help them to placethe frightful symbol, and through it track down the cult to itsfountain-head.Inspector Legrasse was scarcely prepared for the sensation which hisoffering created. One sight of the thing had been enough to throw theassembled men of science into a state of tense excitement, and theylost no time in crowding around him to gaze at the diminutive figurewhose utter strangeness and air of genuinely abysmal antiquity hintedso potently at unopened and archaic vistas. No recognized school ofsculpture had animated this terrible object, yet centuries and eventhousands of years seemed recorded in its dim and greenish surface ofunplaceable stone.The figure, which was finally passed slowly from man to man for closeand careful study, was between seven and eight inches in height, and ofexquisitely artistic workmanship. It represented a monster of vaguelyanthropoid outline, but with an octopuslike head whose face was a massof feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hindand fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind. This thing, which seemedinstinct with a fearsome and unnatural malignancy, was of a somewhatbloated corpulence, and squatted evilly on a rectangular block orpedestal covered with undecipherable characters. The tips of the wingstouched the back edge of the block, the seat occupied the center,whilst the long, curved claws of the doubled-up, crouching hind legsgripped the front edge and extended a quarter of the way down towardthe bottom of the pedestal. The cephalopod head was bent forward, sothat the ends of the facial feelers brushed the backs of huge forepawswhich clasped the croucher's elevated knees. The aspect of the wholewas abnormally lifelike, and the more subtly fearful because its sourcewas so totally unknown. Its vast, awesome, and incalculable age wasunmistakable; yet not one link did it show with any known type of artbelonging to civilization's youth—or indeed to any other time.Totally separate and apart, its very material was a mystery; for thesoapy, greenish-black stone with its golden or iridescent flecks andstriations resembled nothing familiar to geology or mineralogy. Thecharacters along the base were equally baffling; and no member present,despite a representation of half the world's expert learning in thisfield, could form the least notion of even their remotest linguistickinship. They, like the subject and material, belonged to somethinghorribly remote and distinct from mankind as we know it; somethingfrightfully suggestive of old and unhallowed cycles of life in whichour world and our conceptions have no part.And yet, as the members severally shook their heads and confesseddefeat at the inspector's problem, there was one man in that gatheringwho suspected a touch of bizarre familiarity in the monstrous shape andwriting, and who presently told with some diffidence of the odd triflehe knew. This person was the late William Channing Webb, professor ofanthropology in Princeton University, and an explorer of no slight note.Professor Webb had been engaged, forty-eight years before, in a tourof Greenland and Iceland in search of some Runic inscriptions whichhe failed to unearth; and whilst high up on the West Greenland coasthad encountered a singular tribe or cult of degenerate Eskimos whosereligion, a curious form of devil-worship, chilled him with itsdeliberate bloodthirstiness and repulsiveness. It was a faith of whichother Eskimos knew little, and which they mentioned only with shudders,saying that it had come down from horribly ancient eons before ever theworld was made. Besides nameless rites and human sacrifices there werecertain queer hereditary rituals addressed to a supreme elder devil ortornasuk; and of this Professor Webb had taken a careful phoneticcopy from an aged angekok or wizard-priest, expressing the sounds inRoman letters as best he knew how. But just now of prime significancewas the fetish which this cult had cherished, and around which theydanced when the aurora leaped high over the ice cliffs. It was, theprofessor stated, a very crude bas-relief of stone, comprising ahideous picture and some cryptic writing. And as far as he could tell,it was a rough parallel in all essential features of the bestial thingnow lying before the meeting.These data, received with suspense and astonishment by the assembledmembers, proved doubly exciting to Inspector Legrasse; and he began atonce to ply his informant with questions. Having noted and copied anoral ritual among the swamp cult-worshipers his men had arrested, hebesought the professor to remember as best he might the syllables takendown amongst the diabolist Eskimos. There then followed an exhaustivecomparison of details, and a moment of really awed silence when bothdetective and scientist agreed on the virtual identity of the phrasecommon to two hellish rituals so many worlds of distance apart. What,in substance, both the Eskimo wizards and the Louisiana swamp-priestshad chanted to their kindred idols was something very like this—theword-divisions being guessed at from traditional breaks in the phraseas chanted aloud:"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn."Legrasse had one point in advance of Professor Webb, for several amonghis mongrel prisoners had repeated to him what older celebrants hadtold them the words meant. This text, as given, ran something like this:"In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waits dreaming."And now, in response to a general urgent demand, Inspector Legrasserelated as fully as possible his experience with the swamp worshipers;telling a story to which I could see my uncle attached profoundsignificance. It savored of the wildest dreams of myth-maker andtheosophist, and disclosed an astonishing degree of cosmic imaginationamong such half-castes and pariahs as might be least expected topossess it.On November 1st, 1907, there had come to New Orleans police a franticsummons from the swamp and lagoon country to the south. The squattersthere, mostly primitive but good-natured descendants of Lafitte's men,were in the grip of stark terror from an unknown thing which had stolenupon them in the night. It was voodoo, apparently, but voodoo of a moreterrible sort than they had ever known; and some of their women andchildren had disappeared since the malevolent tom-tom had begun itsincessant beating far within the black haunted woods where no dwellerventured. There were insane shouts and harrowing screams, soul-chillingchants and dancing devil-flames; and, the frightened messenger added,the people could stand it no more.So a body of twenty police, filling two carriages and an automobile,had set out in the late afternoon with the shivering squatter as aguide. At the end of the passable road they alighted, and for milessplashed on in silence through the terrible cypress woods where daynever came. Ugly roots and malignant hanging nooses of Spanish mossbeset them, and now and then a pile of dank stones or fragments of arotting wall intensified by its hint of morbid habitation a depressionwhich every malformed tree and every fungous islet combined to create.At length the squatter settlement, a miserable huddle of huts, hove insight; and hysterical dwellers ran out to cluster around the group ofbobbing lanterns. The muffled beat of tom-toms was now faintly audiblefar, far ahead; and a curdling shriek came at infrequent intervalswhen the wind shifted. A reddish glare, too, seemed to filter throughthe pale undergrowth beyond endless avenues of forest night. Reluctanteven to be left alone again, each one of the cowed squatters refusedpoint-blank to advance another inch toward the scene of unholyworship, so Inspector Legrasse and his nineteen colleagues plunged onunguided into black arcades of horror that none of them had ever trodbefore.The region now entered by the police was one of traditionally evilrepute, substantially unknown and untraversed by white men. There werelegends of a hidden lake unglimpsed by mortal sight, in which dwelt ahuge, formless white polypous thing with luminous eyes; and squatterswhispered that bat-winged devils flew up out of caverns in innerearth to worship it at midnight. They said it had been there beforeD'Iberville, before La Salle, before the Indians, and before even thewholesome beasts and birds of the woods. It was nightmare itself, andto see it was to die. But it made men dream, and so they knew enough tokeep away. The present voodoo orgy was, indeed, on the merest fringeof this abhorred area, but that location was bad enough; hence perhapsthe very place of the worship had terrified the squatters more than theshocking sounds and incidents.Only poetry or madness could do justice to the noises heard byLegrasse's men as they plowed on through the black morass toward thered glare and the muffled tom-toms. There are vocal qualities peculiarto men, and vocal qualities peculiar to beasts; and it is terribleto hear the one when the source should yield the other. Animal furyand orgiastic license here whipped themselves to demoniac heights byhowls and squawking ecstasies that tore and reverberated through thosenighted woods like pestilential tempests from the gulfs of hell. Nowand then the less organized ululations would cease, and from whatseemed a well-drilled chorus of hoarse voices would rise in singsongchant that hideous phrase or ritual:"Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn."Then the men, having reached a spot where the trees were thinner, camesuddenly in sight of the spectacle itself. Four of them reeled, onefainted, and two were shaken into a frantic cry which the mad cacophonyof the orgy fortunately deadened. Legrasse dashed swamp water on theface of the fainting man, and all stood trembling and nearly hypnotizedwith horror.In a natural glade of the swamp stood a grassy island of perhaps anacre's extent, clear of trees and tolerably dry. On this now leaped andtwisted a more indescribable horde of human abnormality than any but aSime or an Angarola could paint. Void of clothing, this hybrid spawnwere braying, bellowing and writhing about a monstrous ring-shapedbonfire; in the center of which, revealed by occasional rifts in thecurtain of flame, stood a great granite monolith some eight feet inheight; on top of which, incongruous in its diminutiveness, rested thenoxious carven statuette. From a wide circle of ten scaffolds set upat regular intervals with the flame-girt monolith as a center hung,head downward, the oddly marred bodies of the helpless squatters whohad disappeared. It was inside this circle that the ring of worshipersjumped and roared, the general direction of the mass motion being fromleft to right in endless bacchanale between the ring of bodies and thering of fire.It may have been only imagination and it may have been only echoeswhich induced one of the men, an excitable Spaniard, to fancy he heardantiphonal responses to the ritual from some far and unillumined spotdeeper within the wood of ancient legendry and horror. This man, JosephD. Galvez, I later met and questioned; and he proved distractinglyimaginative. He indeed went so far as to hint of the faint beating ofgreat wings, and of a glimpse of shining eyes and a mountainous whitebulk beyond the remotest trees—but I suppose he had been hearing toomuch native superstition.Actually, the horrified pause of the men was of comparatively briefduration. Duty came first; and although there must have been nearly ahundred mongrel celebrants in the throng, the police relied on theirfirearms and plunged determinedly into the nauseous rout. For fiveminutes the resultant din and chaos were beyond description. Wildblows were struck, shots were fired, and escapes were made; but inthe end Legrasse was able to count some forty-seven sullen prisoners,whom he forced to dress in haste and fall into line between two rowsof policemen. Five of the worshipers lay dead, and two severelywounded ones were carried away on improvised stretchers by theirfellow-prisoners. The image on the monolith, of course, was carefullyremoved and carried back by Legrasse.Examined at headquarters after a trip of intense strain and weariness,the prisoners all proved to be men of a very low, mixed-blooded, andmentally aberrant type. Most were seamen, and a sprinkling of negroesand mulattoes, largely West Indians or Brava Portuguese from the CapeVerde Islands, gave a coloring of voodooism to the heterogeneous cult.But before many questions were asked, it became manifest that somethingfar deeper and older than negro fetishism was involved. Degraded andignorant as they were, the creatures held with surprizing consistencyto the central idea of their loathsome faith.They worshiped, so they said, the Great Old Ones who lived ages beforethere were any men, and who came to the young world out of the sky.Those Old Ones were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea; buttheir dead bodies had told their secrets in dreams to the first man,who formed a cult which had never died. This was that cult, and theprisoners said it had always existed and always would exist, hidden indistant wastes and dark places all over the world until the time whenthe great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city ofR'lyeh under the waters, should rise and bring the earth again beneathhis sway. Some day he would call, when the stars were ready, and thesecret cult would always be waiting to liberate him.Meanwhile no more must be told. There was a secret which even torturecould not extract. Mankind was not absolutely alone among the consciousthings of earth, for shapes came out of the dark to visit the faithfulfew. But these were not the Great Old Ones. No man had ever seen theOld Ones. The carven idol was great Cthulhu, but none might say whetheror not the others were precisely like him. No one could read the oldwriting now, but things were told by word of mouth. The chanted ritualwas not the secret—that was never spoken aloud, only whispered. Thechant meant only this: "In his house at R'lyeh dead Cthulhu waitsdreaming."Only two of the prisoners were found sane enough to be hanged, andthe rest were committed to various institutions. All denied a partin the ritual murders, and averred that the killing had been doneby Black-winged Ones which had come to them from their immemorialmeeting-place in the haunted wood. But of those mysterious allies nocoherent account could ever be gained. What the police did extractcame mainly from an immensely aged mestizo named Castro, who claimedto have sailed to strange ports and talked with undying leaders of thecult in the mountains of China.Old Castro remembered bits of hideous legend that paled thespeculations of theosophists and made man and the world seem recentand transient indeed. There had been eons when other Things ruled onthe earth, and They had had great cities. Remains of Them, he said thedeathless Chinamen had told him, were still to be found as Cyclopeanstones on islands in the Pacific. They all died vast epochs of timebefore man came, but there were arts which could revive Them when thestars had come round again to the right positions in the cycle ofeternity. They had, indeed, come themselves from the stars, and broughtTheir images with Them.These Great Old Ones, Castro continued, were not composed altogetherof flesh and blood. They had shape—for did not this star-fashionedimage prove it?—but that shape was not made of matter. When the starswere right, They could plunge from world to world through the sky;but when the stars were wrong, They could not live. But although Theyno longer lived, They would never really die. They all lay in stonehouses in Their great city of R'lyeh, preserved by the spells of mightyCthulhu for a glorious resurrection when the stars and the earth mightonce more be ready for Them. But at that time some force from outsidemust serve to liberate Their bodies. The spells that preserved Themintact likewise prevented Them from making an initial move, and Theycould only lie awake in the dark and think whilst uncounted millionsof years rolled by. They knew all that was occurring in the universe,for Their mode of speech was transmitted thought. Even now They talkedin Their tombs. When, after infinities of chaos, the first men came,the Great Old Ones spoke to the sensitive among them by molding theirdreams; for only thus could Their language reach the fleshly minds ofmammals.Then, whispered Castro, those first men formed the cult around smallidols which the Great Ones showed them; idols brought in dim erasfrom dark stars. That cult would never die till the stars came rightagain, and the secret priests would take great Cthulhu from His tombto revive His subjects and resume His rule of earth. The time wouldbe easy to know, for then mankind would have become as the Great OldOnes; free and wild and beyond good and evil, with laws and moralsthrown aside and all men shouting and killing and reveling in joy. Thenthe liberated Old Ones would teach them new ways to shout and killand revel and enjoy themselves, and all the earth would flame with aholocaust of ecstasy and freedom. Meanwhile the cult, by appropriaterites, must keep alive the memory of those ancient ways and shadowforth the prophecy of their return.In the elder time chosen men had talked with the entombed Old Ones indreams, but then something had happened. The great stone city R'lyeh,with its monoliths and sepulchers, had sunk beneath the waves; and thedeep waters, full of the one primal mystery through which not eventhought can pass, had cut off the spectral intercourse. But memorynever died, and high priests said that the city would rise again whenthe stars were right. Then came out of the earth the black spirits ofearth, moldy and shadowy, and full of dim rumors picked up in cavernsbeneath forgotten sea-bottoms. But of them old Castro dared not speakmuch. He cut himself off hurriedly, and no amount of persuasion orsubtlety could elicit more in this direction. The size of the OldOnes, too, he curiously declined to mention. Of the cult, he said thathe thought the center lay amid the pathless deserts of Arabia, whereIrem, the City of Pillars, dreams hidden and untouched. It was notallied to the European witch-cult, and was virtually unknown beyond itsmembers. No book had ever really hinted of it, though the deathlessChinamen said that there were double meanings in the Necronomiconof the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred which the initiated might read as theychose, especially the much-discussed couplet:  "That is not dead which can eternal lie, And with strange eons even death may die."Legrasse, deeply impressed and not a little bewildered, had inquiredin vain concerning the historic affiliations of the cult. Castro,apparently, had told the truth when he said that it was whollysecret. The authorities at Tulane University could shed no light uponeither cult or image, and now the detective had come to the highestauthorities in the country and met with no more than the Greenland taleof Professor Webb.The feverish interest aroused at the meeting by Legrasse's tale,corroborated as it was by the statuette, is echoed in the subsequentcorrespondence of those who attended, although scant mention occurs inthe formal publication of the society. Caution is the first care ofthose accustomed to face occasional charlatanry and imposture. Legrassefor some time lent the image to Professor Webb, but at the latter'sdeath it was returned to him and remains in his possession, where Iviewed it not long ago. It is truly a terrible thing, and unmistakablyakin to the dream-sculpture of young Wilcox.That my uncle was excited by the tale of the sculptor I did notwonder, for what thoughts must arise upon hearing, after a knowledgeof what Legrasse had learned of the cult, of a sensitive young manwho had dreamed not only the figure and exact hieroglyphics of theswamp-found image and the Greenland devil tablet, but had come in hisdreams upon at least three of the precise words of the formula utteredalike by Eskimo diabolists and mongrel Louisianans? Professor Angell'sinstant start on an investigation of the utmost thoroughness waseminently natural; though privately I suspected young Wilcox of havingheard of the cult in some indirect way, and of having invented a seriesof dreams to heighten and continue the mystery at my uncle's expense.The dream-narratives and cuttings collected by the professor were, ofcourse, strong corroboration; but the rationalism of my mind and theextravagance of the whole subject led me to adopt what I thought themost sensible conclusions. So, after thoroughly studying the manuscriptagain and correlating the theosophical and anthropological notes withthe cult narrative of Legrasse, I made a trip to Providence to seethe sculptor and give him the rebuke I thought proper for so boldlyimposing upon a learned and aged man.Wilcox still lived alone in the Fleur-de-Lys Building in ThomasStreet, a hideous Victorian imitation of Seventeenth Century Bretonarchitecture which flaunts its stuccoed front amidst the lovelyColonial houses on the ancient hill, and under the very shadow of thefinest Georgian steeple in America. I found him at work in his rooms,and at once conceded from the specimens scattered about that his geniusis indeed profound and authentic. He will, I believe, be heard fromsometime as one of the great decadents; for he has crystallized in clayand will one day mirror in marble those nightmares and fantasies whichArthur Machen evokes in prose, and Clark Ashton Smith makes visible inverse and in painting.Dark, frail, and somewhat unkempt in aspect, he turned languidly at myknock and asked me my business without rising. When I told him who Iwas, he displayed some interest; for my uncle had excited his curiosityin probing his strange dreams, yet had never explained the reason forthe study. I did not enlarge his knowledge in this regard, but soughtwith some subtlety to draw him out.In a short time I became convinced of his absolute sincerity, for hespoke of the dreams in a manner none could mistake. They and theirsubconscious residuum had influenced his art profoundly, and he showedme a morbid statue whose contours almost made me shake with the potencyof its black suggestion. He could not recall having seen the originalof this thing except in his own dream bas-relief, but the outlines hadformed themselves insensibly under his hands. It was, no doubt, thegiant shape he had raved of in delirium. That he really knew nothing ofthe hidden cult, save from what my uncle's relentless catechism had letfall, he soon made clear; and again I strove to think of some way inwhich he could possibly have received the weird impressions.He talked of his dreams in a strangely poetic fashion; making mesee with terrible vividness the damp Cyclopean city of slimy greenstone—whose geometry, he oddly said, was all wrong—and hearwith frightened expectancy the ceaseless, half-mental calling fromunderground: "Cthulhu fhtagn," "Cthulhu fhtagn."These words had formed part of that dread ritual which told of deadCthulhu's dream-vigil in his stone vault at R'lyeh, and I felt deeplymoved despite my rational beliefs. Wilcox, I was sure, had heard ofthe cult in some casual way, and had soon forgotten it amidst the massof his equally weird reading and imagining. Later, by virtue of itssheer impressiveness, it had found subconscious expression in dreams,in the bas-relief, and in the terrible statue I now beheld; so that hisimposture upon my uncle had been a very innocent one. The youth was ofa type, at once slightly affected and slightly ill-mannered, which Icould never like; but I was willing enough now to admit both his geniusand his honesty. I took leave of him amicably, and wish him all thesuccess his talent promises.The matter of the cult still remained to fascinate me, and at timesI had visions of personal fame from researches into its origin andconnections. I visited New Orleans, talked with Legrasse and othersof that old-time raiding-party, saw the frightful image, and evenquestioned such of the mongrel prisoners as still survived. Old Castro,unfortunately, had been dead for some years. What I now heard sographically at first hand, though it was really no more than a detailedconfirmation of what my uncle had written, excited me afresh; for Ifelt sure that I was on the track of a very real, very secret, andvery ancient religion whose discovery would make me an anthropologistof note. My attitude was still one of absolute materialism, as I wishit still were, and I discounted with almost inexplicable perversitythe coincidence of the dream notes and odd cuttings collected byProfessor Angell.One thing which I began to suspect, and which I now fear I know, isthat my uncle's death was far from natural. He fell on a narrow hillstreet leading up from an ancient waterfront swarming with foreignmongrels, after a careless push from a negro sailor. I did not forgetthe mixed blood and marine pursuits of the cult-members in Louisiana,and would not be surprized to learn of secret methods and poisonneedles as ruthless and as anciently known as the cryptic rites andbeliefs. Legrasse and his men, it is true, have been let alone; but inNorway a certain seaman who saw things is dead. Might not the deeperinquiries of my uncle after encountering the sculptor's data have cometo sinister ears? I thing Professor Angell died because he knew toomuch, or because he was likely to learn too much. Whether I shall go ashe did remains to be seen, for I have learned much now.3. The Madness from the Sea.If heaven ever wishes to grant me a boon, it will be a total effacingof the results of a mere chance which fixed my eye on a certain straypiece of shelf-paper. It was nothing on which I would naturally havestumbled in the course of my daily round, for it was an old number ofan Australian journal, Sydney Bulletin for April 18, 1925. It hadescaped even the cutting bureau which had at the time of its issuancebeen avidly collecting material for my uncle's research.I had largely given over my inquiries into what Professor Angell calledthe "Cthulhu Cult," and was visiting a learned friend of Paterson,New Jersey, the curator of a local museum and a mineralogist of note.Examining one day the reserve specimens roughly set on the storageshelves in a rear room of the museum, my eye was caught by an oddpicture in one of the old papers spread beneath the stones. It was theSydney Bulletin I have mentioned, for my friend has wide affiliationsin all conceivable foreign parts; and the picture was a half-tone cutof a hideous stone image almost identical with that which Legrasse hadfound in the swamp.Eagerly clearing the sheet of its precious contents, I scanned the itemin detail; and was disappointed to find it of only moderate length.What it suggested, however, was of portentous significance to myflagging quest; and I carefully tore it out for immediate action. Itread as follows:MYSTERY DERELICT FOUND AT SEAVigilant Arrives With Helpless Armed New Zealand Yacht in Tow.One Survivor and Dead Man Found Aboard. Tale of Desperate Battleand Deaths at Sea. Rescued Seaman Refuses Particulars of StrangeExperience. Odd Idol Found in His Possession. Inquiry to Follow.The Morrison Co.'s freighter Vigilant, bound from Valparaiso,arrived this morning at its wharf in Darling Harbour, having in towthe battled and disabled but heavily armed steam yacht Alert ofDunedin, N. Z., which was sighted April 12th in S. Latitude 34° 21',W. Longitude 152° 17', with one living and one dead man aboard.The Vigilant left Valparaiso March 25th, and on April 2d was drivenconsiderably south of her course by exceptionally heavy storms andmonster waves. On April 12th the derelict was sighted; and thoughapparently deserted, was found upon boarding to contain one survivorin a half-delirious condition and one man who had evidently been deadfor more than a week.The living man was clutching a horrible stone idol of unknown origin,about a foot in height, regarding whose nature authorities at SydneyUniversity, the Royal Society, and the Museum in College Street allprofess complete bafflement, and which the survivor says he found inthe cabin of the yacht, in a small carved shrine of common pattern.This man, after recovering his senses, told an exceedingly strangestory of piracy and slaughter. He is Gustaf Johansen, a Norwegian ofsome intelligence, and had been second mate of the two-masted schoonerEmma of Auckland, which sailed for Callao February 20th, with acomplement of eleven men.The Emma, he says, was delayed and thrown widely south of her courseby the great storm of March 1st, and on March 22d, in S. Latitude49° 51´, W. Longitude 128° 34´, encountered the Alert, manned bya queer and evil-looking crew of Kanakas and half-castes. Beingordered peremptorily to turn back, Capt. Collins refused; whereuponthe strange crew began to fire savagely and without warning upon theschooner with a peculiarly heavy battery of brass cannon forming partof the yacht's equipment.The Emma's men showed fight, says the survivor, and though theschooner began to sink from shots beneath the waterline they managedto heave alongside their enemy and board her, grappling with thesavage crew on the yacht's deck, and being forced to kill them all,the number being slightly superior, because of their particularlyabhorrent and desperate though rather clumsy mode of fighting.Three of the Emma's men, including Capt. Collins and First MateGreen, were killed; and the remaining eight under Second Mate Johansenproceeded to navigate the captured yacht, going ahead in theiroriginal direction to see if any reason for their ordering back hadexisted.The next day, it appears, they raised and landed on a small island,although none is known to exist in that part of the ocean; and six ofthe men somehow died ashore, though Johansen is queerly reticent aboutthis part of his story and speaks only of their falling into a rockchasm.Later, it seems, he and one companion boarded the yacht and tried tomanage her, but were beaten about by the storm of April 2nd.From that time till his rescue on the 12th, the man remembers little,and he does not even recall when William Briden, his companion, died.Briden's death reveals no apparent cause, and was probably due toexcitement or exposure.Cable advices from Dunedin report that the Alert was well knownthere as an island trader, and bore an evil reputation along thewaterfront. It was owned by a curious group of half-castes whosefrequent meetings and night trips to the woods attracted no littlecuriosity; and it had set sail in great haste just after the storm andearth tremors of March 1st.Our Auckland correspondent gives the Emma and her crew an excellentreputation, and Johansen is described as a sober and worthy man.The admiralty will institute an inquiry on the whole matter beginningtomorrow, at which every effort will be made to induce Johansen tospeak more freely than he has done hitherto.This was all, together with the picture of the hellish image; but whata train of ideas it started in my mind! Here were new treasuries ofdata on the Cthulhu Cult, and evidence that it had strange interestsat sea as well as on land. What motive prompted the hybrid crew toorder back the Emma as they sailed about with their hideous idol?What was the unknown island on which six of the Emma's crew haddied, and about which the mate Johansen was so secretive? What had thevice-admiralty's investigation brought out, and what was known of thenoxious cult in Dunedin? And most marvelous of all, what deep and morethan natural linkage of dates was this which gave a malign and nowundeniable significance to the various turns of events so carefullynoted by my uncle?March 1st—our February 28th according to the International DateLine—the earthquake and storm had come. From Dunedin the Alert andher noisome crew had darted eagerly forth as if imperiously summoned,and on the other side of the earth poets and artists had begun todream of a strange, dank Cyclopean city whilst a young sculptor hadmolded in his sleep the form of the dreaded Cthulhu. March 23rd thecrew of the Emma landed on an unknown island and left six men dead;and on that date the dreams of sensitive men assumed a heightenedvividness and darkened with dread of a giant monster's malign pursuit,whilst an architect had gone mad and a sculptor had lapsed suddenlyinto delirium! And what of this storm of April 2nd—the date on whichall dreams of the dank city ceased, and Wilcox emerged unharmed fromthe bondage of strange fever? What of all this—and of those hints ofold Castro about the sunken, star-born Old Ones and their coming reign;their faithful cult and their mastery of dreams? Was I tottering onthe brink of cosmic horrors beyond man's power to bear? If so, theymust be horrors of the mind alone, for in some way the second of Aprilhad put a stop to whatever monstrous menace had begun its siege ofmankind's soul.That evening, after a day of hurried cabling and arranging, I bade myhost adieu and took a train for San Francisco. In less than a monthI was in Dunedin; where, however, I found that little was known ofthe strange cult-members who had lingered in the old sea taverns.Waterfront scum was far too common for special mention; though therewas vague talk about one inland trip these mongrels had made, duringwhich faint drumming and red flame were noted on the distant hills.In Auckland I learned that Johansen had returned with yellow hairturned white after a perfunctory and inconclusive questioning atSydney, and had thereafter sold his cottage in West Street and sailedwith his wife to his old home in Oslo. Of his stirring experiencehe would tell his friends no more than he had told the admiraltyofficials, and all they could do was to give me his Oslo address.After that I went to Sydney and talked profitlessly with seamen andmembers of the vice-admiralty court. I saw the Alert, now sold andin commercial use, at Circular Quay in Sydney Cove, but gained nothingfrom its non-committal bulk. The crouching image with its cuttlefishhead, dragon body, scaly wings, and hieroglyphed pedestal, waspreserved in the Museum at Hyde Park; and I studied it long and well,finding it a thing of balefully exquisite workmanship, and with thesame utter mystery, terrible antiquity, and unearthly strangeness ofmaterial which I had noted in Legrasse's smaller specimen. Geologists,the curator told me, had found it a monstrous puzzle; for they vowedthat the world held no rock like it. Then I thought with a shudder ofwhat old Castro had told Legrasse about the primal Great Ones: "Theyhad come from the stars, and had brought Their images with Them."Shaken with such a mental revolution as I had never before known, Inow resolved to visit Mate Johansen in Oslo. Sailing for London, Ire-embarked at once for the Norwegian capital; and one autumn daylanded at the trim wharves in the shadow of the Egeberg.Johansen's address, I discovered, lay in the Old Town of King HaroldHaardrada, which kept alive the name of Oslo during all the centuriesthat the greater city masqueraded as "Christiania." I made the brieftrip by taxicab, and knocked with palpitant heart at the door of a neatand ancient building with plastered front. A sad-faced woman in blackanswered my summons, and I was stung with disappointment when she toldme in halting English that Gustaf Johansen was no more.He had not long survived his return, said his wife, for the doings atsea in 1925 had broken him. He had told her no more than he had toldthe public, but had left a long manuscript—of "technical matters" ashe said—written in English, evidently in order to safeguard her fromthe peril of casual perusal. During a walk through a narrow lane nearthe Gothenburg dock, a bundle of papers falling from an attic windowhad knocked him down. Two Lascar sailors at once helped him to hisfeet, but before the ambulance could reach him he was dead. Physiciansfound no adequate cause for the end, and laid it to heart trouble and aweakened constitution.I now felt gnawing at my vitals that dark terror which will never leaveme till I, too, am at rest; "accidentally" or otherwise. Persuading thewidow that my connection with her husband's "technical matters" wassufficient to entitle me to his manuscript, I bore the document awayand began to read it on the London boat.It was a simple, rambling thing—a naive sailor's effort at apost-facto diary—and strove to recall day by day that last awfulvoyage. I can not attempt to transcribe it verbatim in all itscloudiness and redundance, but I will tell its gist enough to show whythe sound of the water against the vessel's sides became so unendurableto me that I stopped my ears with cotton.Johansen, thank God, did not know quite all, even though he saw thecity and the Thing, but I shall never sleep calmly again when I thinkof the horrors that lurk ceaselessly behind life in time and in space,and of those unhallowed blasphemies from elder stars which dreambeneath the sea, known and favored by a nightmare cult ready and eagerto loose them on the world whenever another earthquake shall heavetheir monstrous stone city again to the sun and air.Johansen's voyage had begun just as he told it to the vice-admiralty.The Emma, in ballast, had cleared Auckland on February 20th, and hadfelt the full force of that earthquake-born tempest which must haveheaved up from the sea-bottom the horrors that filled men's dreams.Once more under control, the ship was making good progress when heldup by the Alert on March 22nd, and I could feel the mate's regret ashe wrote of her bombardment and sinking. Of the swarthy cult-fiendson the Alert he speaks with significant horror. There was somepeculiarly abominable quality about them which made their destructionseem almost a duty, and Johansen shows ingenuous wonder at the chargeof ruthlessness brought against his party during the proceedings of thecourt of inquiry. Then, driven ahead by curiosity in their capturedyacht under Johansen's command, the men sight a great stone pillarsticking out of the sea, and in S. Latitude 47° 9', W. Longitude 126°43' come upon a coastline of mingled mud, ooze, and weedy Cyclopeanmasonry which can be nothing less than the tangible substance ofearth's supreme terror—the nightmare corpse-city of R'lyeh, thatwas built in measureless eons behind history by the vast, loathsomeshapes that seeped down from the dark stars. There lay great Cthulhuand his hordes, hidden in green slimy vaults and sending out at last,after cycles incalculable, the thoughts that spread fear to the dreamsof the sensitive and called imperiously to the faithful to come on apilgrimage of liberation and restoration. All this Johansen did notsuspect, but God knows he soon saw enough!I suppose that only a single mountain-top, the hideous monolith-crownedcitadel whereon great Cthulhu was buried, actually emerged from thewaters. When I think of the extent of all that may be brooding downthere I almost wish to kill myself forthwith. Johansen and his men wereawed by the cosmic majesty of this dripping Babylon of elder demons,and must have guessed without guidance that it was nothing of this orof any sane planet. Awe at the unbelievable size of the greenish stoneblocks, at the dizzying height of the great carven monolith, and at thestupefying identity of the colossal statues and bas-reliefs with thequeer image found in the shrine on the Alert, is poignantly visiblein every line of the mate's frightened description.Without knowing what futurism is like, Johansen achieved somethingvery close to it when he spoke of the city; for instead of describingany definite structure or building, he dwells only on the broadimpressions of vast angles and stone surfaces—surfaces too great tobelong to anything right or proper for this earth, and impious withhorrible images and hieroglyphs. I mention his talk about anglesbecause it suggests something Wilcox had told me of his awful dreams.He had said that the geometry of the dream-place he saw was abnormal,non-Euclidean, and loathsomely redolent of spheres and dimensions apartfrom ours. Now an unlettered seaman felt the same thing whilst gazingat the terrible reality.Johansen and his men landed at a sloping mud-bank on this monstrousAcropolis, and clambered slipperily up over titan oozy blocks whichcould have been no mortal staircase. The very sun of heaven seemeddistorted when viewed through the polarizing miasma welling out fromthis sea-soaked perversion, and twisted menace and suspense lurkedleeringly in those crazily elusive angles of carven rock where a secondglance showed concavity after the first showed convexity.Something very like fright had come over all the explorers beforeanything more definite than rock and ooze and weed was seen. Eachwould have fled had he not feared the scorn of the others, and it wasonly half-heartedly that they searched—vainly, as it proved—for someportable souvenir to bear away.It was Rodriguez the Portuguese who climbed up the foot of the monolithand shouted of what he had found. The rest followed him, and lookedcuriously at the immense carved door with the now familiar squid-dragonbas-relief. It was, Johansen said, like a great barn-door; and they allfelt that it was a door because of the ornate lintel, threshold, andjambs around it, though they could not decide whether it lay flat likea trap-door or slantwise like an outside cellar-door. As Wilcox wouldhave said, the geometry of the place was all wrong. One could not besure that the sea and the ground were horizontal, hence the relativeposition of everything else seemed fantasmally variable.Briden pushed at the stone in several places without result. ThenDonovan felt over it delicately around the edge, pressing each pointseparately as he went. He climbed interminably along the grotesquestone molding—that is, one would call it climbing if the thing was notafter all horizontal—and the men wondered how any door in the universecould be so vast. Then, very softly and slowly, the acre-great panelbegan to give inward at the top; and they saw that it was balanced.Donovan slid or somehow propelled himself down or along the jamb andrejoined his fellows, and everyone watched the queer recession of themonstrously carven portal. In this fantasy of prismatic distortion itmoved anomalously in a diagonal way, so that all the rules of matterand perspective seemed upset.The aperture was black with a darkness almost material. Thattenebrousness was indeed a positive quality; for it obscured suchparts of the inner walls as ought to have been revealed, and actuallyburst forth like smoke from its eon-long imprisonment, visiblydarkening the sun as it slunk away into the shrunken and gibbous skyon flapping membranous wings. The odor arising from the newly openeddepths was intolerable, and at length the quick-eared Hawkins thoughthe heard a nasty, slopping sound down there. Everyone listened, andeveryone was listening still when It lumbered slobberingly into sightand gropingly squeezed Its gelatinous green immensity through the blackdoorway into the tainted outside air of that poison city of madness.Poor Johansen's handwriting almost gave out when he wrote of this. Ofthe six men who never reached the ship, he thinks two perished of purefright in that accursed instant. The Thing can not be described—thereis no language for such abysms of shrieking and immemorial lunacy,such eldritch contradictions of all matter, force, and cosmic order.A mountain walked or stumbled. God! What wonder that across the eartha great architect went mad, and poor Wilcox raved with fever in thattelepathic instant? The Thing of the idols, the green, sticky spawn ofthe stars, had awaked to claim his own. The stars were right again, andwhat an age-old cult had failed to do by design, a band of innocentsailors had done by accident. After vigintillions of years greatCthulhu was loose again, and ravening for delight.Three men were swept up by the flabby claws before anybody turned. Godrest them, if there be any rest in the universe. They were Donovan,Guerrera and Angstrom. Parker slipped as the other three were plungingfrenziedly over endless vistas of green-crusted rock to the boat,and Johansen swears he was swallowed up by an angle of masonry whichshouldn't have been there; an angle which was acute, but behaved asif it were obtuse. So only Briden and Johansen reached the boat, andpulled desperately for the Alert as the mountainous monstrosityflopped down the slimy stones and hesitated floundering at the edge ofthe water.Steam had not been suffered to go down entirely, despite the departureof all hands for the shore; and it was the work of only a few momentsof feverish rushing up and down between wheels and engines to getthe Alert under way. Slowly, amidst the distorted horrors of thatindescribable scene, she began to churn the lethal waters; whilst onthe masonry of that charnel shore that was not of earth the titan Thingfrom the stars slavered and gibbered like Polypheme cursing the fleeingship of Odysseus. Then, bolder than the storied Cyclops, great Cthulhuslid greasily into the water and began to pursue with vast wave-raisingstrokes of cosmic potency. Briden looked back and went mad, laughingshrilly as he kept on laughing at intervals till death found him onenight in the cabin whilst Johansen was wandering deliriously.But Johansen had not given out yet. Knowing that the Thing couldsurely overtake the Alert until steam was fully up, he resolvedon a desperate chance; and, setting the engine for full speed, ranlightning-like on deck and reversed the wheel. There was a mightyeddying and foaming in the noisome brine, and as the steam mountedhigher and higher the brave Norwegian drove his vessel head on againstthe pursuing jelly which rose above the unclean froth like the sternof a demon galleon. The awful squid-head with writhing feelers camenearly up to the bowsprit of the sturdy yacht, but Johansen drove onrelentlessly.There was a bursting as of an exploding bladder, a slushy nastinessas of a cloven sunfish, a stench as of a thousand opened graves, anda sound that the chronicler would not put on paper. For an instantthe ship was befouled by an acrid and blinding green cloud, and thenthere was only a venomous seething astern; where—God in heaven!—thescattered plasticity of that nameless sky-spawn was nebulouslyrecombining in its hateful original form, whilst its distance widenedevery second as the Alert gained impetus from its mounting steam.That was all. After that Johansen only brooded over the idol in thecabin and attended to a few matters of food for himself and thelaughing maniac by his side. He did not try to navigate after the firstbold flight, for the reaction had taken something out of his soul. Thencame the storm of April 2nd, and a gathering of the clouds about hisconsciousness. There is a sense of spectral whirling through liquidgulfs of infinity, of dizzying rides through reeling universes on acomet's tail, and of hysterical plunges from the pit to the moon andfrom the moon back again to the pit, all livened by a cachinnatingchorus of the distorted, hilarious elder gods and the green, bat-wingedmocking imps of Tartarus.Out of that dream came rescue—the Vigilant, the vice-admiraltycourt, the streets of Dunedin, and the long voyage back home to theold house by the Egeberg. He could not tell—they would think him mad.He would write of what he knew before death came, but his wife must notguess. Death would be a boon if only it could blot out the memories.That was the document I read, and now I have placed it in the tin boxbeside the bas-relief and the papers of Professor Angell. With it shallgo this record of mine—this test of my own sanity, wherein is piecedtogether that which I hope may never be pieced together again. I havelooked upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even theskies of spring and the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poisonto me. But I do not think my life will be long. As my uncle went, aspoor Johansen went, so I shall go. I know too much, and the cult stilllives.Cthulhu still lives, too, I suppose, again in that chasm of stonewhich has shielded him since the sun was young. His accursed city issunken once more, for the Vigilant sailed over the spot after theApril storm; but his ministers on earth still bellow and prance andslay around idol-capped monoliths in lonely places. He must have beentrapped by the sinking whilst within his black abyss, or else the worldwould by now be screaming with fright and frenzy. Who knows the end?What has risen may sink, and what has sunk may rise. Loathsomenesswaits and dreams in the deep, and decay spreads over the totteringcities of men. A time will come—but I must not and can not think! Letme pray that, if I do not survive this manuscript, my executors may putcaution before audacity and see that it meets no other eye.[1] Found among the papers of the late Francis WaylandThurston, of Boston.*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CALL OF CTHULHU ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.