The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Boy Ranchers Among the Indians; Or, Trailing the Yaquis, by Willard F. Baker The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Boy Ranchers Among the Indians; Or, Trailing the Yaquis, by Willard F. Baker This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at https://www.gutenberg.org/license. If you are not located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  Title: The Boy Ranchers Among the Indians; Or, Trailing the Yaquis Author: Willard F. Baker Release Date: November 27, 2006 [EBook #19930] Language: English    *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK *** Produced by Al HainesTHE BOY RANCHERS AMONG THE INDIANSORTrailing The YaquisByWILLARD F. BAKERAuthor of "The Boy Ranchers," "The Boy Ranchers In Camp," "The BoyRanchers on The Trail," etc.ILLUSTRATEDNEW YORKCUPPLES & LEON COMPANYCOPYRIGHT, 1922, BYCUPPLES & LEON COMPANYTHE BOY RANCHERS AMONG THE INDIANSCONTENTSCHAPTER     I  COMPANY COMING    II  THE TELEGRAM   III  "GET READY, BOYS!"    IV  ON THE TRAIL     V  ROSEMARY AND FLOYD    VI  PRISONERS   VII  INTO THE MOUNTAINS  VIII  SHOOTING STARS    IX  A LONE INDIAN     X  SHOTS FROM AMBUSH    XI  THE SURPRISE   XII  FORWARD AGAIN  XIII  WEARY CAPTIVES   XIV  SURROUNDED    XV  WITH THE TROOPERS   XVI  INDIAN "SIGN"  XVII  AN ALARM XVIII  SEPARATED   XIX  THE FIGHT    XX  THE WHITE FLAG   XXI  THE TRICK DISCOVERED  XXII  ANXIOUS HOURS XXIII  THE LAST STAND  XXIV  THE RUSE OF ROSEMARY   XXV  "ALL'S WELL!"THE BOY RANCHERS AMONG THE INDIANSCHAPTER ICOMPANY COMINGHigh and clear the sweet, western wind brought over the rolling hillsthe sound of singing.  At least it was singing of a sort, for there wasa certain swing and rhythm accompanying the words.  As the melodyfloated toward them, three young cowboys, seated at ease in theirsaddles, looked up and in the direction of the singer.Thus the song.  "Oh, bury me out on th' lonesome prairie!  Put a stone under my haid!  Cover me up with a rope an' a saddle!  'Cause why?  My true-love is daid * * * * * *"It is impossible in cold print to indicate the mournful andlong-drawn-out accent on the word "dead," to rhyme with head."Here comes Slim!" exclaimed one of the youthful cow punchers to hiscompanions."As if we didn't know that, Dick!" laughed the slighter of two ladswho, from their close resemblance, could be nothing less than brothers."His voice doesn't improve with age; does it, Nort?" asked Bud Merkel,smiling at his cousins, Norton and Richard Shannon."But he means well," declared Nort with a chuckle.  "Oh, you Slim!" heshouted, as a tall lanky individual, mounted on a pony of likeproportions, ambled into view, topping a slight rise of the trail."Oh, you Slim!"The older cowboy—a man, to be exact—who had been about to break forthinto the second, or forty-second verse of his song (there being in allseventy-two stanzas, so it doesn't much matter which one isdesignated)—the older cowboy, I say, paused with his mouth open, and ablank look on his face.  Then he grinned—that is the only word forit—and cried:"Well, I'm a second cousin to a ham sandwich!  Where'd you fellows comefrom?""We haven't come—we're just going!" laughed Bud.  "We're going over tosee Dad and the folks.  How are they all?""Oh, they're sittin' pretty!  Sittin' pretty!" affirmed Slim Degnan,with a mingled smile and grin.  "How'd you fellows come out with yourspring round-up?""Pretty fair," admitted Bud.  "A few steers short of what we figuredon, but that's nothing.""I should say not!" chuckled Slim.  "Your paw was a heap sight worseoff'n that.""Rustlers again?" asked Nort quickly, as he and his brother glanced atone another.  They had not forgotten the stirring times when they wereon the trail of the ruthless men who had raided Diamond X ranch, andtheir own cattle range."No, nothin' like that," answered Slim easily.  "Just naturaldepravity, so to speak.  Some of 'em ate loco weed and others jest gottoo tired of livin' I reckon.  But we come out pretty fair.  Just gotth' last bunch shipped, an' I'm mighty glad of it.""Same here!" spoke Dick.  "That's why we came over here—on a sort ofvacation.""I reckon some other folks is headin' this way on th' same sort ofideas," remarked Slim Degnan, as he rolled a cigarette with one hand, atrick for which the boys had no use, though they could but admire theskill of the foreman."What do you mean?" asked Bud.  "Is Dad going to take a vacation?  Ifhe does—""Don't worry, son!  Don't worry!" laughed Slim, as he ignited a matchby the simple process of scratching the head with his thumb nail."Cattle will have to fetch a heap sight more'n they do now when hetakes a few days off," declared the foreman.  "What I meant was thatsome tenderfeet individuals are headin'—"Slim did not finish the sentence for he was nearly thrown from hissaddle (something most unusual with him) as his pony gave a sudden leapto one side, following a peculiar noise in a bunch of grass on whichthe animal almost stepped.The noise was not unlike that made by a locust in a tree on a hot day,but there was in the vibrations a more sinister sound.  And well didSlim's horse know what it indicated."A rattler!" yelled Bud, and close on the heels of his words followedaction.He whipped out his .45, there was a sliver of flame, a sharp crack atwhich the three steeds of the trio of youthful cowboys jumped slightly,and there writhed on the trail a venomous rattle-snake, its head now ashapeless mass where the bullet from Bud's gun had almost obliteratedit."Whew!  A big one!" exclaimed Slim, who had quickly gotten his ponyunder control again, and turned it back toward the scene of action.  Itspoke well for his ability that he had not lost his cigarette, and waspuffing on it, though the sudden leap of his steed, to avoid a bitethat probably would have meant death, had jarred the words from hismouth."First of the season," added Bud, slipping his gun back into theholster."Are they more poisonous then than at other times?" asked Nort."Guess there isn't much difference, son," affirmed Slim.  "I don't wantto be nipped by one at any time.  Much obliged, Bud," he said, easilyenough, though there was a world of meaning in his voice.  "I shoreplum would hate to have to shoot Pinto, and that's what I'd a done ifthat serpent had set its fangs in his leg.""Why'd he shoot him?" asked Dick, for he and his brother, though farremoved from the tenderfoot class, were not wise to all western waysyet."There isn't much chance for a horse after it's been bit deep by arattler," Bud explained.  "Of course I don't say every horse that'sbitten will die, but it's harder to doctor them than it is a man.  AndSlim meant he wouldn't want to see Pinto suffer.""You're right there, Bud!" drawled Slim Degnan.  "They do say thisnew-fangled treatment is better'n whisky for snake bites, but I don'treckon I want to chance it.""The permanganate of potash is almost a sure cure for the ordinarysnake bite, if you use it in time," declared Bud.  "But I don't knowthat it would work after a fer de lance set his fangs into you.Anyhow I'm glad we haven't anything worse than rattlers and copperheadsaround here.""They're bad enough!" affirmed Slim, as he gave a backward glancetoward the still writhing form of the big rattler, which was now pastall power of doing harm.The incident seemed to cause the foreman to forget what he had beenabout to say when his horse shied, and the boy ranchers, by which titleis indicated Bud, Nort and Dick, did not attach enough importance to itto cause them to question their companion.  Yet what Slim had beenabout to say was destined to have a great influence on their lives inthe immediate future, and was to cause them to ride forward intodanger.  But then danger was nothing new to them."Well, things are right peaceful since we got rid of Del Pinzo and hisgang of greasers," observed Slim, as he rode on with the boys down thetrail that led to Diamond X ranch, the property of Bud's father."But I'm always worrying for fear they'll come back, or we'll have somesort of trouble with our cattle," observed Dick.  "It doesn't seempossible that over at our Happy Valley ranch we'll be let alone to doas we please.""Don't cross a bridge until you hear the rattling of the planks!"paraphrased Nort to his brother.  "We're all right so far.""Yes, things are sittin' right pretty for the present," declared Slim."Well, here we are," he added, as a turn of the trail brought themwithin sight of the corrals and other parts of Diamond X ranch.  "Andthere's your folks," he added, as a woman and girl, standing in theyard of a red ranch house, began to wave their hands to the boys."I see Dad!" exclaimed End."Where?" asked Nort."Over by the pony corral, talking to Yellin' Kid.  Looks like Kid justcame in with the mail.""He started after it when I rode out to look for a couple of strays,"said Slim.  "Beckon he jest come back.  You boys'll hear morepartic'lars now, I reckon.""Particulars of what?" asked Nort.  "Was that what you started to saywhen Bud shot the rattler?"Slim did not answer, the reason being that a moment later he wassurrounded by a knot of laughing, pushing, jostling and shoutingcowboys, who seemed to want the foreman to settle some disputed point.Bud and his two cousin chums rode on and greeted Mr. Merkel and hiswife, who was "Ma" to every cowboy within fifty miles, and Nell, whowas Bud's pretty sister."Hello, Dad!  Hello, Uncle Henry!" was the greeting.  "Hello, Sis!""Got any pie, Nell?" added Bud."For Nort and Dick—yes," the girl answered.  "But you won't want piewhen you hear—""Say, what's all this mysterious news?" broke out Bud.  "First Slimstarts to tell us and then—""Rosemary and Floyd are coming!" merrily cried Nell."Rosemary and Floyd?" questioned Bud."Your cousins, or, to be more exact, your second cousins," explainedMrs. Merkel.  "We had a letter last week saying they might come on fromCalifornia, and now your father has just had a special delivery letter,saying they're on their way.  They'll be here any time.""Company's coming!  Company's coming!" joyously sang Nell, for she wasdelighted with the news."Rosemary and Floyd," repeated Bud, "I don't seem—""You haven't seen them in some years," his mother said.  "But I'm sureyou'll like them.""Especially Rosemary," laughed Nort, and Nell stuck out her tongue athim."Well, I'm glad they didn't come until after the spring round-up,"spoke Mr. Merkel, looking at a letter he held.  "We'll have more time,now, to be with 'em and show 'em around.  I wonder—"But, as in the case of Slim, he did not finish what he started to say,for there came an interruption, in its way almost as sinister as thewhirring of the rattle-snake's tail.Toward the ranch buildings came the sound of rapidly galloping hoofs,and as they all looked in the direction of the sound they saw, ridingin toward them, one of the cowboys."It's Old Billee Dobb!" exclaimed Yellin' Kid in a voice that was, asusual, unnecessarily loud.  "Looks like rustlers were after him!"But none rode in pursuit of the veteran cowpuncher, though he wasspurring his steed to its utmost."They've broke out!" he yelled as soon as he was within hearingdistance.  "They've broke out!  Scatter my watermelon seeds, butthey've broke out!""What has?" demanded Mr. Merkel.  "Our steers?""No!  The Yaquis!""Indians!" snapped out Bud."That's them, son!  They've broke out—left the reservation, andthey're headed this way!  Oh, rattle-snakes!  Get your guns ready!  TheYaquis have broke out!"The boy ranchers looked at each other and it can not be denied thatthere was a joyous light in their eyes.  Nell shrank closer to herfather, and Mr. Merkel reached over and placed his hand in reassuringfashion on his wife's ample shoulder."Indians!" murmured Dick.  "I wonder—""Sure we can help fight 'em!" exclaimed Nort, rightly guessing thatthis was his brother's question.CHAPTER IITHE TELEGRAMWhile the wind fluttered in his hand the letter from Rosemary, tellingof her plans to visit Diamond X with her brother, and while Mr. Merkellooked anxiously at Billee Dobb on his panting steed, a far-off lookwas in the eyes of the ranchman.  Bud thought he knew what his father'sair portended, and he was eager to speak, but he, as well as theothers, felt the tenseness of the situation, and waited for what mightcome next.Nell was about to speak, to voice her gladness that a girl companionwas to come to the ranch, when Mr. Merkel remarked:"How come you heard all this, Bill—I mean about the Yaquis?  None ofit filtered here until you come up sweating lather!""I met one of the deputy sheriffs in town," explained the veteran cowpuncher.  "He'd just got a telegraph message tellin' him to be on thelookout, as the redskins might be headed this way.""Whoop-ee!" yelled Bud, flapping his hat down on his pony's flank,thereby causing the animal to leap sideways.  "Think of it!  Indians!Whoop-ee!""It's dreadful!" murmured Ma Merkel.  "I don't like to think about it!""But, Aunt, we have to think of it if the Yaquis are coming this way,"spoke Nort.  "We want to think of it to protect you and Nell!""That's right!" added Dick, while some of the cowboys grinned at theeagerness and impetuosity of the boys."Shucks!" exclaimed Mrs. Merkel, getting back her nerve.  "Those Yaquisare nothing more than a lot of Greasers, anyhow.  They'll turn home atthe first sight of a few of the sheriff's posse.  I don't believe I'llworry after all.""That's right!" shouted Yellin' Kid.  "No need to worry when the bunchfrom Happy Valley joins with the Diamond X outfit!  We're a match forall the Yaquis that never washed!""Let's don't be too sure of that, boys," cautioned Mr. Merkel.  "Whatmore did you hear, Billee Dobb?  Is it at all serious?  How many of theimps broke loose?""That I don't know, there's enough of 'em to make the government takeaction.  Some of the regular troops have received orders to move, andthey're on their way now.  If there were only a scattered few of theYaquis, Uncle Sam wouldn't be so anxious.  They've raided one Arizonatown, I heard.""They have!" cried Nort, Dick and Bud in a breath."Why this must have happened several days ago," exclaimed Mr. Merkel."The Yaquis are quartered some distance from here, and news doesn'ttravel as fast as all that.  How do you account for it, Billee?""Well, the fellow who told me got his information from one of thosescavengers," explained Billee."Scavengers!" cried Bud."Yes, you know—one of them fellers that go up in flyin' machines,"explained the old cow puncher."Oh, you mean aviators!" exploded Bud, trying not to laugh."Well, something like that, yes," admitted Billee.  "Word of the risingof the Indians was sent out by wireless, and some of the flyingmachines were ordered to the border.  One of 'em who was flying aroundhere had tire trouble, or something like that, and had to come down.It was from him the boys back in town got some of the news, and thedeputy sheriff gave out the rest."Oh, the Yaquis are risin' up all right, and they may come out here.  Irode over like a prairie fire to let you folks know.  We've had troubleenough here at Diamond X and I didn't want any more.""Much obliged to you, Billee," said Mr. Merkel.  "Did you happen tohear what town it was in Arizona that the Yaquis raided?""It was La—La—wait a minute now.  It was one of those crazy Spanishnames.  I'll tell you—La—La—La Nogalique—that's it!""La Nogalique!" cried Mr. Merkel, and he looked at the letter fromRosemary."That's her!" affirmed the cowboy."Why—why!" exclaimed the ranchman, "that's the way they werecoming—in their auto!  La Nogalique!  They might have been there—""Who were coming?" asked his wife quickly."Rosemary and Floyd; They'd be there just about—when was that raid,Billee Dobb?" cried Mr. Merkel."Last Friday!"The ranchman whistled."That's bad!" he murmured.  "Bad!""Would Rosemary and her brother have reached there by then?" asked Mrs.Merkel."Just about," her husband replied slowly.  "Just about!  This looksbad!  Boys, we've got to do something!  Those Yaquis may just be off ona little harmless jamboree, or they may be excited by a lot of theirMedicine Men, or whatever they call 'em!  Once let 'em get on therampage, half Mexicans as they are, and we won't know what to expect!It looks bad!  I'm glad the round-up is over.  It gives us time.  Boys,I think—"But what he thought Mr. Merkel did not disclose—at least for the timebeing.  The attention of all was again attracted by the sound of rapidhoofbeats, and, looking toward the trail that led to town, a horsemanwas seen riding toward Diamond X.  By the manner of his approach it waseasily assumed that he came on no ordinary errand."More news of the Indians, or I miss my guess!" murmured Bud.And while the solitary horseman is rapidly approaching, I will endeavorto imitate his speed in acquainting my new readers with a little of thepast history concerning the boy ranchers as they have played theirparts in the previous books of this series.The initial volume is entitled "The Boy Ranchers," and tells how Nortand Dick Shannon went to visit their cousin, Bud Merkel, on the ranchof the latter's father.  This ranch, Diamond X, was in a western state,not far from the Mexican border.  And, as you know, the Yaqui Indianswere, in the main, a tribe of Mexican Redmen, who made their homepartly in the Land of Montezuma and partly in Arizona, as best pleasedthem.  Efforts were made by the Mexican Government to keep the Yaquison a reservation, but the efforts were not always successful.Mr. Merkel was a ranchman of experience, and planned to have his sonfollow in his footsteps.  This Bud was eager to do, and when hiscousins came he saw a chance for them to get into the cattle raisingbusiness on their own account.This they did, but not before they had solved a strange mysterycentering about Diamond X.  As you may recall, the ranch was namedafter the brand used to mark its cattle—an X within a diamond outline.The mystery solved, the boy ranchers turned their attention to othermatters, and these are related in the second volume, "The Boy RanchersIn Camp."  Mr. Merkel, by using an ancient underground water coursebeneath Snake Mountain, had brought much-needed moisture to a distantvalley he owned, thus making it possible to use it as a place forraising cattle.  This new ranch, variously called Happy Valley, DiamondX Second, and Buffalo Wallow, was given in charge of the boys toexperiment with.  They were allowed to raise cattle on their ownresponsibility.  Without water Diamond X Second was out of thequestion.  And the story in the second book has to do with the effortsof Del Pinzo, a dangerous character, and others, to drive away theboys.  There was a fight over water rights, and another desperatefight, involving some strange ancient secrets.The third book, "The Boy Ranchers on the Trail," deals with the boyranchers after they have become full-fledged "cow punchers."  Sosuccessful were they in Happy Valley that they incurred the enmity ofDel Pinzo and his followers.  Cattle rustlers stole many valuablesteers from Bud and his cousins, and it was not until after a desperateencounter that the unscrupulous men were defeated.Then, for a time, peace settled down over Diamond X and the boys'ranch.  The spring round-up was over, and a successful year begun, whenthe ordinary course of events was interrupted in the manner I have setdown in the beginning of this book—by news that the Yaquis had risen.All eyes were turned on the solitary horseman, who rode fast on theheels of Billee Dobb.  As this rider came nearer, it could be seen thata paper fluttered in his hand."Special delivery letter, maybe," ventured Dick."Maybe," admitted Bud."I—I have a feeling that it's bad news," murmured Mrs. Merkel to Nell."Maybe not," Bud's sister whispered.  "It may be only a rush order forcattle to be shipped."All that were fit have been shipped," her mother said.  "I'mafraid—I'm afraid—"With a shower of gravel, scattered by the sliding feet of hishastily-reined pony, the man drew up in front of the group."Mr. Henry Merkel here?" he asked, crisply."Here," said Bud's father, quietly."Got a telegraph message for you.  It's from La Nogalique!""La Nogalique!" murmured Mr. Merkel.  "Oh, I hope Rosemary—"With a rapid motion Mr. Merkel tore open the yellow envelope.CHAPTER III"GET HEADY, BOYS!"Anxiously the boy ranchers and the others watched the face of thestockman as he read the message.  It was rather lengthy, whichaccounted for the somewhat protracted time it took Mr. Merkel to get atthe meaning of the words.  But when he had read to the end he passedthe missive to his wife, exclaiming, as he did so:"Couldn't be much worse!""Are they killed?" cried Nell, clasping her hands."No, but maybe they'd better be," grimly answered her father."Rosemary and Floyd are carried off by the Yaquis!" he added."How do you know?""Does the message say so?""Which way did they go?"These were the questions, fired in rapid succession, by Bud, Nort andDick."That information's in the telegram," explained Mr. Merkel.  "Themessage is to me from the Sheriff of La Nogalique, or at least fromsome one in his service, for it's signed with his name.  I know him,slightly.""Did he see Rosemary and Floyd carried off?" Dick wanted to know."Not exactly.  But wait.  I'll read it so you may all hear," said Mr.Merkel, taking the missive from his wife's trembling hand.  "Old HankFowler didn't try to get it all in ten words so we have a pretty fairidea of what went on.  Reckon he knew he didn't have to pay for thatmessage.  It come out of the county funds I take it.  Listen to this,boys!"Mr. Merkel read:"'I regret to inform you that some relatives of yours were carried offin the last raid of the Yaquis here.  The Indians came over the borderfrom Mexico and shot up this place (La Nogalique).  I was away, butsome of the boys give them a fight, and drove them off.  But they tookwith them some guns, cattle, what money they could steal and a younglady and gentleman who claim to know you.  The way it happened wasthis.  This young lady, named Rosemary Boyd, and her brother Floyd,came here in an auto, from California.  They give it out they were ontheir way to Diamond X.  But they hadn't more than reached town thanthe Yaquis came in and shot things up."'The Indians took this young couple, and it was owing to the pluck ofthe girl that we knew what happened.'""Good for Rosemary!" cried Nell.  "How did it happen?""I'm coming to it," her father said, having paused to get his breath.It was dry work, talking so much and under the stress of excitement,and Nell had broken in on him."'As the Indians were riding away, with this young lady and herbrother,'" the message went on, "'she managed to scribble something ona piece of paper she tore from a note book.  She tossed it to one ofthe cowboys who was shot in fighting the Yaquis.  He brought the girl'smessage to me after the fight, when I'd sent some of my men to trailthe devils.  This is what the message said, and I'm sending the actualmessage to you by mail.  "Get word to my uncle, Henry Merkel, Diamond XRanch, that Floyd and I are taken.  Ask him to send help."  That's whatthe message said and I'm doing as requested.  I've sent all the help Ican, but the Yaquis got the start on us, owing to the fact that I wasout of town with a posse after rustlers.  But we'll get that girl andboy back or bust every leg we've got, Mr. Merkel.  And you can send onhelp if you want to and join us.'"The lengthy message was signed with the name "Hank Fowler," and whenthe reading was finished, Mr. Merkel glanced around at his listeners."These young folks are some kin of yours, I take it?" asked Old BilleeDobb."Sure," assented the ranchman.  "More of my wife's than mine, but it'sall the same.  They were coming here on a visit, coming all the wayfrom California by auto.  I thought it was rather risky when they firstwrote of it, but my wife says Rosemary is a good driver, and Floydalmost as good.""Is he a Westerner?" asked Yellin' Kid."Not born and raised here," said Mr. Merkel, "but Floyd is notenderfoot, and as for Rosemary—""She's a whole can of peaches!  That's what she is!" cried Bud.  "Tohave the nerve to stop and scribble a message to dad when the Yaquishad her and her brother.  Clear grit I call that!""Sure thing!" assented Nort."Gee!  I wish I'd been there!" sighed Dick."What!  To be captured by the Indians and made into sausage meat?"joked Mr. Merkel, for at times they poked a bit of fun at Dick onaccount of his plumpness.  Though, truth to tell, he was now not toostout, and the life of the west had greatly hardened him."They wouldn't have caught me without a fight!" he bruskly declared."That's right!  A fight!" cried Bud.  "What are we going to do aboutthis, Dad?  We can't let our cousins be carried off this way; can we,fellows?" he demanded of his boy rancher companions."I should say not!" was the instant response, duet fashion."No, it wouldn't be right for us to sit back and do nothing," agreedMr. Merkel.  "There aren't any too many men available to help out thesheriff.  We've got to do our share.  Get ready boys!" and he looked athis son and nephews, his glance also roving over his own aggregation ofcowboys, most of whom were now gathered in front of the main ranchbuilding of Diamond X."Where are we going?" asked Dick."On the trail of the Yaquis!" answered his uncle.  "We can spare mostof the bunch, now that the round-up is over.  You don't need many outat your ranch, Bud.  Call in all you can spare, and we'll hit thetrail!""Whoo-pee!" shouted Nort, whirling his horse about and setting it at agallop down through the corrals."This is news!" yelled his brother, following the lead of Nort."I only hope we aren't too late!" remarked Bud, when his cousins cameback to join him."Too late?  What do you mean!" asked Nort."I mean to save Rosemary—and Floyd.  Those Yaquis—they're regulardevils when they get on the war path!  Oh, I hope we aren't too late!"It was a hope the others shared.Rapid action replaced the comparative quiet that reigned during thereading of the telegram.  Cowboys rode to and fro, and Bud and hiscousins prepared to depart for Diamond X Second to arrange for takingthe trail against the Yaquis.As the boy ranchers rode off down the trail, promising to return asspeedily as possible, to join with the bunch from Diamond X, theireager talk over the recent events was interrupted by the noise ofshouting."What's that?" cried Dick, looking in the direction of the noise.  Itappeared to come from a swale, or depression among some small, roundedknolls."Sounds like a cattle stampede," remarked Bud, urging his pony forward."And yet it can't be that."Nort and Dick followed as soon as they could swing their horses about.The sound of shouting and the thunder of the feet of manyanimals—horses or steers—came more plainly to the ears of the boyranchers.CHAPTER IVON THE TRAILWith Bud in the advance, urging his pony to topmost speed, Nort andDick followed.  Bud shot along the trail, up one rise, down another,all the while coming nearer to the noise which increased in intensity.Clearly something was wrong either among a bunch of Diamond X cattle,or with some of the horses belonging to the ranch outfit.  And thatsome human individual was concerned in the "fracas" was evident by theshouts and yells that, now and then, punctured the air."By the Great Horned Toad!  Look at that!" cried Bud, when he waswithin viewing distance."He'll be killed!" added Nort."No, he's out of it now!" yelled Dick.  "But maybe it's the end of him!"As the three boy ranchers thus gave vent to their surprise, and almostwhile they were in the act of exclaiming, a ragged figure of a man hadshot over a stout corral fence, and had fallen in a heap just on theother side and out of the reach of the teeth and hoofs of a number ofhalf wild cow ponies.  The thud of the animals' bodies, as they threwthemselves against the fence, in the stoppage of their mad race to getthe ragged man, could plainly be heard."Whew!" cried Bud, reigning his pony to a sliding stop, as he saw that,for the present at least, the man was safe, though his inert form mightindicate serious injury.  "That was a close call!""What was he doing in that corral?" asked Nort, and his hand, almost byinstinct, slid to the handle of his .45 protruding from the holster."And who is he?" asked Dick, who had followed his brother's lead."That's what we've got to find out," said Bud, who, perhaps from longerassociation with western conditions, had manifested no inclination todraw his gun.  "Guess he'll wait for us," he added, as he slid from thesaddle, having ridden close to the prostrate form.But, even as Bud spoke, and as Dick and Nort dismounted, the strangerrose to a sitting position, rubbed his hand across his forehead, triedto smile at the boys and then, in what would have been a jolly voiceunder other circumstances said:"I'm supposed to ask 'Where am I?' I believe, but we'll pass that up,and I'll substitute 'what time is it?'  Just as a variation you know,"and he actually chuckled.  "Not that it matters," he added, as he sawBud fishing out a sturdy silver watch—the only kind it is safe tocarry on a cattle range.  "Doesn't matter in the least.""Then why—" began Nort.  But the stranger stopped him with a friendlygesture."Don't ask me that!" he begged, smiling broadly, as he scrambled to hisfeet, thereby disclosing the fact that he was even more ragged as togarments than at first appeared when he was lying down.  "Don't ask methat.  The question has been fired at me ever since I was old enough todecide whether I'd have butter on my bread or take it in the naturalstate.  It was 'why did I do this'—'why didn't I do that' until, invery desperation I gave up trying to answer.  I do now.  I don't knowwhy I ask the time.  I really don't want to know.  There are otherquestions more to the point.  Don't trouble to answer.  And pleasedon't ask me 'why' this, that—or anything.  Frankly I don't know, andI care less.  I am here.  Where I'll be to-morrow no one knows, and noone cares.  It is my philosophy—the philosophy of a rolling stone.  Iassure you, gentlemen—"This time it was Bud who interrupted.  There was a look on the face andin the eyes of the young ranchman that his cousins could wellinterpret.  It meant that fooling, nonsense or an evasion of the issuewas at an end."Look here, stranger," said Bud, and, though his voice was stern it wasnot unfriendly.  "Maybe you are a tenderfoot, but you don't look it,and I reckon you've been around here long enough to assimilate the factthat when a stranger is found among other men's horses that stranger isdue to make an explanation.""My boy, you are right!" laughed the ragged man.  "Absolutely andtetotally right!  Of course you recognize the fact that I am no longer'among' your horses.  I was, but I am not.  I came out, so tospeak," and he indicated, by a tumbling motion of his hands, that hehad leaped the fence to get away from the half wild ponies."That's all right," spoke Bud, his voice still stern.  His cousins wereleaving this matter entirely to him.  "That's all right.  But youwere among them, and it may be more to our good luck than our goodmanagement that you aren't astride one of them now, and riding off.What's your name and where are you from?"These were vital, western questions."You are right in your surmise," said the man, limping toward the boys,and still smiling, which occupation he had not left off since arisingto his feet.  "If luck had been with me I would have ridden on one ofyour horses.  Not off—far be it from me to do that.  But I would haveridden to the nearest ranch, tried to get work and so have paid for theuse of the animal."However, fate had other things in store for me.  I never saw such wildanimals!  They came at me like so many fiends, and after trying in vainto quiet them, and I may say I have some skill with wild beasts, Ithought discretion the better part of foolhardiness, and—made for thefence!"He chuckled at the recollection."Then you weren't going to steal a horse?" asked Nort."Far from it, kind sir," and the man bowed with just the slightestsuggestion of mockery, at which Bud frowned.  "I am a lone traveler,and I sought help on my way—help for which I would have paid in work.""Who are you?" snapped out Bud."I have told you my name," said the stranger, in gentle contrast toBud's harsh tone.  "Rolling Stone, at your service," and he bowedagain, this time with no trace of mockery."Rolling Stone!" ejaculated Nort."That isn't a name," complained Bud, but his voice had lost some of itsstern quality, and his lips trembled on the verge of a smile."I realize that it is more a state of being, or a quality," the manadmitted.  "But it happens to be a sort of paraphrase of my title.  Iam Roland Stone, at your service, but my taste, inclination and theaction of disheartened friends has fastened the other appellation onme.  Rolling Stone I am by name and by nature."He said it in a way that left little room for doubt, and the boyranchers seemed to realize this.  They could understand how such acharacter could easily change Roland into "Rolling," if such was hisnature.  And "Stone" was a common enough name."All right, Mr. Rolling Stone," said Bud.  "If that's your choice itstill leaves the other question unanswered.  Where are you from?""Everywhere and anywhere, which is to say nowhere," came the reply."You need only to look at me to tell what I am—a happy-go-luckyindividual, a tramp, a hobo, and yet I am willing to work when thespirit is on me.  I never stole a dollar or a dollar's worth in all mylife.  I have harmed neither man, woman or child.  I am my own worstenemy, and I am—frankly—hungry!  If you will give me food I'll payfor it in work to the best of my ability—""You said you had some skill with wild animals," interrupted Bud.  "Doyou mean—""I don't mean horses, if you will excuse the interruption," the mansaid.  "There is my one failing.  I used to be with a circus, and thelion and I were good friends.  Perhaps some taint of the wild beastodor clings to me, which causes horses to rear up and tear.  Or else—""That didn't cause these ponies to act that way," laughed Bud, who,with his cousins, was rapidly forming a liking for the stranger."They're half wild themselves.  Just in off the range, and they haven'tbeen broken yet.  I doubt if Yellin' Kid would tackle one.  It isn'tanything to your discredit that you got out in a hurry.  But you sayyou're hungry?"That was an appeal which never went unheeded in the west."Mightily hungry, fair sir!" and, though Rolling Stone smiled, therewas an appealing note in his voice.  "The last meal I had for nothingwas given me by Hank Fowler.""Hank Fowler!" cried Bud."The sheriff?" added Nort."Who sent on to Mr. Merkel the message from Rosemary?" completed Dick."Rosemary—that's for remembrance," quoted Rolling Stone with a smile."I know her not, and yet Hank Fowler is a sheriff to my certainknowledge.""Do you mean the one from La Nogalique?" persisted Bud."That same.  I appealed to him when I was down on my luck, as I nearlyalways am, and he befriended me.  I have known him for years.""Then there can't be much wrong with you," decided Bud.  "If you wantwork, my father can fix you up.  We'll need some extra hands if we pullout a lot to take the trail after the Yaquis.  So—""Excuse me, young man.  But did you say—Yaquis?" asked RollingStone, and there was a new and eager note in his voice."Yes," supplemented Nort.  "The Yaquis—Indians you know—have gonewild again and they've raided a town and carried off some of ourfriends.  We're going to—""You can't tell me anything about the Yaquis that I don't know, youngman!" exclaimed Rolling Stone, and he seemed imbued with new life.  "Iknow they're Indians, of a sort, though a very rotten sort.  Theykilled my best friend years ago.  I haven't heard anything about a raidlately.  Been too lazy to look for news, I reckon.  But if it's truethat they're on the rampage, and you're on the trail after them let me,I beg of you, have a hand in it.  I asked for work just now.  Changethat to a fight and I'm with you at the fall of the hat and until Idrop!  Let me come!  Let me help pay back the debt I have against theseinfernal Yaquis.  Will you?" he asked eagerly.Bud looked at his cousins.  Here was a new element.  And with all hislight manner, and ragged clothes, there was something very satisfyingabout Rolling Stone, as he asked to be called."We'll need all the help we can get," said Bud, slowly.  "If HankFowler says you're all right, that goes with us.  Sure it isn't HankFisher who vouches for you?" he asked sharply."Hank Fisher—I don't know the man," was the answer."You're better off not to," spoke Bud grimly, for Fisher was a ranchmanof unsavory reputation, who was believed to have figured in more thanone affair with the half breed Del Pinzo, to the discomfort of DiamondX."Hank Fowler, the sheriff, will tell you I'm straight," said RollingStone.  "I don't say I haven't faults," he went on.  "But when I sayI'm my own worst enemy I've spilled an earful," and he laughed genially."We'll let it go at that," Bud answered.  "If Mr. Fowler says you're onthe level that's sufficient.  And you can come with us.""Thanks," was the laconic reply.  "Will one of your ponies carrydouble?" and he looked over his shoulder at the corral."We won't ask you to ride one of those mustangs," laughed Bud.  "Andit's too much to double up.  I'll go back and get one of dad's ponies.It isn't far.  You stay here," he added to his cousins and RollingStone.  "I'll be back soon."Riding rapidly, Bud was quickly back at Diamond X.  He told the storyof the meeting with Rolling Stone.  At first Mr. Merkel was a bitsuspicious, but it happened that one of the cowboys had heard ofRolling Stone, and knew him to be what he laid claim to."I reckon he's all right," assented the ranchman.  "Take him with you,Bud.  You'll need help, and if he knows anything about the Yaquis he'llbe of value.""All right," remarked Bud.  "He's on.  What horse can I take for him?"One was selected.  Together the boy ranchers and Rolling Stone rode outto Happy Valley, for certain matters must be adjusted there before thestart could be made after the Indians who had carried off Rosemary andFloyd.Work went on at top speed, and a day later our young heroes, withRolling Stone, better dressed, but the same unconventional spirit,started forth."On the trail!" grimly remarked Bud as they started to join forces withthose from Diamond X."On the trail!" echoed Nort and Dick."And we can't meet with those Yaquis any too soon for me!" addedRolling Stone."You seem to have it in for them rather hard," observed Dick."It can't be any too hard," answered the man with a grim tightening ofthe muscles around his mouth.  "When I think of all they did—"He paused and gazed at the distant horizon.  That there was a storyconnected with his hate of the Yaquis none of the boys doubted, andthey were eager to hear it.  But this was not the time and place.  Toomuch remained to be done, and there was too little time in which to doit."I wonder when we'll meet up with the imps?" spoke Nort, as they ambledeasily along."No telling," said Bud.  "We've got things in shape back there so thatwe can remain away all summer if need be," and he glanced back towardtheir ranch which they had just left.  "But I'd like to clean up thisbunch of 'onery' Yaquis, and then get back on the job.  Cattle raisingis our business.""But just now we're following a side line of rescuing Rosemary andFloyd," observed Nort.  "And I think we can do it!"Well it was that Fate veiled the Future.CHAPTER VROSEMARY AND FLOYD"Floyd, I don't like this a bit!""What's the matter, Rosemary?"The young man driving the sturdy little sport model of a car broughtthe machine to a stop and glanced at the girl sitting beside him.There was a quizzical smile on his face, a good-natured smile, however."What don't you like, Rosemary?" he asked again, and there was not inhis tone any air of bored fault-finding such as seems to come naturalto some brothers in appealing from a decision of some sisters."I don't like the way this trail is shaping up, if you'll excuse myEnglish," answered Rosemary Boyd."Your English is perfectly excusable, Rosemary," retorted Floyd.  "Infact I rather like it.  It is much better than this trail, to befrank.""Are you sure we have come the right road?""As sure as I can be of anything in this doggoned country, where theyhaven't enough sign posts.  I took the turns they told me to take inthe last town we passed through, and all the land marks have run trueto form so far.""But we're a good ways from Uncle Henry's ranch yet; aren't we, Floyd?"and there crept into the voice of Rosemary an anxious note."Well, maybe we are, but what do we care for a few hundred miles?"He laughed merrily, showing a set of white, even teeth, and his jollitywas so catching that his sister had to join in."Well, I suppose it really doesn't make much difference," she said."We're out for a lark and we've had it, so far.  Only I don't seem tofancy sleeping out in the open again to-night.  We were lost yesterday,you remember, and didn't make the town we expected to."Floyd seemed to be waiting for something."Well?" he suggested.  "Why don't you add that it was all my fault.""I was going to leave that out," Rosemary said."But I'll admit it," acknowledged her brother.  "I did pull a bloomer,as an Englishman would say, and I don't intend to do it again to-day.I admit I shouldn't have tried to do more than a day's trip yesterday.If I had taken your advice and stayed in the town where there was atleast an apology for a hotel, you'd have had a better night's sleep.""Well, I didn't mind being out in the open so much, after I got used tothe howling of those wolves," Rosemary remarked."Coyotes—coyotes—not wolves, though they're off the same piece ofgoods," corrected Floyd."Well, never mind the lesson in natural history," laughed Rosemary."The point at issue is that I don't like the sort of country we'regetting into.  It doesn't look to me as though this could ever lead usto Uncle Henry's ranch, and I'm anxious to get there.  Bud's motherwrote that he and his cousins, Nort and Dick, had such exciting times,that I'm anxious to join them.""So'm I," said Floyd.  "And we'll get there.""Not on this trail!" declared his sister, as her brother was about tostart the car.  "You're getting into a worse and wilder country all thewhile.  I think we should have taken the left turn a ways back.""The cow puncher we asked told us to take the right turn, and I did,"retorted Floyd."Cow puncher!" exclaimed his sister scornfully, "He looked more like arenegade Mexican than a real American cowboy.  And his accent wasSpanish, too.""Oh, well, lots of good American cowboys came from Mexican or Spanishpeople, and speak both languages," asserted Floyd.  "Don't hold thatagainst him.""I don't," said Rosemary.  "But I will hold it against him if he hasput us on the wrong trail, and I'm beginning to believe that's what hedid.  And maybe purposely, Floyd.""Purposely?  What do you mean?""Well, you know what we were told when we started out to make thistrip—that we had better take the most civilized and best traveledtrails, as the Yaquis were reported to be on the verge of making anoutbreak.""Yes, and for that reason I kept well away from the border.  But wearen't anywhere near the Yaquis country now.""Aren't we?" asked Rosemary, with a strange quietness in her voice."No, of course not!" snapped Floyd.  It was the first time, sincebrother and sister had started from California, to make a somewhatadventurous trip to their uncle's ranch that they had been near a"break" in their cordial relations.  "The Yaquis are five hundred milesfrom here.""I hope so, I surely do hope so!" murmured Rosemary, in such ferventtones that her brother felt an uneasy sense of fear creeping into hisheart.  For the first time he began to realize that perhaps they haddone a foolhardy thing in making this trip alone.  He slipped his handinto his pocket, making sure that his gun was in readiness.  And it didnot relieve his anxiety to note that Rosemary did the same.Brother and sister were of the west.  They were brave and bold and notafraid of danger when they had half a chance to meet it face to face.But they had heard much of the treacherous and mean nature of theYaquis Indians.  These were not like the early American tribes ofredmen, who had something of a code of honor in their warfare, crueland heartless as it seemed at times."Well, do you want to go back?" asked Floyd, as he slowly started thecar.Rosemary considered for a moment."Let's look at the map and go over what we were told along the route,"she suggested.Then followed a careful scanning of papers and drawings, with theresult that Rosemary said:"I guess we may as well go on.  It's a long way back to the nearesttown, and this map does seem to indicate that we are heading for LaNogalique.""That's what I say!" chimed in Floyd.  "I only hope La Nogalique isbetter than it sounds.  If we can put up there for the night you'll geta little rest, and maybe I'll have this carburetor adjusted.  I don'tlike the way it's acting.""Oh, good, sweet, kind carburetor, don't go back on us now!" imploredRosemary, kissing her hand toward the engine of the car.  "Be nice andI'll sprinkle you with violet talcum powder when we get to UncleHenry's!""Don't be silly!" grunted Floyd."Let's go!" called his sister.  "It's getting late, and according tothis map it's ten miles yet to La Nogalique—which means twenty if weare going by past performances."The car sped forward, the trail seeming to grow worse instead ofbetter, as might be expected if they were approaching a town.  Lurchingfrom side to side, making sharp turns to avoid bowlders and holes,Floyd guided the machine.  Now and then Rosemary would glance at herbrother, after a particularly vicious jolt, but she said nothing."A good sport!" Floyd mentally voted his sister.They topped a steep rise, and as they started down the other slope,making a turn, Rosemary pointed ahead and exclaimed:"There!  Now we're all right!  La Nogalique!"Nestling in a small valley was a smaller town, its few buildingsshowing plainly in the last rays of the sun which would soon set behindthe mountains and hills."Guess we're not so badly off after all!" exulted Floyd.  "We'll sleepin real beds tonight!""And I take back what I—er—thought about you!" laughed his sister."Thanks for not saying it!" chuckled Floyd.  "I admit I was guessingmyself a while back, for that trail looked as though it was headingstraight for no place in particular.  But we're all right now."However, as they descended the slope, approaching the town, it became aquestion in both the mind of sister and brother as to whether they wereall right.  When they came near enough to see and hear plainly itbecame evident that something unusual was going on in La Nogalique, ifsuch was the village in view.There was the popping of guns and intermittant shouts, while figurescould be seen riding wildly to and fro amid the scattered buildings."Guess there's some sort of a celebration," commented Floyd."Probably some Mexicans have come over the border, and are celebratinga feast day," observed his sister.  "This must be about the border linebetween the United States and Mexico.""I reckon," conceded Floyd.  "But say, I don't just like this!  Look,those men are shooting at each other!"He stopped the car and pointed to two groups of horsemen who,undoubtedly, were firing at each other with evil intent.  For asRosemary and Floyd looked, several men toppled from their saddles, andtheir steeds rushed wildly to and fro.Then, as the travelers sat in the machine, looking down the last slopethat led to the town, a solitary horseman came clattering up the rockytrail."Turn back!  Turn back!" he shouted.  "Don't go down there!"He was attired as a cowboy and spoke good United States."What's the matter?" demanded Floyd, as he let the car roll to one sideto give the horseman room to pass."Yaquis!" was the answer.  "Them onery Mexican Indians have broke looseand are raiding the country.  They've started in here at La Nogalique!I'm riding for the troops.  Better turn back!""Oh, Floyd!" cried Rosemary, involuntarily."Don't go down there!" warned the horseman, as he spurred on, for hesaw the car slipping down the slope."I don't intend to, if I can turn around and beat it up the hill,"Floyd said.  "The question is—can I?"It was a question.  The road was narrow, and the hill steep.  If youhave ever tried to turn a car around on a narrow, hilly road and crawlback up it, you will appreciate the position of Rosemary and herbrother."If you can't make it in your car get out and hide!" advised thehorseman, flinging this back over his shoulder as he rode on.  "ThoseYaquis are human devils!"He was out of sight a moment later around a turn in the trail.  Floydspeeded up the engine and began to guide the machine toward a placethat looked wide enough to turn in.  But that was the smallest part ofthe problem.Just as he was making the turn there was a lurch to one side, and theright forward wheel sank into a ditch at the side of the road.  The carsettled so far over that Rosemary had to cling to Floyd to avoidsliding out, and she could not repress a scream."No going back now!" exclaimed Floyd grimly.  "We're lucky if we can goahead.""Do something!" desperately cried Rosemary.And then, with a suddenness that was nerve-racking, there swept aroundthe bend in the road toward them a band of yelling Mexican Indians—theYaquis!CHAPTER VIPRISONERSRosemary and Floyd knew something of the west.  They had lived inCalifornia a number of years, and had traveled across the continentmore than once—by auto on one occasion.  So they were not at alldisappointed when they saw the Yaquis did not measure up to thepicturesque standard of Buffalo Bill's Indians.In fact the first glimpse of the onrushing band of Yaquis would giveone the impression that they were a lot of colored cowboys, in mostragged garments.  But each one carried a gun or a revolver and theweapons were for use, and had been used, some with fatal effect.Shouting and yelling, some firing their guns off in the air, beatingcoiled lassos against the heaving sides of their steeds, spurring thefrantic animals, shouting in Spanish, all of them dusty, sweaty anddirty—the band was at once ridiculous and fearsome.Up the trail they rushed, adding to their fierce yells as they caughtsight of the auto in which sat Rosemary and Floyd.  Probably the bandof Yaquis had started off after the cowboy messenger who was riding tosummon the United States troopers, and the finding of Rosemary andFloyd was but an accident.But it was an accident likely to bode ill for our friends.  The Indians(I call them that though they were really Mexicans) having sighted whatwas to them fair game, were turned from their original purpose ofcapturing the messenger.Rosemary and Floyd caught a jumbled jargon of Spanish shouts, mingledwith Mexican and American words, and then out of the ruck of riders asolitary horseman spurred toward them."He's the leader, I guess!" exclaimed Floyd, and Rosemary caught thegleam of his revolver in her brother's hand."Floyd!  Don't!" she cried."Don't what?""Don't shoot?  Oh, we haven't a chance!  If we do kill—or wound afew—it will only make it worse for us.  Don't shoot!"Rosemary spoke only just in time, for Floyd was already raising theweapon to aim at the leader who had spurred out of the ruck of otheryelling Yaquis.And, as if this leader sensed what was about to happen, and had decidedto administer a lesson, there was a sharp crack from his side.  He hadnot raised his hand higher than his saddle pommel, but Floyd's hat spunfrom his head and went sailing to the ground.  At the same time heheard a vicious "zing" which told of a bullet in flight."Floyd!" screamed Rosemary."I'm all right!  He's bluffing!" her brother answered.  But he did notshoot back.This Yaqui, better dressed and mounted, but more evil in face than anyof his band, smiled grimly as he jammed his gun back into the holster.And Floyd had the sense to return his weapon.  As Rosemary had said,there was grave danger in firing, for at best only a few of the Yaquiscould have been disposed of, and the others would have taken a terriblerevenge.Right up to the stalled car—stalled because it had lurched to one sidein the ditch—rode the yelling Yaquis.  Some of them got in the path ofthe evident leader, but he bumped them to one side with his horse—amore powerful animal than any ridden by his followers—shouting at themin vigorous Spanish as he knocked them out of his way."La Paz!  La Paz!" is what Rosemary and Floyd heard shouted at theleader, and this they took to be his name, or, at least, his title.From then on they referred to him as "Paz," which was as good anappellation as any.Up to the auto he rode, at breakneck speed, pulling his horse to asliding stop, so that the animal almost sat down on its hind legs in aneffort to avoid crashing into the car.  To the credit of Rosemary be itsaid that she did not scream, nor did Floyd flinch, though it seemed,for a moment, that there would be a crash.Then the Yaqui leader, with a grunt, and a wave of his begrimedhand—in which grime Rosemary noticed with a shudder, blood wasmingled—indicated that the travelers were to alight."Nothing doing, Chief!  That is if you are a chief!" boldly answeredFloyd.  "We're United States citizens, on United States soil, and wedon't have to do what you tell us.  Pull your freight—get your men outof the way and we'll mosey along.  That is we will if I can get the carout of the ditch!"The Yaqui grinned, but did not take his eyes from Rosemary or Floyd,and muttered:"No sabe!""Oh, you understand all right—you don't want to, that's thetrouble," exclaimed Floyd.  "Come now, be a sport.  I don't know whatyour fight is with the men down there," and he motioned to the townbelow, where sounds of fighting could still be heard, "but we haven'tdone anything.  If some of your men will help me get out of this ditchI'll pay 'em."Evidently "pay" was one word not only Paz, but some of his followers,understood, for there were grunts and eyes gleamed more brightly whilesome of the Indians started forward.Paz shot out a few words at his men, and those who had had theboldness, to move forward pulled back their ponies.  Evidently he hadthem well in hand.Rapidly he uttered something in Spanish, at the same time again wavinghis hand to indicate to Floyd and Rosemary that they were to get out ofthe machine.  Brother and sister knew enough of the language tounderstand what was said.  It was the same request made in gestures."Shall I jump on him, Rose?" asked Floyd in a low voice.  "I can justabout make it from here, and I haven't forgotten my football tackledays.  Shall I jump on him?  Then maybe you can pop one or two, and wecan start down in the car.  Once we get into town the officials arebound to protect us.""Don't, Floyd!" his sister advised in the same low tone.  "We have nochance but to submit, and wait for help.  I've heard of these Yaquis.There aren't enough men in La Nogalique to cope with them excepttroopers come.  And they're far enough off.""Just give in, and hope for the best.  But don't let them separateus—whatever—whatever you have to do."There was a catch in the girl's voice, but this was the only evidenceof fear she had shown.  She was a true "sport.""But what do you suppose their game is?" asked Floyd, and during thistalk between brother and sister, the Yaqui leader, stood regarding themquizzically."I don't know," Rosemary answered.  "This is just one of theirperiodical raids, I guess, and they have just added us to their list.But we'll have to do as they tell us—at least for the time being.Help me down, Floyd."He assisted her out of the car.  Paz, smiling—or perhaps grinningwould be the better word—came toward them, and motioned with his handtoward the gun Floyd had put up."You don't get it,—Paz unless you want the business end!" snapped outFloyd, and his hand edged toward the weapon with no mistake in hismeaning.In an instant he was "covered" by the gun in the hand of the Indian,and Rosemary changed the scream she had started to utter to the advice:"Give it up, Floyd!  They haven't seen mine and don't know I have one.Maybe I can get by with it!"Floyd almost sighed as he passed over his weapon, butt first, in theaccepted style of surrendering.  Paz grinned again, and motioned to hismen to come up.  One of them began loosening a lariat at his saddlehorn."They're going to make prisoners of us," said Floyd."Never mind!  There'll be some way out," whispered Rosemary.CHAPTER VIIINTO THE MOUNTAINSDisreputable ragamuffins as they appeared, the Yaquis were quick enoughto put their captives in a position to render them almost helpless.Though the Mexican Indians do not seem to have the picturesqueness andskill of the outdoors possessed by the North American Indians, stillthey knew how to knot their lariats about Rosemary and Floyd, and sotie them on spare horses that it would have been no easy task to escape.Aside from rude hands bundling her about, no insult was offeredRosemary; and though Floyd was not treated so gently he was notactually mistreated.  Rosemary was not searched, and her automaticremained in a hidden pocket, where, if need be, she could quickly reachit.Floyd's gun was taken away, and all the money he carried loose in hispockets.  But he had been wise enough when starting out on this trip,to make a secret pocket in his vest, and this now held a goodly sumwhich the Indians overlooked.  Of course a more careful search wouldreveal it, as it would Rosemary's gun.Paz, speaking in Spanish, detailed several men to guard the prisonersand then, taking his place at the head of his band, he led them backdown the trail."Say, what does this mean?" asked Floyd of his sister.  "He's goingright back down among men that ought to be our friends.  If there areany town officials there, or a soldier or two, they ought to save us.""I'm afraid there isn't, though," the girl answered.  "If there hadbeen the lone cowboy wouldn't have ridden for help.  And the fightingis still going on."The sound of shooting was resumed as she spoke, and shouts and yellscame to Floyd's ears.  He began to understand what had happened, hissurmise being borne out, later, by the facts.La Nogalique is a town in Arizona, just on the Mexican border.  In factso close is it that in places only a barbed wire fence separates thepossessions of Uncle Sam from those of the Mexican republic.  Andoutside of town even the wire fence "petered out," so there wasnothing—no natural boundary—to tell where citizens were under theprotection of the stars and stripes or under the domain of thedescendants of Montezuma.What had happened, just as Rosemary and Floyd suspected, was that theYaquis—never very peaceable—had risen in one of their periodic raids.They frequently hold up the Southern Pacific trains, kill and rob thepassengers and take what express matter they like.This band, probably weary of making war on the none too resistingMexican soldiery, had crossed the border, and "shot up" La Nogalique.When it was learned that one of the cowboys of the town had ridden tobring some United States troops from a nearby station, Paz, one of theleaders, had set out with his followers to capture the rider.  They hadcome upon Rosemary and her brother with the result detailed."But why are they riding back into town with us?" Floyd wanted to know."Mexico is south of La Nogalique," answered Rosemary.  "They have toride through it to get back to Mexico, and they—they're taking us withthem!"There was a gasp in her voice."We've got to do something!" desperately cried Floyd.  He strained athis bonds, but uselessly.Paz turned and shouted something in anger, but Floyd gave him backfully as black a look as the one on the Yaqui leader's face.  At leastFloyd was going to maintain a bold front.Down the slope and into the small town rode the Indians with theircaptives.  Now the sound of shooting and shouting became louder.  Itwas evident that some of the Americans were making a stand against theIndians.  The Americans were firing from houses and other shelter, theIndians riding here and there, aiming whenever they saw anyone at whomto shoot.  Several evidently dead bodies were in the streets, theproportion being about equal between the Americans and the Indians.Rosemary could not repress a shudder as she saw, in one doorway, a deadwoman and a little girl.How the fight started, whether it could have been avoided, and what thetown officials had done or were doing, were only matters for surmise."There was a fight but I guess the Indians were too many for ourfellows," grimly said Floyd, as his horse was led along.  He hadmanaged to keep close to Rosemary."It looks that way," the girl said.  "Oh, Floyd!  If we could only getword to our folks or Uncle Henry!""I don't see how we can," said Floyd.  "When night comes maybe we canbreak away, but—"He did not finish.  It was a desperate hope as he and Rosemary wellknew.Suddenly, when the centre of the town was reached by the band havingtaken our friends captive, there was a burst of fire, mingled withshouts of defiance.  Out of one of the buildings burst a band ofAmerican cowboys and others.  They had gathered together to make astand, and this was their chance.Several of the Indians fell from their saddles, and others, thoughwounded, managed to retain their seats.  Bullets flew about Rosemaryand Floyd, fortunately not hitting them, but coming too close forcomfort.Paz and his followers were evidently taken by surprise, and for amoment did not return the fire.  Then, as it increased the Indiansturned and began fleeing up the trail they had just descended, takingRosemary and Floyd with them.  Evidently they not only thought theremight be danger in making a stand against the intrepid Americans, butperhaps they reasoned that they had captives too valuable to risklosing in another pitched fight.At any rate Paz gave the orders to retreat, and his men obeyed.Rosemary and Floyd saw what was happening.  Helpless, they were carriedaway into the mountains.True it was United States territory, but for all the good that did thecaptives, it might as well have been Mexico.  There were no troops orother help at hand.Paz rode on ahead, and directly behind him came his more trustedfollowers surrounding Rosemary and Floyd.Suddenly Paz and his lieutenants (if such they might be called) in thelead, were thrown back in confusion as shots rang out, and Floyd andhis sister had a glimpse of some cowboys riding down the trail, as ifto give battle."Hurray!  Now we're all right.  This is a rescue!  The troopers arecoming!" shouted Floyd.But though the valiant cowboys made a brave stand they were too few tocope with the Indians.  It developed, later, that they were a strayband who had been told of the trouble by the lone cowboy who was ridingafter the troops.  The band of punchers, resolving to do their best,had spurred to the fight, but were overwhelmed.Two were killed and another wounded.  And this youth—he was but thatin years—managed to break through the first line of Indians like afootball player with the ball smashing the interference of the opposingteam.Right to the side of Rosemary and Floyd he galloped, and then the girlhad a flash of inspiration.  Quickly she managed to take from herpocket a notebook, and, one of the ropes coming loose from her hand,she was able to scribble on a torn out page this message:"Get word to my uncle, Henry Merkel, Diamond X Ranch, that Floyd and Iare taken.  Ask him to send help."She rolled this into a ball, and as the cowboy lurched past her shethrust it into his hand."Ride!  Ride away!" Rosemary fairly shouted in his ear, for there wasso much noise of shooting and yelling that she had to cry loudly tomake herself understood."I'm going to stay and fight!" cried the youth recklessly."You can't!  They're too many!  Ride and bring help!  Deliver mymessage!" pleaded Rosemary.  "It's the best way to help us!"Then, as Paz, wild and furious, rode up with pistol aimed at thecowboy, the latter fired his last shot, full in the face of the Indianleader, wheeled his horse, and managed to dash away.How Paz escaped no one knew, but the shot only grazed him, and withmutterings he threw aside his own empty weapon, and spurred after thebold cowboy.  But the horse of Paz slipped, while the steed of theAmerican, being more sure footed, carried him out of danger.He vanished around a turn in the trail, and Paz swung back to his ownmen, several of whom had been wounded, and one killed by the bold,dashing American cowboys.Then, when this little "fracas" was over, Rosemary and Floyd were againled forward, into the mountain fastness, prisoners of the Yaquis.While, miles away, the boy ranchers were totally unaware of the tragichappenings."What did you do, Rose?" asked Floyd, in a low voice, as the trail wasresumed."I scribbled a note and sent it by that cowboy.  He'll bring help if hecan.""Well, I hope he can.  If they don't get him, or he doesn't lose yournote."But the message was delivered and was the means of spurring into actionthose at Diamond X ranch.CHAPTER VIIISHOOTING STARSContrary to what was usual when a band of cowboys, including Bud, Nort,and Dick, started off on the trail, there was very little singing,laughing and joking as they gave their ponies rein to begin pursuitafter the kidnapping Yaquis.  Even the lightest-spirited cowpuncherfelt the gravity of the situation, though, save for the three boyranchers, none had ever seen Rosemary and Floyd.  And it was so longago that Bud, Nort and Dick had met these western cousins that theyscarcely remembered them."But we'd hit the trail for the rescue whether they were our cousins ornot!" declared Bud Merkel, as he kicked his heels against the flanks ofhis pony, and sent that steady-going animal forward with a rush."Whoa there, son, whoa there!" advised Snake Purdee who was inleadership of the party."That's right," chimed in Yellin' Kid, with his usual strident tones."Take it easy, Bud, We've got a long, hard trail ahead of us, and wehaven't any spare horses.""I didn't intend to start a race," spoke Bud, as he slowed up andwaited for Nort and Dick.  "I was just wishing I could kick some ofthose greasy Mexican Indians, and it must have been a sort of reflexaction on my part that gave Toot a tap in the ribs," and he patted hispony, no very handsome steed, but a sticker on a long trail.  Bud hadtaught his pony to run out of the corral at the blowing of a horn,hence the name "Toot.""I don't know anything about them there reflex actions," observedYellin' Kid, "but I do know that this is no fishin' party!  We've gothard work cut out for us if we're to trail them sneakin' Yaquis.""You delivered an earful that time, my friend," stated Rolling Stone,with a grim smile.  "I've had dealings with these imps and while theydon't compare in bloodthirstiness with the worst of our former AmericanIndians, they're bad enough.  I know!"He seemed to gaze afar, into the past, and the boy ranchers hoped hewould some day tell the details of how he had come so to hate theYaquis.The trailing party, started into action by the receipt of the messageso daringly written by Rosemary, consisted of fifteen cowboys, and inthese I include our three heroes, who certainly are entitled to beclassed with the others.  For though not as old, they had hadconsiderable experience now, and were able to rough it with the mostveteran cow puncher.In addition to Bud, Nort and Dick, there was Snake Purdee, who was invirtual charge, according to instructions from Bud's father.  Yellin'Kid, Rolling Stone and several other cowboys made up the remainder ofthe party, which was well armed, and provisioned as fully as waspractical.  They expected to replenish their packs of food at variousplaces, and if they passed beyond the pale of civilization they wouldlive off the land, or do their best in this respect."It can't be any worse for us than for those Indians," Snake Purdee hadsaid, when the talk was on the food question."Yes, but a white man can't live on what those heathen eat," remarkedRolling Stone.  "They'll eat lizards and snakes, and think they'restopping at one of the best hotels, with bath an' everything.  Or theycan go without eating longer than any human beings I ever saw.  In factI don't believe they are human.  They're imps, that's what theyare—plain imps!  If I had my way I'd—"Rolling Stone gave a sudden jump, and a grunt, the reason for thisaction being that Snake Purdee had urged his steed to a place next tothat of the speaker and had given him a jolting punch in the ribs."Wha-wha—" stuttered Rolling Stone.In answer Snake pointed toward Bud and his cousins, on whose faces werelooks of grave alarm as the new acquisition to their forces spoke thusof the fierce character of the Yaquis."Don't get 'em to worrying too much about that there young lady an'gent what these Indians have carried off," whispered Snake, and it waswell it was he who spoke, and not Yellin' Kid, or our heroes would havesensed what was up.  "Keep it dark," advised Snake.  "Keep it dark!Don't take the heart out of 'em!""Oh!" exclaimed Rolling Stone.  "I see!""Pity you wouldn't," snapped out the cowboy leader.  "You got to have alittle consideration for the young fellers!"Rolling Stone nodded, and then, as if to make amends for what he hadsaid, he added:"Course I'm not saying all Yaquis are alike.  There may be some halfway, or maybe a quarter way decent.  And maybe they've captured thisyoung lady and gentleman just for ransom.  In that case they'll takegood care of 'em.""Do you think so?" asked Bud, for, truth to tell, he had been greatlyalarmed as he thought of the possible fate of Rosemary and her brotherin the hands of the unprincipled Yaquis."Oh, sure!" asserted Rolling Stone, with more conviction than he felt."They're after money, these Indians are, or what money will buy.  Andthey like good U.S. money instead of Mex. dollars which are worth aboutfourteen and a half cents a pound just now.  So it's to their intereststo treat their captives well, so they'll bring a good price in themarket.""Good price?" exclaimed Nort.  "Do they put them up at auction?""No, I didn't mean just that," Rolling Stone hastened to add.  "I meanif they ask a ransom they're bound to keep the prisoners in good shapefor if they don't produce 'em in that same fashion they're likely toslip up on the reward.""Then they won't harm Rosemary or Floyd?" asked Dick, whose vividimagination had pictured his cousins as being subject to the torturesof the burning stake."Well, of course they won't have feather beds to sleep on," spokeRolling Stone slowly, "but I take it your cousins are used to roughingit, and it will be no worse than a scouting trip for them.""Yes, I s'pose Floyd is used to camping out," admitted Bud.  "But asfor Rosemary—""Don't worry, son," advised Snake.  "Rosemary is a western girl and youknow what your sister is.""That's right!" and Bud visibly brightened.  "Nell could look afterherself if given half a chance.  And maybe we'll catch up to theseYaquis before very long.""Sure we will!" asserted Snake, but he and the other cowboys, moreexperienced in matters of this sort than our heroes, felt that therewas a grim terror between them and those whom they pursued.However they had started, and were making as good time as possible.Messages had passed between Mr. Merkel and those in authority at LaNogalique, and the probable route of the kidnapping Yaquis wasindicated as well as could be.  This saved a long trip to the border inorder to get on the trail of the Indians from the time they had takenRosemary and Floyd.Well armed, with righteous indignation burning in their hearts, used toroughing it, and with men who knew almost every foot of the country,the expedition from Diamond X was well equipped for the work in hand.At first after they started out there was eager talk, and speculationas to where the Indians would be met with, and what the probableoutcome would be of the fight that was sure to follow."Unless they run off when they see us and leave Rosemary and Floyd forus to bring back," spoke Dick, almost afraid lest this outcome shouldprevent a fight."Don't worry.  They won't run!  They'll stand and give us as good or asbad as we can send," declared Rolling Stone."We'll wipe out the band if we get half a chance!" declared Bud, and itwas not said in a bloodthirsty or boastful spirit.  It was calmretribution that actuated our friends.Along the trail they traveled—a trail they were destined to follow forweary days and nights.  This was only the beginning.  They must makeall the speed they could, and yet spare the horses all that waspossible.  There was a chance of getting new mounts at several places,but it was only a chance and could not be depended on.  They must savewhat they had, both in the way of horseflesh and rations.Night found them well on their way, and though the boys were eager tocontinue, Snake insisted on a halt being made not only for supper butto give men and horses a needed rest."The Indians will have to stop just as we do," said the older cowboy."They can't keep on continually; they have to stop and rest.""Yes, I suppose so," granted Bud.So the night camp was made, and when the horses had been turned out tograze, hobbled so they would not stray, and when the evening meal wasover, the party sat about the fires, talking of but one topic—whatwould happen when they came up with the Yaquis.As they were in friendly country, not after cattle rustlers and had nofear of Del Pinzo and his gang, there was felt to be no need ofstanding guard.  But for all this Bud, Nort and Dick were a bitrestless, and did not sleep as soundly as the others.In fact along toward morning, though while it was yet very dark, Nort,thinking he heard suspicious noises, unrolled from his blanket andstood up."What's the matter?" came in a hoarse whisper from his brother."I don't know," answered Nort, in the same hoarse tones.  "I thought Iheard something.""So did I," and Dick scrambled out to stand beside his brother.  "Arethe horses all right?""I hope so.  We're lost without them.  Let's take a look and—"Nort stopped suddenly and pointed to the northern sky.  Above thehorizon shone some red sparkles of light skimming and shimmeringthrough the dark night."Shooting stars!" remarked Dick, in a whisper."Shooting nothing!" cried Nort, and his voice was loud.  "Those aresignals from the Yaquis!  Snake!  Wake up!  We're right close to theIndians!" he yelled.CHAPTER IXA LONE INDIANLess noise than that which issued from the excited throat of Nort wouldhave been sufficient to arouse a larger camp than that of the cowboyson the trail of the Yaquis.  Instantly every man in the party, notforgetting Bud who had been sleeping as soundly as any, was on thealert, gun in hand, rubbing the sleep from his eyes with the other fist."What's up?" snarled Snake.  He always did hate to rouse suddenly."Look!" cried Nort, pointing to the north, where, now and then, ashimmering light cut the blackness of the sky.  "Dick says they'reshooting stars, but I say Indian signals.""They aren't shooting stars, that's sure!" declared Rolling Stone."I've slept in the open too often, counting those same shooting stars,to be mistaken.  They're signals of some kind!""But not Indians' signals," asserted Yellin' Kid."Whose then?" Nort wanted to know, satisfied that he had not awakenedthe camp in vain."They're rockets—or some sort of fire works," went on Dick.  "First Ithought they were shooting stars, but I can see now that they aren't.They're sky rockets or Roman candles.""That's right," agreed Snake.  "And no Yaquis will fool with suchinfernal machines as them.""Unless your cousins had some," suggested Yellin' Kid looking towardBud and his chums.  Some one had thrown an armful of greasewood on thefire, and it blazed up brightly, disclosing the countenances of theIndian trailers."What would Rosemary and Floyd be doing with fireworks?" asked Bud."I didn't know but what they might be bringing some to Diamond X for acelebration, and the Indians, having laid hands on the rockets as wellas on your cousins, might be setting 'em off—setting off the rockets Imean—for a celebration over their victory," observed Yellin' Kid,somewhat out of breath after this long oration."Nonsense!" asserted Snake.  "The Indians wouldn't set off the rocketson purpose.  They'd be afraid.  Though of course they may have done soby accident.""I don't believe Rosemary or Floyd would be bringing us fireworks,"remarked Bud.  "They're too old for such kid stuff.""That's what I thought," said Snake."But who is shooting off the rockets?" asked Nort, as another brilliantburst of fire, not unlike shooting stars, illuminated the dark northernsky."Troopers," said the old cowboy."Troopers?" question Dick."Yes.  United States cavalry.  There are several companies stationedout here, and they may be on a practice march, or having a sham battle,as they sometimes do.  These are signals from one post to another.""Or maybe a signal about the Indians," suggested Bud."Yes," agreed Snake.  "It may be the troopers are after the Yaquis.  Isure hope so, for the imps are going to be hard enough to nab once theyget up in the foothills and mountains.  We'll need the help of thetroopers for sure!""Isn't there some way we could let them know we're coming?" asked Dick."Not very handy," the cowboy leader answered.  "We haven't anyfireworks, and shooting off our guns would only waste good bullets thatwe may need later.  Besides, those shooting stars are farther off thanthey look.  We couldn't make our guns heard, and the flashes would beso low down they couldn't be seen.  All we can do is to wait untilmorning.  We're traveling in that direction anyhow, and we may come upwith the regulars.""With their help we'll make short work of the Yaquis!" boasted Nort."Don't be so sure of that," warned Rolling Stone.  "The Indians, whilenothing like the American redmen, are cute and foxy enough in their ownway.  They probably know of nooks and hiding places in the mountainswhere they could lay up for weeks, and almost next door to a troop ofsoldiers, without getting located.  It's going to be largely a matterof luck if we nab 'em!""Well, here's hoping," voiced Bud, as he turned toward the fire.It was chilly out in the open at that hour of the morning.  For thoughthe days are very hot, it began to get cool very often as soon as thesun went down, and the air kept getting cooler until the golden raysagain warmed the earth.  So one and all sought the genial blaze, tothaw out a little before again rolling in blankets to wait for sunrise.Aside from the alarm over the shooting stars, nothing else disturbedthe camp that night, and all were gladly astir with daybreak.  The firewas started into new life, and soon coffee was boiling over the coals,while mingled with its odor was the appetizing smell of crisp bacon."Let me make the flapjacks," begged Rolling Stone.  "I used to be agreat hand for them, and I still have some small skill."He would need to have, for not a member of the party but what couldturn a neatly browned cake high in the air, catching it unerringly asit came down, to be cooked on the other side.  Even Nort and Dick hadbecome quite adept at this.But the skill of even Snake Purdee had to take a back seat in the faceof the performance of Rolling Stone.  Not only were his cakes better intaste, and more delicately browned, but he showed almost uncanny skillin tossing them high in the air, and catching them in the pan as theycame down.  Not once did a cake "slop over"—that is descend halfwithin and half without the pan.  Each one fell true and in the middleof the skillet, there to be held over the coals again until crisp andbrown."You're a wonder—that's what you are!" affirmed Yellin' Kid in hisusual hearty tones, as he passed his tin plate for more."It's a gift—that's all!  Just a gift!" modestly admitted theself-constituted "flapjacketer," as he laughingly dubbed himself.Smart was the word and smart was the action when breakfast was ended.The horses had made their meal during the night, and were ready fortheir riders who were soon in the saddle, riding toward the north—thenorth in which direction the Yaquis had vanished with theircaptives—the north where the mysterious signal lights had been seen.Through the day rode the posse of self-constituted seekers after thecaptives.  They could not hope, for some time yet, to come upon actualtraces of the Yaquis.  But they felt that they were heading in theproper direction.It was towards the close of the afternoon, when they were beginning toseek for a suitable camping place, with water, that Nort, who hadridden on a little in advance, came to a halt at the top of a rise.His halt was caused by the appearance of a solitary horseman, comingtoward him.  And it needed but a second look, through that clearatmosphere, to disclose that the rider was not an American cowboy."What's wrong, Nort?" called Bud, for he had sensed something unusualin his cousin's attitude."An Indian!" was the answer.  "A lone Indian!"The others rode hastily up the slope.  The solitary horseman was comingrapidly on.  He seemed to have no fear of thus riding into the midst ofhis enemies."Got his nerve with him, anyhow!" mused Snake, as he looked to his gun."Maybe he's come to say the Yaquis will surrender and give up Rosemaryand Floyd," suggested Dick.  "Maybe they know we're on their trail."CHAPTER XSHOTS FROM AMBUSHThe boy ranchers were very free with their surmises as to what mightportend the oncoming of the lone Indian.  Youth is ever thus, eager toguess instead of waiting for certainties.  The older cowboys—Yellin'Kid, Snake, Rolling Stone and those who made up the rescueparty—remained in silent contemplation of the approaching figure."He rides doggoned funny," observed Snake."Like a bag of oats," added Rolling Stone.  "Looks like he'd fall offany minute.""Say!" began Bud eagerly, and then he stopped, as if he had thoughtbetter."What's the matter?" asked Nort."Don't you know somebody who rides just like that?" Bud inquired."Some one we all know?"Nort and Dick uttered exclamations.  Bud's words were all that wasneeded to set in motion a slumbering train of thought."Looks to me like he was hurt," affirmed Yellin' Kid.  "Can't be one ofthe Yaquis.  They wouldn't be this near.  And if they was they'd be toobig cowards to ride right for us this way.""This isn't any unfriendly Indian!" declared Bud.  "He knows us—and weknow him!""How come?" demanded Snake, half incredulously."Can't you see?" cried Bud.  "It's our own Indian—Buck Tooth!""Wow!" shouted Yellin' Kid.  "So it is!  But I'd never have known him.He's all togged out—got his war paint on!"And, in very truth, Buck Tooth—for he it was—had donned a strangegarb.  Wearing some of the clothing of civilization, he had ornamentedhimself with dangling bits of cow-hide, with parts of tails danglingfrom it.  He carried behind him a collection of pans and campparaphanalia that rattled and banged about him as he rode forward.  Hehad stuck some feathers in his coarse black hair and he was a somewhatlaughable mixture of an American and Mexican Indian on the warpath."Ugh!" grunted Buck Tooth when he came within speaking distance.  Notthat he ever spoke much, but this was his greeting."What'd you come away from the ranch for?" demanded Bud, for Buck Toothwas a valued hand on a cattle place, and he had been left with thesomewhat small force to take charge of Happy Valley when the others hadstarted after the Yaquis.   "What you doing here?" Bud wanted to know."Me after 'em too—Yaquis!" grunted the Indian.  "Me catchum an'shootum same like um shoot me!"As he spoke, or, rather, grunted this out, he pointed to his leftshoulder.  It was bound about with bloody rags, and in spite of hisstoicism the Indian winced as he moved in the saddle."Did the Yaquis shoot you?" cried Nort."Sure!  I come after you—no could stay when fight to be done—andYaquis what you call plug me!  But I plug one, two, three 'fore I quit!""Where was this?""Was there a fight?""Lead us there!""When did it happen?"These were only a few of the questions hurled at Buck Tooth, whose namewas obviously well earned once you had looked at him.  The old nativeseemed stunned by the volley of interrogations, and sat stolidly in hissaddle while more were shot at him."Ugh!" he grunted in answer.  "Fight yistidy—back there," and he waveda dirty hand in the direction whence he had come."Sure they were Yaquis?" asked Snake."Sure; Me know—Me Yaqui once!""That's right!" fairly shouted Bud.  "I forgot, for the time being,that Buck Tooth is a sort of Yaqui Indian.  But how comes it they firedon one of their own tribe?" he asked."Bad Yaquis—no good!" was the answer."That's right—they sure are bad!" declared Rolling Stone.  "I've haddealings with 'em!""Did you see anything of their prisoners—young lady and young man?"asked Snake.  "Say, you'd better talk with him—you can sling his lingobetter than I can," and the cowboy appealed to Bud.Thereupon the boy rancher talked to Buck Tooth in a way he knew hisIndian helper could understand, and Buck Tooth answered in like strain.The Indian had been at Happy Valley ever since that venture had beenunder way, and in that time Bud and the old native had come tounderstand one another very well.  Buck Tooth, it will be remembered,was of aid to Bud and his cousins when the fight over the water rightsand the dam was under way, and the Indian helped fight Del Pinzo's gang."It's this way," Bud translated to the others, having finishedquestioning the Indian.  "He got sort of lonesome after we left theranch, and though I told him he must stay, he hiked off on his own hookto join us.  He took a roundabout trail so he wouldn't meet up with ustoo soon and get sent back."Then, it appears, yesterday, he ran into a bunch of Yaquis, and theyfired at him.  He got in among some rocks and fired back, and he sayshe did for two or three.  Maybe he wounded 'em, or maybe he made 'emcandidates for the Happy Hunting Grounds.  Anyhow, after the fight hemanaged to get on our trail, and here he is.""But did he see anything of Rosemary and Floyd?" asked Nort."Not a sign.  He says these Yaquis didn't have any captives," Budanswered."How do you account for that?" Dick wanted to know, while rather a grimsilence fell on the others."Well, this may have been another party of Indians.  Very likely was,"Bud declared."That's right!" chimed in Snake.  "The ones that captured Rosemary andFloyd could hardly have gotten so far north as the ones were that gaveBuck Tooth that little reminder in the shoulder."This opinion, coming from one who could reason out the matter, madeeveryone feel less apprehensive."There must be two or three bodies of these Yaquis," went on SnakePurdee.  "They always split up after a raid.  One party has Rosemaryand Floyd, and another engaged in a little set-to with Buck Tooth.Being one of them he knew their fighting tricks and he left his markson 'em.""It's queer one Indian would turn against the others of the sametribe," spoke Nort."No, not in Buck Tooth's case," declared Bud.  "He's a good Indian, ifever there was one.  And, as he says, these Yaquis may be a lot ofhalf-breeds, or a part of the tribe that is outlawed from the others.I'm not standing up for the Yaquis," he hastened to add, "for I knowthey've done a lot of dirty work.  But this bunch may be worse than theothers.  Anyhow Buck Tooth says so.  And I'm glad he's with us.  I feltsorry after I left him back at the ranch.""Yes, he'll be of service I reckon," asserted Snake, and Yellin' Kidnodded in agreement.The Indian's wound, which he had not troubled himself to dress, waslooked after with rough and ready, but effective cowboy skill and then,a good camping place near a water hole having been reached, saddleswere taken off the weary steeds who began to roll about in welcomerelief.The fires were made, grub cooked and as night settled down all preparedfor much-needed rest."Well, another day or two and we ought to catch up to 'em," observedBud, as he prepared to turn in with the others."That's right," agreed Yellin' Kid.  "They can't have traveled anyfaster than we did, and we took a shorter trail."The night passed without any incidents of moment, though Nort nearlygave a needless alarm when he sprang up, declaring that he was being"roped" in the darkness.But a light revealed that only a harmless snake was crawling over hisneck, an unpleasant enough sensation as you doubtless will admit, butone not necessarily disastrous."Burr-r-r-r!" shuddered Nort, when he saw that it was a snake, and nota lariat that had rasped him.  "I'd almost rather it was a lasso!  Ihate snakes!"Then sleep was resumed.The gray, cold and somewhat cheerless dawn was breaking over thetemporary camp when, as Buck Tooth toddled over to replenish the firefor breakfast, there came sharp cracks of rifles from the surroundingrocks and scrub underbrush, and the old Indian fell."Yaquis!" yelled Nort, springing for his gun."Ambushed!" cried Bud."Steady, everybody!" shouted Yellin' Kid and his strenuous voice,rumbling and echoing through the silent morning, seemed to calm themall.  "Get down on your faces!  Drop!" commanded the cowboy, whilepuffs of smoke, flashes of fire and nerve-racking reports told that theattack from ambush was in some force.CHAPTER XITHE SURPRISECamp had been made by the boy ranchers and their friends in a littleglade, amid rocks and stunted brush, a natural fortification as it were,with only one side open.  And it was from this one side that the shotsfrom the ambushers were pouring in.Though Yellin' Kid and Snake Purdee had said nothing to the boys aboutit, the place had been purposely selected with an eye to its possibledefense."You can't tell what will happen in this country," Snake had said toYellin' Kid, and the latter agreed, lowering his voice, for once atleast, so Bud and his cousins could not hear."We've got to be on our guard," Snake had added, and so, while Bud, Nortand Dick would have been willing to slump down almost anywhere, and campas soon as they found water, this secluded site was selected.The wisdom of this was now apparent, since, had there been no naturalshelter available, several casualties might have resulted from theopening of a fusillade at dawn.As it was, however, so quickly had the cowboys (and with them I nowinclude Buck Tooth) taken to shelter, that, aside from a few minor woundson the part of two or three, no one was badly hit."What's it all about?" called Bud from behind his sheltering stone toSnake.  Bud's gun was hot, for he had emptied the magazine, and withlittle effect, as was afterward learned."Who's attacking us?" added Nort.  He, as had Dick, had also firedrapidly and with equal non-effect."Search me," succinctly replied Snake.  "All I know is that there'ssomebody out there anxious to fill us full of lead—more anxious than Iam to be filled," he added grimly.  "Lay low everybody!" he shouted, asanother burst of firing succeeded the calm that had followed the firstattack.Bullets "zinged" in amid the rocks, striking the hard stone with vicious"pings!" and leaving grim, gray marks on the boulders; marks that wouldhave brought spots of vital redness had they found a human target.Bud refilled the magazine of his gun, and started a return fire whenSnake threw a piece of stone that fell near the boy rancher, thusattracting his attention.  There was little use in shouting above thedin.  A voice could be heard only in the lulls of shooting."What's the matter?" yelled Bud, scarcely making himself heard.Snake motioned for him to cease firing, an example followed by Nort andDick.  As for the older cowboys they had wisely witheld their fire.Explanation was made by Snake a moment later when he crawled over to Bud,keeping well hidden amid the rocks, and speaking in his ear, thoughyelling at the top of his voice as he did so, said:"What's the use of shootin' when you can't see your mark?  Save yourpowder and lead!"It was good advice.  Bud could not help but laugh at the conclusion ofSnake's advice.  For the cowboy had started to give it in tones thatYellin' Kid might have been proud to own.  This was necessary becausethose in ambush were firing in full force it seemed.  But they stoppedsuddenly, in the midst of Snake's remarks, so that the end of thecowboy's advice fell amid a silence, and, being delivered at full powermust have been heard by the enemy.Bud's laughter at this little incident was echoed by the others, and, forthe moment, relieved the grim tension.  But its grip tightened on all ofthem a moment later, as a bullet, viciously "zinging" its way amid therocks, clipped a little from the lobe of the ear of one of the cowboys.He uttered an exclamation, partly of disgust at his own carelessness inexposing himself, and Snake yelled:"I told you to keep down, you tenderfoot!"It was the harshest expression that could have been used.Following that single shot, after the fusillade that had been in playduring Snake's advice to Bud, silence fell, and Snake and Yellin' Kid atonce began to make preparations for what might be a prolonged fight.  Thetwo veteran cowboys in virtual charge of the relief expedition managed tocrawl together to the shelter of a big rock, and there held aconsultation, the while cautioning the others to remain behind theprotection of boulders they had picked out after the first rush.Fortunately the horses had all been well picketed in a glade back of therocky fastness in which our friends had made fires and slept for thenight, so the outfit from Diamond X was between its steeds and the enemy.The horses, though at first startled by the firing, had soon settled downto a quiet cropping of such scanty herbage as grew in that desolateplace.  The animals were accustomed to the noise of guns, which formed animportant part of every roundup, and, fortunately none had strayed.I say fortunately with good reason, for in that wild country a manwithout a horse was worse off than one without a country, all patrioticreasons aside, of course.  It was impossible for a man on foot tosuccessfully make his way from water hole to water hole, and anautomobile would have been worse than useless.  Therefore it was with afeeling of thankfulness that Bud and his friends realized the horses weresafe—at least for the time being."Fellows, listen to me," Snake said in a low, clear voice, after he andthe Kid had talked in half whispers for a time.  "We've got to dosomething, and maybe prepare for quite a fight.  Now those whose names Icall come with me.  The others stay here with the Kid."Thereupon Snake named half the force, including in it the three boyranchers, to their great delight.  For they rightly guessed this was tobe a skirmish party, to sally out and see who were the attackers—perhapsto wipe them out."Crawl over to the left and wait for me," went on Snake.  "Don't moveuntil you can have shelter all the way.  The firing's coming from onlyone direction as yet—guard against that.  Get together and wait for me."Sharp are the wits of those who live in the west, especially in thecattle country where snap judgment is often needed.  Thus it took but amoment for Snake's plan to make itself plain to Bud and the others.One by one they crawled, or ran half crouched, from their original placesof safety to the angle where a great rock, jutting out from the side ofthe glen in which they had camped, offered shelter for all.  There theystood, with ready guns, waiting for the next move in the grim game.Snake had remained in consultation with Yellin' Kid until now, and then,seeing his force waiting for him, the veteran cowboy made a dash to jointhem.I call it a dash, but Snake was not foolhardy, and the advice he gave hetook himself.  Advantaging himself of every natural cover, the leader ofthe second party dodged this way and that, stooping over half double,until he was within ten feet of the shelter.  Then since along the routewhere he came from, there was an open, unprotected space, he tried tocross this in two jumps.He succeeded, but as he landed, and half fell amid his comrades, a gunbarked, somewhere out in the ambush, and by the convulsive movement ofhis body Snake gave evidence of having been hit."Are you hurt?" cried Bud, as he caught the reeling cowboy."Guess not—much!" grunted Snake, but his voice was labored."Where was it?" snapped out one of the cowboys.  "Let's have a look.""Here!"  Snake placed his hand over his heart.  The boy ranchersgasped—they knew what it meant to lose one of their leaders at a timelike this.In an instant Snake's coat was flung open, and his shirt half torn toexpose his chest.  And then there fell out, from next his skin on whichit had made an ugly bruise, a partly flattened bullet."Whew!" whistled Nort."Close call, that!" added Dick."Doggone!" voiced Snake, as he reached his hand to the inside pocket ofhis vest.  "They spilled half of it!""What?" asked Bud, relief showing itself in his voice."My tobacco!" answered Snake.  "I had some packed away there to keep itmoist—some new kind of plug chewin' I got last week.  Doggoned if theyain't put a bullet clean through it!""And lucky for you they did," grunted Tar Soap Mullin, who had earnedthis name from the kind of lather he used in shampooing himself everySaturday night.  "If that bullet hadn't happened to hit your plug itwould have plugged you."And this was evident when Snake took out the tobacco in question.  Thelead missile had struck the hard and pressed cake of tobacco, striking atin tag fastened to it, and thus the force of the bullet had beenneutralized, giving Snake no more than a severe shock and bruise."Well, it might have been worse," the cowboy grimly said, as he tuckedback his shirt, and put the tobacco in another pocket.  "Now we got toget busy!  This is getting serious!"  Bud and his chums thought he mighthave said it was serious from the start, as indeed it was."What I picked you fellows out for," went on Snake, "is to take a sort ofscurry out there and see who's doin' all this shootin'."  He clippedletters off his words in his haste.  "We're goin' out there an' see if wecan take 'em in the rear, while Yellin' Kid holds their attention infront.""Do you reckon they're Yaquis?" asked Tar Soap."Might be, then ag'in might not.  If they aren't I don't see why in thename of all the rattlers of Forked Rover [Transcriber's note: River?]they're pickin' on us."The method of procedure was simple and quickly agreed upon.  Snake was tolead the boy ranchers and his half of the party, by as safe and devious aroute as possible, out of the natural fort, to try and take the enemy inthe rear.  If they could be placed between two fires—that of Snake'sparty and of Yellin' Kid's—a surrender might be compelled."And don't take too many chances," advised Snake, as the sally forth wasstarted.  "Watch yourselves."They all knew enough to do this."When do we start?" asked Bud in a low voice, as Snake seemed to bedelaying for some reason."Soon as the Kid and his lads start firing," was the answer.  "They're tohold the Indians' attention in front while we come at 'em from the flankand rear.  Get ready—it may come at any moment now!"It did, a second or two later—the signal.  Amid a burst of shots fromYellin' Kid and his force, Snake led the way with his men, all of themcrouching down to keep as much as possible behind the rocks."Don't shoot until you see something to shoot at," Snake had ordered."Save your lead."Bud, Nort and Dick were together, leaping, crawling, crouching andstumbling.  Suddenly Dick, who had gone a little ahead of his two chums,looked through an opening of the rocks.  What he saw caused him to gaspin surprise, and as he pointed he cried:"Del Pinzo!  Del Pinzo and his crowd!  It isn't the Yaquis at all!  It'sDel Pinzo!"CHAPTER XIIFORWARD AGAINTime was when the mention of Del Pinzo's name would have brought fortha yell of anger from the cowboys of Diamond X ranch.  He was an enemyat once to be feared and loathed, for he did not fight fair, and he wasof the detested, half-breed Mexican type.But now, when the cry of Dick apprised the others of the presence ofthis ruthless cattle rustler, thief and all-around bad man, there wasno answering shout.  One reason for this was that caution wasnecessary, so that the presence of the skirmishing party be notdisclosed, and another was that the information that it was Del Pinzo,and presumably his gang who had ambushed our friends, came as a greatsurprise."Del Pinzo?" half gasped Snake Purdee as he ran to Dick's side."Yes, there he is!  See!"The boy rancher pointed to a figure standing near a stunted bush.There was no doubt about it—Del Pinzo it was, and at his usualbusiness, firing on some one, for he had a rifle raised, in the act oftaking aim."I'll spoil one shot for him, anyhow," announced Snake.He whipped out his .45, there was a sharp crack, and the gun of theMexican half breed dropped to the ground, discharging as it fell, butharmlessly.  And then the outlaw, with a yell of rage, gripped hisright hand in his left.  For Snake had fired at the man's triggermember, thus disabling him for the time.And, as he turned, and beheld who had thus "winged" him, Del Pinzo gaveanother cry—as filled with surprise as had been the exclamation ofDick on beholding the Mexican renegade who, it was supposed, was safelylocked up in penalty for many crimes."That your bunch down there?" called Del Pinzo to Snake, and he wavedhis uninjured hand toward the camp amid the rocks."You said something, Del Pinzo," grimly answered the cowboy.  "What youall up to now?  Be careful—I have you covered!" he warned.  "And ifyour men want to bask in the sweet sunshine of your presence from nowon, tell 'em to chuck down their guns.  Also, up with your hands!"There was a stinging menace in the tones that Del Pinzo knew wellenough to obey.  His hands, one dripping blood, were raised over hishead, and he called something in Spanish to his followers, as yetunseen by the boy ranchers and their friends.Instantly the scattered firing on the part of the outlaws ceased, and,catching this air of silence, Yellin' Kid gave an order that silencedhis guns."Now, what's the game?" demanded Snake, holding the whip hand as itwere.  "What do you mean by firing on us?""I did not know it was you," declared the half breed.  "We set out tolook for the Yaquis—""The Yaquis?" interrupted Snake."Sure!  They have risen, it is said, and I and my men are on theirtrail!"This was news indeed—another surprise, in fact.  That Del Pinzo wasspeaking the truth could scarcely be believed.  In the first place thiswas almost an unknown accomplishment with him, and in the second placethe Yaquis were of his own kind—reckless outlaws who would stop atnothing to get booty, either in cattle or money.  It was more likelythat Del Pinzo and his gang were seeking an opportunity to join forceswith the band of up-rising Yaquis."Oh, you're after the Yaquis; are you!" asked Snake."Sure, senor Purdee!" Del Pinzo spoke fairly good English, and he couldbe polite when it suited him.  "We saw that some one was encamped inthe rocks, and I took them for the Yaquis.  So we opened fire—it iswith sadness that I know now it was your friends whom I shot at.""Um!  Maybe so—maybe not," grimly retorted the cowboy.  "Anyhow it'sus, and it seems to be you.  I thought you were somewhere else," headded referring to the fact that Del Pinzo had been arrested.  It wasnot the first time the half breed had been in the toils of the law,following cattle raids on Diamond X or other ranches.In the previous books of this series I have related some of Del Pinzo'soutrages.  He was concerned in the water fight that so nearly endeddisastrously for Bud and his cousins."Oh, I get out!" said Del Pinzo, easily, and with a shrug of hisshoulders which might mean that coming forth from a jail was nothing inhis life."So I see," observed Snake with a grin.  "By hook or crook, I reckon.Well, I don't know as we have anything against you and your bunch justat present.  If you're after the Yaquis you're on the same errand asus.  But, if you'll excuse me sayin' so, I'd rather travel my own road."This was a delicate hint to which Del Pinzo was not oblivious."Surely, senor," he answered, grinning.  "You go your way and I gomine.  Only let the fighting cease.  As you say—there is nothingagainst me—now.""Which isn't saying that there won't be, or hasn't been," spoke Snake."File out your men—without guns, you understand!" he snapped.  "Andthen you can hit your own trail.  Looks like there'd been a mistake allround.  We thought you the Yaquis.""Oh, Senor Purdee!"  There was false injury in the tones."And I'm not so sure but what it will turn out that way in the end,"added the cowboy grimly.  "However, we'll give the benefit of the doubtfor the time being.  File out!"Del Pinzo gave an order, and his band of disreputable half breeds likehimself, including several Indians, though not of the Yaquis tribe,marched out, hands above their heads, while Snake and his men, the boyranchers in the van, watched."Is that all?" asked Snake, when the outlaws stood in a row amid therocks.  He was taking no chances on leaving a hidden, lurking foe tofire behind their backs."All, Senor Purdee.  Shall we go?""When I tell you to, yes.  Now, Del Pinzo, you know I don't trust you,and there's no use soft soaping the situation.  I wouldn't trust youwith a Mexican dollar.  So here's what you've got to do."March over there," and he indicated a bunch of scrub about half a mileaway.  "Stay there until we get breakfast and are on our way.  Whenwe're far enough off I'll fire a shot, and that'll mean you can comeover here again, get your horses and guns, and take after the Yaquis,if it suits you.""We want to drive the Indians back," declared Del Pinzo."Yes, I reckon they're picking on your preserves, that's the reason,"said Snake.  "Well, this is a free country.  As long as you're out ofjail—though how you beat it I can't guess—you can do as you please, Is'pose—as long as it doesn't interfere with us."So hit any trail you like as long as it isn't ours.  Nowremember—don't make a break for your horses and guns until I fire ashot.""So be it, Senor.  And one thing more?""What is it?""May I put down my hands?  I am wounded—""Oh, put 'em down?  I didn't more than graze you to keep you fromshooting one of our men.  Put 'em down!"With a sigh of relief the outlaw lowered his hands, an example followedby his men, all of whom were unarmed.  They marched behind their leaderto the place designated, and for the first time Snake breathed easily."How do you reckon he got here?" asked Bud, when hurried preparationswere under way for breakfast."Give it up," answered Snake, who had sent some men to collect the gunsand horses of the Del Pinzo gang."He may have bribed his way out of jail, or have broken out, and we'llhave to let that go until later.  He may really be trying to drive backthe Yaquis, for fear they'll steal things that he has an eye tohimself.  Or he may be lying—I think most likely the last.  Anyhow hehappened to strike this place the same time as we did, and eitherknowing who we were, or not knowing, and that part has me guessing, hetried to pick us off.  However we'll give him the slip this time.""I don't see how, if you leave him his horses and guns," put in Yellin'Kid."Well, he and his men can't do much riding on horses without saddlesand bridles," said Snake, "and as for the guns—well, I'll leave themfor him at the first ranch I come to.""You mean you're going to take his guns with you?" asked Bud."Surest thing you ever said, son.  Think I'd trust him with anyshooting irons behind me.  And we'll just strip his horses, too.  Wecan pack along his saddles and bridles.  If they want to ride bare backthat's up to them."And this was the plan followed.  There were several pack animals in theoutfit from the Diamond X, and on these the saddles and bridles fromthe outlaws' horses were packed.  Then the guns were collected from theambush, and taken along when the start was made after breakfast."Hit the trail!" cried Snake, when preparations were complete.Off in the distance, hungrily waiting for the signal that would letthem return, stood Del Pinzo and his gang.  Their food was notdisturbed.  They had the means for making breakfast.Off rode Snake and his followers.  At a distance of little more thanhalf a mile from the scene of the fighting, on a rising hill, thecowboy stopped."Here's where we let 'em go back and eat," he said grimly.He raised his gun and fired a shot.  Instantly the gang, with Del Pinzoin the lead, rushed for the place where their property had been left."We spiked their guns, I think," chuckled Bud, as he rode beside hiscousins."I guess yes!" laughed Nort.Forward they rode once more—on the trail of the Yaquis.  As theydipped down into a little valley there came to their ears faint yellsof rage."They've found their saddles gone!" said Nort.Again came a shout."They've missed their bridles!" said Dick.A louder yell!"No guns!" shouted Bud.  "Oh, this is one time we put it all over DelPinzo!"Forward rode the outfit from Diamond X.CHAPTER XIIIWEARY CAPTIVES"Rosemary, are you able to stand it?"  Floyd put this question to hissister as the weary captives were urged along the trail by the Yaquis."We've just got to stand it, Floyd," was the brave answer.  "Helpmust come to us, and we must bear up until it does come.""Oh, I can stand it all right—I really don't mind.  But for you—itmust be terrible!  And the worst of it is I can't do a thing to helpyou.""Not now, no, Floyd," Rosemary answered, with a brave attempt at asmile.  "But we must watch our chance.  These Mexican Indians aren'tlike our own—or like our own used to be.  They aren't half as smart.We ought to be able to escape from them if we get half a chance.""Well, maybe, Rosemary.  But they're bad enough if they aren't smart."Floyd spoke with all the evidence on his side.  For a moredisreputable, unsavory, desperate and wicked band of men it would bealmost impossible to find.  Repulsive in face, dirty, tattered andtorn, wearing all sorts of cast off garments, a few in blankets,astride bony and broken horses, most of them, but each one armed withgun, revolver or knife, it was a crew of pirates, cut-throats,highwaymen to be carefully shunned."Well, I'm glad to see you keeping your courage up, Rosemary," remarkedher brother, trying to ease himself in the saddle.  It was not veryfeasible, as the captives were partly tied to prevent their escape, andthey could not shift about as they pleased."Oh, we have to make the best of it, Floyd," his sister told him."They haven't treated us roughly yet.""No, and I wonder at it.""It's because they have taken us for a ransom, I'm sure.  They know ifthey don't hand us over in good shape there will be no ransom money forthem.""Who do you think they count on getting it from?""Our relatives, of course.  Or maybe they think Uncle Sam willintervene on our behalf.""I wish to goodness he would—that he'd send a band of U.S. regularsafter this bunch of pirates.  Golly!  How the Yaquis would scatter; eh,Rosemary?""Maybe we'll see that soon, Floyd.  And maybe the boys from the DiamondX will come to our rescue.  You know Bud's mother wrote that he and histwo eastern cousins had a ranch of their own now.  My message ought toreach some one.""I hope it does, Rosemary.  But who's this coming up?"The talk of brother and sister had attracted the attention of theIndians, and there had been muttered comments.  Following this one ofthe knot of guards around the two captives had spurred ahead to wherePaz rode.  Then back with the messenger came riding an Indian bettermounted and equipped than most of the members of the band.He forced his horse between the steeds of Rosemary and Floyd, and gaveeach of them a grin he may have intended to be friendly."What's the idea—Mike?" asked Floyd."Mike?  Why do you call him that?" asked Rosemary."Because he looks friendly enough to be an Irishman," was the answer."See, he has a turned up nose, I verily believe he has Irish blood inhim.  Let's call him Mike.""Mike" grinned, though doubtless he understood nothing of what was said."He does look Irish," agreed Rosemary.  "But I don't see how."The explanation probably was that some wandering, adventuring Irishmanhad married an Indian woman.  The Yaquis, like many other Indian ornative tribes often intermarried.  In fact it was this that in ameasure led to their downfall.  For they lost the ideals of their race,disease crept in and to-day many a band of what was once a noble peopleis but a dragged-out remnant, steeped in crime.The Yaquis were once among the best of the Mexican Indian tribes.Though not large in numbers they were clean-living and of highcharacter.  The Spanish conquest of Mexico marked the beginning of theend for them, as it did many another Mexican race.There was once a great civilization existing in the narrow strip ofland connecting North and South America.  Now only the faintest tracesremain.Once the Indian tribes flourished, they may even have had a writtenlanguage, of which now only a few idiograms remain.  The men and womenwere skilled in basketry, pottery and the making of gold and silverornaments.But they fell upon evil days, or evil days came to them, it matterslittle which, and they began to go down.  Today there are only a fewthousands of the Yaquis left, and they have degenerated into trainrobbers along the Southern Pacific line.  They live like beasts, theyhave mingled with negroes, degenerate Spaniards and Mexicans until itis almost an insult to apply the name "Indian" to them.And it was a band of such natives as this that had captured Rosemaryand Floyd.  Kept as much as possible to the confines of what might betermed, unofficially, a reservation, the Yaquis occasionally brokethrough the line of Mexican soldier guards and went on a rampage, oftencrossing the border into Arizona, as happened in the spring of 1921,when several Americans were killed in a border town.It was an uprising of this same nature which had spelled trouble forRosemary and her brother.  They had happened along at the wrong time,as it were.Tired and weary, in body and spirit, the captives were urged forward."Mike" as our friends had dubbed him, seemed good natured enough, forhe kept a perpetual grin on his face.  His mission seemed to be to ridebetween Rosemary and Floyd, and prevent any collusion to escape.However there was no time or chance to think of that now.  Thecavalcade filed along a narrow, rocky gorge, from which there was noside trail.  Paz and some of his more intimate followers rode in thevan, and the rear guard was made up of ragged Indians—with apologiesfor using the name.Rosemary and Floyd would not have had a chance had they been able toturn their horses and make a bolt for it.  So they must ride on.  Theywere too weary to talk now, they could only hope for the best.  Whenwould the rescuers come?A halt was made at noon, and some coarse food was passed to thecaptives.  Rosemary shuddered at it and turned away."You must eat," Floyd told her.  "Got to keep up your strength youknow."And she managed to choke down a few mouthfuls.The afternoon passed wearily.  They were going deeper into themountains it seemed.  There appeared to be some dispute between Paz onone side and a few of his followers on the other.  And it seemed tohave to do with a place to camp for the night.  The men wanted to stopwhile the sun was yet in sight, but Paz insisted on going on until itwas below the jagged peaks.  Then he indicated a place where camp wasto be made.Mike slid off his horse, and, loosening the ropes, indicated thatRosemary and Floyd were to do the same.  So cramped and stiff wasRosemary that she fell in a heap as she slid from the saddle.  With acry Floyd sprang to her aid, only to be thrust back by Mike."What do you mean?" yelled the boy.  "I want to help mysister—you—you—"He was spluttering with rage as he raised his hand, and looked aboutfor a rock with which to attack the Indian."Don't—Floyd!" called Rosemary calmly.  "I am all right—just numb,that's all!  Don't get into a fight.  They may separate us!"Indeed that did seem to be the orders given by Paz, who rode up amoment later.  For Mike took Rosemary by the arm, and was leading heraway, while another Indian, dirty, greasy and with an evil grin on hisfat face, thrust Floyd to one side."Stop!" suddenly cried Rosemary.  She swung free of Mike's grasp, andin an instant that individual was looking straight into the muzzle of asmall but very serviceable automatic.CHAPTER XIVSURROUNDEDBubbling over with mirth, at the manner in which they had gotten thebest of Del Pinzo and his gang, the outfit from Diamond X rode on thetrail again, once more intent on trailing the Yaquis that had capturedFloyd and Rosemary.  And if Bud, Nort and Dick could, at that moment,or thereabouts, have seen Rosemary boldly defying the evil-faced Mikewith her automatic, their admiration for the girl would have beenmanifested by yells of approval.But Bud and his chums, with their cowboy friends, were all unaware ofwhat was happening farther on in the desolate mountain whither theIndians had led their captives.  If they had been they probably wouldnot have ridden on in such comparative leisure.  For they did not rushat headlong pace, knowing they had a long, long trail ahead of them,and must conserve not only their strength, but, what was moreimportant, that of their horses.Without horses it would have been impossible to have gone on for morethan a short distance in that wild country.  As I have explained motorcars, even the marvelous little Ford, would have been out of thequestion, so rough was the trail, so winding amid rocks, now down insome narrow defile, hardly wide enough for a single rider, and againascending some slope tangled with brush and dead trees.Knowing themselves to be thus dependent on their horses our heroessaved their steeds all they could.  It was for this reason that, muchas they hated Del Pinzo and his gang, they would not deprive theseoutlaws of what was a means of life—their horses."But they won't ride after us, and I don't believe they'll give us anymore trouble," chuckled Bud, as he visioned the outlaws, used to theircomfortable if clumsy saddles, riding bareback.  To a horseman this isthe limit of torture, for the horses of the west are no circus animals,with broad, flat backs.  Instead, they generally have a ridge of boneon which it is almost impossible to ride, even when a blanket or two isstrapped on in place of a saddle.  Only an Indian can manage to ridealong with but a blanket for a seat."Yes, we put one over on them all right," agreed Dick."The only thing about it is that they held us up," remarked Nort."We're several hours behind our schedule now.""It can't be helped," spoke Bud, looking at a deep scratch on hishand—a scratch caused by a glancing bullet.  "We can't really doanything toward rescuing Rosemary and Floyd until we strike the trailof the Yaquis, and it's mostly guess work until then.""But when we do locate them!" exclaimed Nort, as he gripped the handleof his gun, "we'll let 'em see what a mistake they made!""You got rid of a mouthful that time, son," observed Yellin' Kid.  Andthen, lifting his voice he roared out:  "As I was ridin' on the trail,  My true love for to see.  I met a four-legged grizzly bear,  An' th' grizzly he met me!  "'Oh kind Mr. Bear,' I gently called,  'Move on!' but he shook his head.  So then I ups with my .45  An' fills him full of lead!"Having gotten this out of his "system," Yellin' Kid seemed to feelbetter.  He smiled genially at the boy ranchers, and flapping his hatdown on the side of his pony sent the animal ahead in a cloud of dustto join some of his companions in the lead.Thus, making merry as possible under the circumstances, the outfit fromDiamond X resumed the trail, the more experienced cowboys looking hereand there for any "sign" that would indicate the presence or thepassage of the Yaquis.As a matter of fact Snake Purdee did not expect to "meet up" with anyof the Indians for some time.  He and Rolling Stone had talked thematter over, and Rolling Stone had given the benefit of his experiencein trailing Yaquis."With them," said the new acquisition to Diamond X, "it's a sort of aflash in the pan.  They get excited for some reason or other, have awar dance, a pow wow or some ceremony, and before they know it somecrazy leader has taken the trail with some of his friends, and they'rebent on shooting up some Mexican or American town, getting strong drinkwhen they can, and stealing everything they can lay their dirty paws on."That's when they're in the first rush of excitement, and I take itthat it was on a time like this the Yaquis took Miss Rosemary andFloyd.  Why they did this, instead of shooting 'em, as they generallydo, I can't make out.  The Yaquis don't ordinarily use those methods.""Unless they took my cousins to hold for ransom," suggested Bud."Well, of course that's possible, but I didn't know the Yaquis werethat smart," answered Rolling Stone.  "Still, some new leader may havegotten together a band, or it may be some half breed, or even somerenegade American is at the bottom of this.  I can understand a chaplike that holding prisoners for ransom."But what I started to say was that once the first wild outburst isover, the Yaquis will keep mighty quiet.  They won't go about with abrass band, advertising their hiding places.""You mean it won't be easy to find them?" asked Nort."That's it, son.  They're going to be mighty cute and foxy, and while aYaqui isn't in it with our old time American Indians in the matter ofcovering a trail, still we aren't going to have any walkover.  We'vegot our work cut out for us.""I believe you!" shouted Yellin' Kid.  "But we'll get the devils sooneror later.""The sooner the better," said Rolling Stone quietly, and there was inhis very quietness a menace which the boys understood very well.  Everyhour that Rosemary and Floyd remained in the hands of the Yaquis meantan ever increasing danger.  And once the mad frenzy of the Indians woreoff and they began to realize what they had done, anticipating theconsequences once they were captured with the prisoners in theirpossession, there was hardly a question of what they would do toRosemary and Floyd.  The captives would be killed to get them out ofthe way.It was this that urged the rescue party ahead with all the speedpossible, and consistent with preserving their horses' power to travel.In spite of wounds, and some were seriously hurt (one dying later)there was no sign of gloom in the midst of the party of which the boyranchers formed an important element.  Some of the cowboys sang, andYellin' Kid intoned another verse or two of the many songs with whichhe seemed plentifully provided.Coming to a deep ravine, along which the trail led into the mountains,where it was reported the Yaquis had headed, Snake Purdee called a halt."What's the matter now?" asked Rolling Stone."Do you see anything?" asked Bud, for he noticed the veteran cowboylooking down into the black depths."No," answered Snake slowly, "but it strikes me this is a good place toget rid of the saddles and truck we took offen Del Pinzo.  No usecarting the duffle along.  It's no good to us and it only tires ourpack mules.  Heave it down this gully, boys and we'll ride lighter."This was soon done, and the baggage animals, at least, went forwardwith easier burdens.  The trail became more rough as it led upward, butSnake explained that they would cross one range of the mountain, andcome to a level plain which must be traversed before the second rangewould be reached."And we'll either come across the Yaquis in the plain, or as we go upthe second mountain," said the cowboy.  "That will be about their limitI fancy."They camped that night on the downward slope of the first mountain,having crossed the ridge through a narrow pass, not easy to negotiate.There was a more tense feeling when this night camp was made than atany time before."For it seems now, somehow," explained Bud, "that we're within strikingdistance of the Yaquis.  We're trailing 'em close!""The closer the better—so, we can get a few shots at 'em!" declaredNort."Will they really make a stand and fight?" asked Dick."I don't know," Bud replied.  "I never—""They'll fight all right!" interrupted Rolling Stone.  "They'll fightnow just through fear of being captured.  The first hot impulses thatcaused them to run wild are cooling off.  They'll be worse to tacklenow than when they first took the war path, for they will be cool andcalculating, while before they were hot headed, and anyone who usedhalf his brains could best 'em.  Yes, we aren't going to have a picnic.""Well, we didn't come for that," said Dick grimly.He and his companion boy ranchers were willing to endure all thehardships and dangers with the more seasoned cowboys, and Bud and Nortwho, until within a comparatively recent time were unused to westernways, were now accounted as capable of Bud, than which there was nohigher praise.There was evident in the manner in which campfires were built, and asystem of sentinel guards posted, that the older men realized thenearness of danger.  The cowboys had dropped their half banteringmanner, and sat grim-lipped and thoughtful of eye about the blaze.This change in their manners affected our youthful heroes who looked atone another somewhat apprehensively, and more than once let their handsstray to their weapons.But the night passed without untoward incident, if we except a falsealarm given by Bud when he was standing guard.  He had been pacingbackward and forward for some hours, and it was almost time for hisrelief, when he saw, peering over the top of a rock, what he took to bethe feathered headdress of an Indian.  Forgetting, for the moment thatthe Yaquis did not adopt the picturesque adornments of the Americanredmen, Bud fired, at the same time letting out a yell.Of course, this roused the whole camp, and you can appreciate Bud'schagrin when his "Indian" proved to be nothing more than a wavingbranch of a bush topping a rock.  The waving leaves had looked likefeathers in the starlight, by which alone Bud had seen them."Well, I wasn't taking any chances," he said, when the cause of hisalarm was ascertained."That's right," Yellin' Kid assured him.Morning saw the party in saddle again, and as better time could be madeon the down trail, they reached the intervening plain of the valley,between the two mountain ranges well before noon.A halt was made for "grub," and it was after this meal, when they wereabout to proceed again, that an astounding discovery was made.  Dickgave the alarm.  He had gone off a little way to get his pony, whichhad strayed, when he saw, on the far horizon, a band of horsemen.  Theywere too distant to be made out clearly, but against the intensely bluesky Dick saw waving lances, and he at once shouted:"Indians!"This was enough to focus all eyes, first on him and then on theapproaching band.  The waving lances could plainly be seen now."And look there!" cried Nort, as he pointed to the North, a directionexactly opposite to that whence the horsemen discovered by Dick wereapproaching."More Indians!" shouted Yellin' Kid.Snake Purdee leaped to a high rock and with rapid gaze swept thehorizon."They're coming from all directions," he said grimly, as he leaped downand began a rapid survey of their position, with a view to its defence."We're being surrounded!"And this was so.  From all points there rode in on the outfit fromDiamond X an ever narrowing circle of horsemen, many of whom carriedlances which pointed toward the zenith."They aren't Yaquis," exclaimed Rolling Stone.  "Those Mexican Indiansdon't carry lances.  They must have met up with a band from someAmerican reservation and have gotten them to go on the warpath.  Thislooks bad!"CHAPTER XVWITH THE TROOPERSWith a skill and foresight which never seemed to leave them, theleaders of the rescue expedition had selected the place for the dinnerstop with a view to its possible defense in case of emergency.  Thiswas part and parcel of life in the west, especially when on anexpedition of this character.In consequence there were several natural places of refuge and hiding,behind which a fight could be conducted.  And as soon as it wasascertained that a body of horseman—hostile it seemed they mustbe—were riding against them, the first thought was how best a fightcould be conducted."Get in the horses!" commanded Rolling Stone.  "They'll shoot them offfirst crack out of the box, for they'll know we're done for without ouranimals."As the rescuers had been about to move when the approaching party wasdiscovered, and as some of the cowboys actually had their horses inhand, the securing of the remainder of the steeds was a work of nogreat moment.At one edge of the roughly outlined circle in which the noon camp hadbeen pitched, was a group of big rocks, that would make a naturalstable and hiding place for the horses.  The animals were led into thislittle corral, and made fast there by lariats.  As much of the baggageas possible was piled in with the horses.This much done by Bud and his friends it was necessary to look tothemselves, for the strange horsemen were slowly but surely coming on,and it was beyond question that they had entirely surrounded ourheroes.  From all points of the compass, a thin line it is true, butone in which there were no breaks, in came the attackers."We've got to form a circle ourselves," said Snake grimly.  "Get downas low as you can, boys, each one behind a rock, and with one at yourback if you can make it.  They won't rush us at first.  They'll try topick us off until they find out how many of us there are."Quickly the others followed his advice.  It was an admirable place todefend, and other things being equal could be held by a small bandagainst a large body.  But the factors of food and water would enterinto the fight, and though the camp was watered by a little stream,everyone from Diamond X knew the first act of the attackers would be togo higher up and cut off the supply of fluid.  In this hot summerseason men and beasts could only last a short time without water.Then, having seen to it that the boy ranchers and the others were in asgood a position of defense as possible, Snake Purdee picked out his ownlittle niche and laid out on the ground in front of him his supply ofcartridges.Each man—and by "man" I include the boy ranchers—had a rifle and arevolver, or, rather, automatic, each weapon using cartridges of thesame caliber.  Thus only one sort of ammunition had to be packed, andthere was greater efficiency afforded."Get ready," called Yellin' Kid in as low a voice as he ever used."They've come to a stop for a talk, and they'll begin shooting soon Ireckon."The feet of the steeds ridden by the advancing horsemen had raised acloud of dust which hung about them like a hazy curtain, preventing aclear view.  In fact, after the first glimpse of the riders they hadonly been seen as dim figures approaching through this haze of dust.But now, as they had stopped, as Yellin' Kid had said, the dust beganto drift away, and, for the first time our friends had a comparativelyclear view of those surrounding them.It was Bud who first gave the good news.  Looking intently at ahorseman nearest him, the boy suddenly leaped to his feet and gave ashout that could be none other than joyous in its meaning."Get down, you idiot!" cried Snake.  "Do you want a bullet through you?"But the lad continued to shout and yell, waving his hat, and there wasno fusillade of shots from the ring of horsemen.  Then, for the firsttime Bud made himself understandable, for he shouted:"They aren't Indians!  They aren't Indians!  They're United StatesTroopers!  Hooray!  Now we've got our help!""Troopers?" repeated Snake, for a cloud of dust had blown about him,greatly obscuring his vision."Troopers—sure!" yelled Nort, now seeing what Bud had beheld.And a moment later it was clear to all of the surrounded band that thehorsemen were, indeed, mounted men of Uncle Sam's cavalry—a company oflancers, a type of the armed force that has gone out of existence now,but one which was very effective in some Indian fights.A bugle rang out clear and sweet from somewhere in that surroundingcircle of troopers, and instantly the outer edges of the ring beganclosing in.  Then our friends, knowing their fright had been withoutfoundation, rose up from their hiding places and, standing together,with Snake at their head as commander, waited for what was to come next.It was not long in manifesting itself.  A trooper, evidently an orderlyfrom a group of officers in front of our friends, rode up, waved hishand in place of a salute when he saw he had to deal with one of hisown kind, and asked:"Who are you and what are you doing?""We're from Diamond X ranch," replied Snake, "and we're on the trail ofthe Yaquis who have captured some of our friends!""Oh, the Yaquis!" exclaimed the trooper, in evident surprise.  "Why,we're after the same bloody beggars!  Glad to have met you.  We seem tobe off the trail for some reason.  Captain Marshal will want to speakto you.  Better come with me.""Wait 'til I get my horse," murmured Snake, for, like all westerners,he hated to take more than a few steps out of the saddle.A moment later he was riding toward the officers of Uncle Sam'stroopers, while the remainder of the lancers riding in, mingled withthe small force from Diamond X."It's good to see you fellows!" chuckled Bud as the bronze-facedsoldiers gathered around the boy ranchers."We were just about to open fire on you," said one of the lancers, andNort and Dick noticed that in addition to the steel-tipped weapon eachtrooper carried a carbine and wore a revolver in his belt.  The lanceswere, in reality, more for show than for actual use, though in chargingthe hostile Indians the spears had served many a useful purpose."Glad you didn't," said Yellin' Kid.  "There'd have been trouble, forwe were all primed for you," and he waved his hand toward the rocksamid which some cowboys were just arising, picking up the ammunitionthey had spread out for quick use."We thought you were Yaquis, and we had orders to shoot to kill,"explained another trooper."And we took you for Indians—not exactly Yaquis, for they don't carrylances," said Dick.  "I'm glad it was a mistake all around.""But say, do you fellows know anything about these dirty Mexicans whohave crossed the border?" asked a third trooper, a lieutenant from hisstripes, it would appear.  "I won't call 'em Indians, though I reckonthey are, of a sort.  But where are they?  We got orders to take after'em, but we can't get sight of so much as a dirty blanket.""Well, we think we're on their trail," Bud answered, "though maybe weare as far off as you are.  Anyhow—"But he did not complete the sentence.  From the distance a single shotrang out, and as all turned they saw, standing on the sharp horizonline, a solitary figure, from near which arose a thin wisp of smoke.CHAPTER XVIINDIAN "SIGN""What's that?" cried Snake, turning from where he had been talking withCaptain Marshall.  "Real Indians this time?""Nothing to worry about," answered the commander of the troopers with asmile.  "That's one of my scouts, and he's evidently found something.""Found something?" questioned the veteran cowboy."Indian sign, most likely.  I sent several men out, just before wesighted your party and took you for the Yaquis.  I told my men, if theydiscovered anything, to get within sight of us and fire one shot.  Thenthey were to stay on the spot until we came to investigate, and that'swhat we'll do now.""Do you think it's the trail of the Yaquis he has discovered?" askedNort, waving his hand toward the solitary horseman."It may be—I rather hope so, for we haven't had any luck thus far inlocating the beggars.  When we sighted you we thought we were in for afight, but it didn't happen," the captain added, his voice quite rueful."I notice you came along all primed for business!" chuckled Yellin' Kid."But we were ready for you—in case you had turned out to be thoseMexican imps!" added Rolling Stone."Yes, you seemed to have picked out a good spot," complimented thecavalry captain.  "We were just talking among ourselves that we weregoing to have trouble in getting you out, when we saw one of you wave ahat and then we knew it was all right.  In a way we were glad, for thisfighting is nasty business at best, though we don't pass any of it upwhen it comes our way," he added with an air of pride in his troop."You weren't any gladder to find out there was a mistake than we were,"said Dick.  "You soldiers looked like a lot of Indians with lances andscalps dangling from them."  Indeed the lances of the troopers weredecorated with wisps from the tails of horses, and, at a distance,might have resembled grewsome human scalps."There are few Indians, now-a-days who use lances," said CaptainMarshall.  "They went out of date about the time Fenimore Cooper wroteabout Leather Stocking.  The Indians didn't keep to their bows andarrows, or lances, once they could get guns and powder.  I don't knowmuch about the Yaquis, but I fancy they did the same—discarded theirlances, if they ever used any, and their bows, for guns.""Another thing," added Lieutenant Snow, who was next in command to hiscaptain, "scalps were too precious a trophy to dangle from the point ofa lance.  Some Indians may have tied strands of human hair on theirlances, but I doubt if they used scalps.  The scalps were hung at thebelt of the man who took them, to be afterward displayed in his tepee.But I don't believe the Mexican Indians followed that practice, thoughof course I'm not certain about it.""The modern Yaquis are mean enough to do anything," said Rolling Stone."What the old timers did doesn't matter now.  It's what these of todaydo.  And I reckon ye've heard how a party of 'em has taken prisonerssome of their friends," and he waved his hand toward the outfit fromDiamond X, of which he was not yet a full-fledged member."Yes, we heard about the uprising," admitted Captain Marshall.  "We hadorders to take the trail, and we've been on it since.  Well, as long asyou are ready, we may as well trot over and see what the scout has toreport.  I hope he can put us on the real trail."The bugle sounded, the troopers formed, and with the boy ranchers andtheir friends falling in the rear, an unofficial part of the company ofregulars, the cavalcade set forth again.On the way Snake Purdee, who rode beside Captain Marshall, told suchdetails as he possessed about the capture of Rosemary and Floyd.  Theofficer had heard pretty much the same story, for it had been wired todistant points on the theory that the Yaquis would scatter, and therewas no telling in which direction they would travel."So Del Pinzo is on the rampage again; is he?" asked the Captain, asthey neared the lone scout, who was patiently waiting to impart suchinformation as he had."Well, he won't rampage an awful lot until he gets a new outfit!"chuckled Yellin' Kid, who had ridden up to be on hand when the scoutwas reached."What do you mean?  Did you shoot him up?" asked the cavalry captain."If you did you ought to get a medal of honor, for of all the rascalsin this section he's the worst.""We shot him and his followers up a bit," admitted Snake, "but wedidn't damage 'em as we ought.  However we took their horse furnitureand guns away and left 'em their animals.  It'll be a few days beforethey get active again.""Good!" exclaimed Captain Marshall.  "And now we'll hear what Kelly hasto report."The scout saluted as his commanding officer rode up, and the others,realizing that there was a certain need of reserve in this firstinterview, held back until the captain should signify that he was readyto talk to them.  For a time Captain Marshall and Private Kelly talkedin low tones, the scout frequently leaning over to point to somethingon the ground, the captain gazing intently where his trooper indicated.Finally the commander waved his hand to invite his fellow officers andtroopers, as well as the members of Diamond X, to approach."Kelly has found it," said the captain.  "Plenty of Indian sign, whichshows the Yaquis, or some of them at least, passed this way.  Here'sthe trail, and we'll follow it.  Do you want to come with us?" he askedof Snake Purdee."Well, we'd like to, if it isn't asking too much.  Our main object isto get within shooting distance of these Yaquis, and save this Rosemarygirl and her brother.""Precisely our object," the captain said.  "And as long as we have thesame business I think we can do better together than if we separate.Your men will undoubtedly be of service to us if the trail getsfainter, and there's no telling how many are in this band, so the moreguns we have the better.""My idea," agreed the leader from Diamond X.  "And now let's have alook at this Indian sign.  Rolling Stone here claims to know a lotabout the Yaquis, and he may be able to put us wise to some of theirwrinkles.  Come here, Stone!" he invited.In order not to obliterate the faint marks in the soil which indicatedthe passage of a body of horsemen, the troopers, with Bud and hisfriends, had halted some distance away from the lone scout.  The latterhad remained a little way off the trail, so his own horse's feet wouldnot mingle with those of the enemy.For some time the older cowboys, Rolling Stone, Captain Marshall and afew of his men who had fought Indians years back, gazed at the Indian"sign" as it is called.  In this sense the word means the evidencesleft by a passing body of Indians, the casual and accidental record ofpassage.  The word is also used to indicate arbitrary marks and symbolsmade by one body of Indians to leave a message for some body offollowing savages.  This sign language is very difficult for a personnot accustomed to it to read, though it can not be said that thedegenerate Yaquis had the art down as fine as had our own AmericanIndians of two or three generations ago."Well, they've been along here, and they're headed that way," saidRolling Stone, thus confirming the opinion of the older troopers."Then the thing to do is to follow them," said the Captain.  "Give thesignal, bugler!" he called.Once more the clear notes rang out, and the party started off after theYaquis.Nort and Dick, riding beside Bud, toward the rear of the cavalcade,looked down to see what the "sign" consisted of.  Aside from some hoofmarks in the earth they saw nothing."They might have been made by our own ponies," observed Nort."Yes, but they weren't," Bud declared."How can they tell?" asked Dick."Oh, I don't know exactly, but there are dozens of little points thatan Indian trailer looks for," Bud answered.  "He can tell whether thehorses trotted or walked.  He can tell whether the man who rode him wasa tenderfoot or a cowpuncher.  And of course it's easy enough to tellin which direction a horse is going.""Unless they put the shoes on backwards," said Nort."There isn't much of that done," said Bud.  "And, as a matter of fact,as you know, they don't shoe many horses out here.  They let 'em runbarefoot.  Anyhow, it looks as though we really were on the trail ofthe Yaquis at last.""I hope so!" agreed Nort and Dick.CHAPTER XVIIAN ALARMWhile the boy ranchers and their friends from Diamond X had joinedforces with Uncle Sam's troopers and were warm on the trail of theYaquis, the squalid, degenerate and vicious band that had capturedRosemary and Floyd still retained possession of their captives.  Thoughdisheartened and apprehensive, Rosemary and her brother had made uptheir minds to one thing—they would not be separated—come what might.For his sister's sake Floyd had firmly decided that if they attemptedto take Rosemary off by herself he would, at any cost, make an effortto follow, even if it resulted in his death at the hands of the Indians.As for Rosemary, she had but one thought—to remain near her brother atany cost.  And as she had so far managed to conceal from the Yaquis thefact that she possessed her efficient automatic, and a supply ofammunition, she felt a sense of security that otherwise would not havebeen with her.  She, too, resolved on desperate measures before shewould let them separate her and Floyd.So when Mike, as the one who carried out the orders of his villainouschief Paz, tried to take Rosemary off by herself, probably to break herspirit and induce her to send a letter to her friends asking thatransom money be forwarded—when Mike tried to do this he received oneof the surprises of his miserable life as he found himself looking intothe muzzle of Rosemary's gun."Ugh!" grunted the Indian."I don't know exactly what that means," said Rosemary coolly, as sheheld the gun with steady hand so that it "covered" Mike, "but mybrother and I are going to stay together.  If you try to separate usI'll shoot as many of you as I can, and I'm a pretty good shot," sheadded grimly.  "Then I'll shoot myself and him before I'll let you tryany of your tricks on us!"She spoke with such fierce earnestness that, though all of her wordsmay not have been intelligible to her captors, they at least understoodher intent.Paz gave a grunt, half of admiration and half of anger at thisunexpected change in his plans.  Rosemary suddenly wheeled, facing him.She swung her weapon to cover the evil rascal.There was a spurt of flame, a puff of smoke and before the crack of thereport snapped out the dirty, greasy hat of Paz went spinning from hishead.A cry of dismay arose from the followers of the Yaqui chief and mingledwith his own grunt of rage.  With a yell Mike reached for his gun, butwith a gesture his chief stopped him, saying something in their owntongue.It was, undoubtedly, a command to refrain from shooting down thecaptives, which was the evident intent of Mike.  And of course thatcould easily have been done, for the Yaquis were well armed with riflesand revolvers they had stolen in their raid.  They were not the bestshots in the world, but an infuriated band of them firing on a wearyboy and girl, would have made short work of their lives."That wasn't a miss!" said Rosemary with a laugh, as she still held hergun to cover the leader.  "I just wanted to shoot off your hat.  Icould have aimed lower down if I had wanted to.  That was just to showyou I know how to shoot!""Ugh!" grunted Paz, and there was open admiration on his rascally face.He talked rapidly to Mike and some of the latter's companions who hadgathered around, and there was no further attempt to take Floyd awayfrom Rosemary.The latter, however, was on her guard, for she feared they would rushher, and try to take away her weapon, the unexpected display of which,as much as her cleverness in shooting away the hat of Paz, had held theIndians at bay for the necessary reaction to take place."Yo' all right!" grunted Paz with another grin, while one of hisfollowers picked up the hat, looking curiously at the bullet holethrough it: "Yo' smart gal!""Sure did have your nerve with you!" complimented Floyd, as he stoodbeside his sister.  "I wish I had my gun!""It's probably just as well you didn't have," she said with asmile—rather a wan and weary one it must be admitted."Why?" demanded Floyd.  "I'm as good a shot as you are.""I know it.  But in matters of this kind ruffians will stand for morefrom a girl or woman than they would from a man.  If you had drawn agun they probably would have shot you down without a moment'shesitation.  But when I pulled mine it took them off their feet, so tospeak.""I wish it would take off a lot of their ugly heads, and their dirtybodies, too!" grunted Floyd.  "Say, Rose, what are we going to do?This is a terrible pickle to be in.""It's better to be in a pickle, for that's a sort of preservative,Floyd," she joked, though how she had the heart to do this she herselfscarcely realized.  "As long as they keep us in pickle there's somehope," she went on, with a tired little laugh.  "But when they take usout—well, I'll be glad to have my gun," she added grimly.She still held the weapon, but it was evident that she was not going tobe obliged to use it again at once, either for intimidation or actualdefence.  Paz waved to her to put it away, and she did, slipping itinto a pocket of her skirt.It was a pocket she had had made for just such a purpose as carrying agun where the ordinary observer would not see it.  And if you have everhunted for a pocket in your mother's or sister's skirt, and given up indisgust, you will understand that the subterfuge of Rosemary was not assimple as at first appears.  Of course she realized that if they hadbeen desperately bent on finding her weapon the Yaquis could have takenit from her.  But they evidently did not dream that she had one.  And,now, when she had given a demonstration of how quickly she could drawand use it, they would be a bit careful of how they approached her.Floyd's weapon, of course had been taken from him almost at once.  Hehad been taken unawares or this might not have been the case.  But itwas probably better, under the circumstances, that he had no gun.  Or,as Rosemary had said, he might have rashly fired and the answeringshots from the Indians might have killed both of the captives."Go on!" Paz said to Rosemary, indicating that she and her brothermight remain together.She had brought about what she intended.The captives were led farther in among the rocks to a sort of naturalcave, and there they were left, some food having been tossed down wherethey could reach it.  It was the most primitive sort of a prison, sosimple, in fact, that after a while Floyd said:"What's to hinder us walking away from here, Rosemary?  They aren'twatching us, and if we pack some of this grub—rotten as it is—maybewe can get away, and reach Diamond X ranch.""I'm afraid we'd have small chance of that," Rosemary answered wearily."What I'm in hopes of is that some one will come to the rescue.  I'msure my note will bring us help.""Yes, but when?" asked Floyd, a bit fretfully.  "It may be too late.I'm going to see if we can't get away.  Stay here and I'll crawl up tothe top of the rock and see what the situation is.""I think you'll find it isn't as easy as it looks," said his sister.Nor was it.  In the first place the climb up the jagged rocks waswearisome, but Floyd managed it.  But when he was at the top, andlooked over to see if there was a trail of escape, he was unpleasantlysurprised by a piece of stone hitting him sharply on the head.At first he thought it was a fragment of rock dropping from above,perhaps dislodged by his exertions.  But there was no rock over hishead.  He was at the highest peak in that immediate vicinity.Then the lad's eyes roved about and he saw, sitting in a natural nicheof the stone, not far from him, a greasy Indian, who held his handpoised to toss another stone at Floyd.The Indian grinned and motioned to the captive to go back.  Then Floydunderstood.  This Indian was a sentry, placed on guard to prevent thecaptives leaving."Well?" questioned Rosemary, as Floyd slid back to where she wasspreading out some blankets that had been tossed in with their food."No go," was the discouraged answer.  "They've got us hemmed in.""We'll just have to wait—that's all," said the girl.  "I don't believethey'll do us any real harm now.  They probably want money for lettingus go.  I expect they'll be having us write notes, soon, to UncleHenry, asking him to forward ten thousand dollars, or some amount likethat.""Ten thousand dollars!" gasped Floyd."Mexican!" laughed Rosemary with a joking spirit she did not altogetherfeel.Thus left to themselves, in a sort of natural prison of the rocks, aroofless cave, the captives spent the night, rolled in blankets.  Itwas cool without a campfire, but none was allowed them.  Sore, stiffand disheartened, Rosemary and Floyd arose soon after the sun was up,and made a pretense at breakfast.  They were given some tin cups ofblack, bitter and muddy coffee, without sugar, but it was mostcomforting."I never tasted anything better!" declared Floyd, draining the lastdrops."Nor I," agreed his sister.There was a movement among the Indians, and it was evident that theywere about to take to the trail again.  Rosemary and Floyd wondered howfar they would thus be led into the mountains.  Surely if a demand forransom money was to be made it must be made soon.But then they did not know how far they were from the ranch of theiruncle, whom they had set out to visit.  They might be going toward itor away from it.  They had lost all sense of direction.Suddenly something seemed to take place down in the main camp of theIndians that indicated a new element in the grim adventure.  There wereshouts and excited cries—cries of alarm, it was very evident."Oh!" cried Rosemary with shining eyes.  "Maybe it's a rescue partyafter us?""I hope so!" shouted Floyd.A moment later Mike, his face showing unmistakable signs of fear, camerushing in, and by signs, and talk in his own tongue, of which Rosemaryand Floyd could understand a few words, he indicated that they were tofollow him.Meanwhile the confusion and alarm in the main body of the Yaquisincreased.What had happened?CHAPTER XVIIISEPARATEDThough realizing how useless it was to question Mike—useless becauseshe doubted if he understood her, and equally futile because he wouldnot bother to answer her—still Rosemary fired a volley of questions atthe Indian."If I had my way I'd fire a volley of bullets at him—provided I hadthem to fire!" growled Floyd.  But he had not, and Rosemary did notdeem this an occasion to again produce her weapon, which she waskeeping as a last resort.Besides, Mike did not betray any specially hostile intentions.  Heseemed merely anxious to get Rosemary and Floyd out of their prisonpen, so to speak, and on the move."But what's it all about?" demanded Rosemary.  "What's the excitement,and what's the hurry?"For that there was excitement and an alarm, and that she and herbrother were being urged to hurry was very evident."Yes, what is it?" and Floyd added his demand to that of his sister."No sabe!" grunted Mike, that being his way of using his command ofSpanish to indicate that he did not know.  More likely he did not wantto tell.  But there was no way of forcing him."Oh, we've got to ride those horrid knife-backed ponies!" half groanedRosemary, as she saw led out for the use of herself and her brother thesteeds on which they had been carried thus far into the mountains."They're so bony I'm afraid their backbones will cut through thesaddle.""They look as though they might," agreed Floyd.  "Gee, but I'm dirtyand I'd like a shave and this is perfectly rotten altogether!" hecompleted with a sigh."Don't mention such a thing as a bath tub!" wailed Rosemary.  "I don'tbelieve these heathen know what water means for washing in."Certainly the appearances of the Yaquis bore out that assertion.  Theywere dirty, grimy and greasy to a degree—and a high degree at that.Rosemary wore bloomers under a short skirt, an attire eminently suitedto women folk in the west.  For Rosemary was a rider of no smallability, more at home in the saddle than on the seat of an auto, andshe and Floyd counted on much riding once they reached their uncle'sranch which now, alas, seemed far away.Thus attired the girl found no difficulty in getting into the saddle,and her ability provoked murmurs of admiration from the Yaquis."Oh, if I only had a chance I'd show you how to ride!" declaredRosemary, when she understood that her skill as a horsewoman was beingcommented on.  "Let me set out in the open once, with a good horseunder me instead of a specimen of crow-bait, and I'll open your eyes!"But this was not to be—just yet.Floyd, too, was a good rider, but his sister had more of a naturalknack with ponies, and often bested him in a race.  He too, now swung aleg over the saddle and mounted.  With Mike in the lead, and several ofthe Yaquis bringing up in the rear as a guard against a retreat on thepart of the captives, they were urged forward out of the rocky defileinto which they had come the night before.Eagerly Rosemary and Floyd looked about them for some indication as tothe cause of the sudden excitement, and the movement among the Indians.Anxiously the captives scanned the horizon for a sight of some rescueparty, the approach of which might have sent the Indians scurrying forcover.  But nothing was to be seen—at least of that nature, thoughRosemary and her brother did see something that caused them greatsurprise.This was a sight of the main body of the Yaquis, under the leadershipof Paz, moving off at a right angle to the main trail, while Mike,evidently in command of the smaller party which guarded the captives,was going on up the mountain slope, farther into the fastnesses of therugged peaks."Say, what's up?" asked Floyd, of his sister."Don't know, but it looks as if they had separated.  One band going oneway and our bunch this way.  I don't like it either.  I'd rather dealwith Paz, ugly as he is, than with this Mike, who is Irish only becausewe've given him that name," Rosemary answered."It is queer," murmured Floyd, as he guided his pony along thedifficult trail.  "Paz has gone off with the main body of Indians, andleft us in charge of these.  If I only had a gun we could take a chanceand rush them, Rose.  There's only about three dozen!""Too many for just one gun," she answered."But can you guess what the game is?" her brother wanted to know."Well that's all I can do—guess.  From what went on soon afterbreakfast I imagine some of the Indians saw, or heard about a partythat was on their trail.""You mean a party from Diamond X?""Either that or soldiers.""That's so!  Soldiers!" cried Floyd.  "I hadn't thought of them!  Ofcourse there are troopers stationed out here at various places.  Andword of the Yaquis uprising is sure to go to them.  Maybe a band ofU.S. Regulars is on the way to save us, Rose!""I hope so.  But we can't count on it.  What I do think, though, isthat Paz took alarm at something, and he isn't going to chance beingfound with us on his hands.""You mean he's passing the buck to Mike here?""Something like that.  If our friends or Uncle Sam's men round up thisbunch of cut throats and find us in their possession it will go hardwith them.  So Paz isn't taking any chances.""That may be the explanation," agreed Rosemary.  "Anyhow we're beingtaken farther into the mountains by a small band, and the larger bodyis sliding off to one side.""It's a queer thing," said Floyd, as he and his sister rode along sideby side, "that these Yaquis didn't turn back into Mexico, and take usacross the border instead of rushing us into the United States.""Maybe they were afraid to cross the border, which is pretty sure to bebetter guarded than usual, after this outbreak," Rosemary said.  "Ormaybe the Yaquis didn't want to share spoils with any of their friendson their own side of the fence.""That's so!" agreed Floyd.  "And now that there's a chance of ransommoney—or these beggars think there is—I reckon they're less anxiousthan before to whack it up."That's it!  They're taking us as far off as they can to keep the cashamong themselves, and, meanwhile, Paz leads the main body away from us.""But what that move means I'd like to know," mused Rosemary.It was rather a puzzle to her and her brother.  All they were sure ofwas what they saw—that the Yaquis had separated, most of themfollowing Paz, while the captives were left in charge of the villainousMike and his selected followers.Rosemary slipped her hand into her pocket to feel the handle of herautomatic.CHAPTER XIXTHE FIGHTThe discovery of the Indian trail, and the unmistakable evidence thatthe marks had been left by a band of Yaquis, was the most encouragingnews the boy ranchers and their friends had received since starting outto rescue Rosemary and Floyd.  It was a fortunate meeting with the U.S.Troopers."Only for that," observed Bud, as he rode along with his cousins, "we'dhave been way off.  We were headed just in the opposite direction whenwe took to cover thinking the Yaquis were coming after us.""Yes, and the longer we traveled the farther off we'd be," agreed Nort."It's lucky all around.""It'll be luckier when we come up to this band of Greasers and takeRosemary and Floyd away," declared Dick."Just think!" exulted Nort.  "We'll soon be taking part in a realIndian fight!  I didn't think there could be such a thing outside of anovel.""Are these Yaquis real Indians?" asked Dick.  "They don't impress methat way.  Seems more like fighting some low down colored men.""I wouldn't insult a decent negro by comparing him to an Indian of thepresent Yaquis tribe," laughed Bud.  "They aren't at all alike.  Butthe Yaquis are real Indians of one of the Mexican races—a race thatwas once among the best.  Of course, even then, they weren't like ourAmerican Indians.""I guess I'm looking for tomahawks and scalping knives and listeningfor warwhoops!" admitted Dick.  "I have an Indian stone pipe home, witha long flat stem, made of a piece of oak, with designs burned in it.Around one end are wound some red and blue beads, and the stem has someold faded ribbons tied to it.  Have the Yaquis anything like that?" heasked Bud."Not that I know of.  The present generation smoke cigarettes when theycan get 'em, something no self-respecting American Indian would dreamof.  Maybe the Yaquis have some such ceremony as smoking the peacepipe, but I don't know about it.  I never saw any of their stone pipes.I know the kind you mean, Dick.  The pipe part is hollowed out with asmall hole—hardly holds enough tobacco for a good smoke, I'd say,though I never tried it.""That's the kind," Dick said.  "Well, to my mind, these Yaquis aren'thalf so—so—well, you know what I mean," he concluded, at loss for theright word."Picturesque," suggested his brother."That's it!  They aren't at all the kind of Indians you'd like to readabout.""Rex Beach doesn't think much of 'em," commented Bud.  "I read in oneof his books where he says the Yaquis are a playful people, and theydearly love to hold up Southern Pacific trains.  It's one of theirfavorite sports and pastimes.""Do you really think they do?" asked Dick.  "If they're train robbersthey have more gumption than I thought.""Well, I don't know," admitted Bud.  "Rex Beach writes good stuff, andhas some corking movies out, but maybe he was joking when he spoke ofthe Yaquis.  Anyhow we know what they've done to our friends, and it'sup to us to pay 'em back!""You said a hollow-toothful that time, kid!" declared Rolling Stone, ashe cantered up ahead to take part in a consultation, caused when a new"sign" was discovered.The discovery of new marks in the soil—marks left by the passing alongof some Indians—was deemed of enough importance to call a halt, whilethose most familiar in the interpretation of such mystic evidences,made certain what they indicated.In this discussion the boy ranchers could have no part for they werenot at all versed in the meaning of what was quite plain to RollingStone, some of the trooper scouts and a few of the cowboys."We'll eat as long as we had to stop," decided Captain Marshall, whenit was made known to him that some of the scouts wanted to scurry aboutin a circle, and ascertain if there were any more evidences that wouldhelp solve many vital questions.The troopers had come out well rationed—much better so, in fact thanhad our friends, and the soldiers extended an invitation to theircomrade in arms to partake of "grub," an invitation that was quicklyaccepted.  For the American soldier is the best fed of any in the world.In the midst of the meal word was sent back to have Buck Tooth, the oldIndian in the service of Bud, to come out to where the trooper scoutsand cowboys were having a consultation."Buck Tooth can tell 'em what's what," declared Bud.  "He claims to bea Yaqui, though since these imps have pulled off this stunt I thinkI'll get Buck Tooth to change his tribe.  But he can read Indian signall right."This was evidently so for, a little later, exultant shouts on the partof the trooper scouts and the cowboys announced that something new hadbeen found.  And it was Buck Tooth's discovery as the boy rancherslearned soon.The old Indian had carefully studied the trail, and then, going off toone side, had hunted about until he found what he was in evident searchof—another trail, leading in the opposite direction from that ourfriends had been following."Yaquis come 'long here—go up to mountain, then come back 'gin, sameway like, then go like so," and Buck Tooth held out his arm stiffly,extending two fingers of his hand wide apart like a fork."I see what he means!" exclaimed Snake Purdee.  "They doubled on theirtrack for part of the way back, and then branched off from the trail,thinking to fool us.  But they didn't.""It looks that way," agreed Lieutenant Snow.  "This trail Buck Toothdiscovered is much the fresher.  We ought to follow that."And this they did, after a hasty meal.Once more they were after the Yaquis, and late that night one of thescouts in the lead car riding back at full speed with the news:"They're right ahead of us!""Wow!" yelled Bud."Hurray!" shouted Dick."Get ready for the fight!" cried Nort."Wait a minute now, boys!" advised Snake.  "You may have a proper partin the fracas, but remember we're with the United States troops, andunder the leadership of Captain Marshall.  We must do as he says.""Oh, I guess the Captain will give the boys a chance," said LieutenantSnow with a smile, as he gave an order to the buglar.The stragglers rode in, the troops were quickly formed for immediateaction, and other scouts were sent out to report on the location anddisposition of the Yaquis, which were about three miles in advance, thefirst scout said."Did you see anything of Rosemary or Floyd?" asked Bud anxiously."No.  I wasn't close enough for that.  But the beggars are legging itfor all they're worth!""Then let's get after them!" cried the Captain.  "We don't want them toget away!"The pace had not been fast, so the horses were comparatively fresh, andthey were now urged into a trot, while skirmishers were sent on aheadto receive the first reports of the advanced scouts.Suddenly, as the sun was beginning to dip below the horizon, some ofthe scouts came riding back, pointing down into a small, rocky valley,while the foremost yelled:"They're making a stand down there!""Come on!" cried Captain Marshall, and, a few minutes later the fightagainst the Yaquis began.CHAPTER XXTHE WHITE FLAGThe boy ranchers—at least two of them,—were much disappointed at themanner in which this fight against the Yaquis started.  And I think Ineed not say that the two I mean were Dick and Nort.  Bud, while he hadnever before taken part in a fight against Indians, did not expect somuch of the romantically picturesque and so was not so disappointed.But like most healthy lads Nort and Dick, in their early days, had readmany books about the west, stories of adventures among the cowboys,miners and Indians—especially the latter.  And all the stories had todo with the dashing manner in which the redmen fought, when they foughtin the open.  Of course, when they had the chance, the Indianspreferred to sneak up on their victims and take them unawares.  It waseasier than standing up against gunfire.But when the Indians had fought there was a dash and spirit about theirattack that made the blood run faster in the veins.  The redmen wouldbegin circling about the band they were to attack, riding their poniesfaster and faster as they approached, leaning over on the far side, tobring the animal's body between themselves and the hail of bullets.Then the doughty Indian, hanging to his saddle blanket by onemoccasined foot would fire from under his pony's neck, dashing away intime to escape the white man's bullet.That was warfare to make any real lad wish to toss aside his schoolbooks and hike for the great WEST!And it was by anticipating such scenes as this that Nort and Dick weredisappointed.  But, in a way they had been prepared for it by seeingwhat manner of Indians the Yaquis were.  No warpaint, no featheredheaddresses, no necklaces of bears' claws, and of course no bows andarrows.It must be admitted that the stories on which Nort and Dick had fedtheir imaginations were true enough about the time they were written.But the romantic Indians died off, or were confined on reservations,and those who occasionally sneaked over the border from Mexico, to makeraids by which they gathered in cattle, ponies and weapons, were not ofthis class."It's like making an attack on a bunch of Greasers!" declared Nort, insome disgust, as the fight opened.But just then a bullet sang uncomfortably close to his head, and as heducked down—too late of course had the shot been true—Bud laughed andsaid:"Don't lose sight of the fact that they can shoot!"Indeed the Yaquis, thus forced to make a stand and fight, were notgoing to give up easily.  The soldiers, the outfit from Diamond X andthe boy ranchers were to have no easy time of it.It was inspiring to witness the manner in which the troopers went aboutthe business of rounding up the renegade Yaquis.  At the firstintimation that there was to be serious fighting, when the band hadgotten close enough for effective work, the horses were sent back to beout of danger from the bullets.  The animals belonging to Bud, Nort,Dick and their friends were taken in charge by some of the troopers.For it was vitally necessary that means of retreat or of advance bepreserved.  And of course there was no thought of retreat on the partof our friends.Buck Tooth, the old Indian, slid from his pony with a sigh of relief.He did not care for riding.  He liked an automobile, but he was too fatto sit in comfort on a rangy cow pony."Keep head down!" he advised Nort, as he saw the lad apparently duck abullet."Guess that's good advice," admitted the lad with a sharp intaking ofhis breath."Do same like soldiers," went on Buck Tooth.And, as I have said, the example of the troopers was one to befollowed.  This was not the first time they had been in Indian fights,and against more worthy foes of the redman type.  Each trooper pickedout such natural shelter as was available, and then began looking overor around it for a sight of some human target at which to aim.This sort of warfare would be carried on until there was a chance torush the Yaquis, when the horses could be brought up for this purpose,or the charge made on foot.  The Indians, exercising as great care fortheir steeds as had the white men, had also sent the ponies to the rear.The place of the fight was about the middle of a small valley, closedin at either end by broken hills of rock, while rocks and greatboulders were scattered over the floor of the vale, thus affordingnatural shelter for both sides.  The rising ground at the rear of eachparty prevented the chance of a rapid retreat, and it was evident thatthe fight would go to a "finish."Just how large the party of Yaquis was could not be told, but CaptainMarshall believed he had more men than were rallied to the support ofPaz, the notorious leader of the Mexicans."But I haven't seen Rosemary or Floyd," remarked Nort, as he wormedhimself into a hollow place behind a rock, not far from Dick and Bud."Well, they are probably back in the rear.  That's where they generallykeep their captives," explained Dick.  "If they see the fight goingagainst them they'll send word back and some party will scoot out withour friends.""Then we'll have the chasing to do all over again," ruefully observedNort."Oh, I guess Captain Marshall knows a trick or two," commented Bud."Look, he's sending some of his men out now to try and get in the rearof the Yaquis."Dick and Nort turned to see a detachment of the troopers making theirway on hands and knees out among the rocks.  Their object was what Budhad stated—to get in the rear of the Indians and not only attack themfrom that vantage point but also to prevent a retreat with thecaptives, in case Rosemary and Floyd were at that point.And now the fight began in earnest.With each party in a position advantageous to it the first few minutesof attack and defense were marked only by firing that accomplishednothing.That is to say there was an exchange of bullets, most of whichspattered against the rooks, sending up sprays of vicious lead orshowers of pulverized stone, but inflicting no dangerous wounds.  Oneof the troopers was temporarily blinded by some of this stone dustgetting into his eyes when a bullet struck the rock just over his head,and several others, including Lieutenant Snow, were "creased" bybullets when they exposed an arm or leg.  But these were only triflesin the day's adventure.If the Yaquis were not as romantic, tricky and brave as the old Apachesor Sioux, they were no quitters, and they seemed to be well directed.For after the first scattered firing on their part, they began afusillade which increased in intensity."They aren't saving ammunition," commented Snake, as he drew a quicksight on an exposed head, and had the satisfaction of seeing it dropback out of sight in a manner that told of a hit."I guess they know it's a case of shoot or be shot," remarked Yellin'Kid, his tones low, for a wonder.It must be stated that the troopers and those with them fought under abetter system, and were better trained, to say nothing of being betterindividual marksmen.  For this reason the casualties on the side of theYaquis soon began to mount up.  Occasional yells, and the spasmodicleaping up of some "warrior" as he was hit after a careless exposure oflimb or body, told that the renegades were paying toll.On the other hand more than one trooper was hit, two being killed notfar from Bud and his cousins.Nor did our heroes escape.  For Nort received a nasty, but notdangerous wound in the left leg, while Dick, incautiously looking frombehind his rock, to see the effect of one of his shots, felt a bulletclip the lobe of his right ear, bringing pain and plenty of blood.At first Bud and Nort thought Dick had been killed, for he fell backwith a groan and his neck was stained a bright red, his ear bleedingfreely.  But after the momentary shock the lad raised himself—stillkeeping back of his rock, and cried:"I'm all right.  That ear always was too long!""Good stuff, kid!" cried one of the troopers.  "Here, wind some of thison," and he tossed over a roll of antiseptic bandage.Minor hurts were thus quickly bound up, and Bud, having received apainful wound in the right hand, had to retire from the fight.  He didnot actually go to the rear, however, but remained with Nort and Dick,handing them cartridges to reload their weapons."Gosh!  This is rotten!" bewailed Bud, looking at his bandaged hand.It was dismay not at the nature of the wound, but because he could nolonger "pepper" the Yaquis.And the Indians were being attacked with a vengeance and were being"peppered" to such good advantage that some of them rose up and startedto run to the rear.  This was the last running they did, however, forthe unerring rifles of the troopers picked them off.And then the strategy of Captain Marshall had its effect.  For suddenlythe troopers he had sent to attack the rear of the Yaquis opened up afire and this, being augmented by shots from the main body, soon threwthe Indians into such confusion that the end was only a question ofminutes.And it came suddenly.  For just as Captain Marshall was preparing toorder a charge, Snake gave a yell and shouted:"The white flag!  They're quitting!"CHAPTER XXITHE TRICK DISCOVEREDTruly enough, this had happened.  On top of one of the jagged rocks,behind which they had conducted the defense that had failed, stood aragged Yaqui Indian.  To and fro, on the end of his gun, he waved notexactly a white flag, but a dirty rag that once might have been white.Objects of this hue did not long remain like the driven snow among theYaquis."Cease firing!" blared the bugle, and the spiteful rattle of thesoldiers' guns stopped abruptly."Cover the beggar, some of you," ordered Captain Marshall, "and a fewof you get ready in case this is a trick and they try a rush.  I'lllook into this.""Let me go!" pleaded Lieutenant Snow eagerly.  "I can sling their lingoa bit, Captain.""Very well," assented the commander.  "But watch yourself, Mart.  Idon't trust the devils, though if they try any of their tricks we'llwipe out the whole band.  I wish I had a rapid fire gun.  We made amistake coming off without it.  But we had to leave in a hurry."During this brief talk, during which none of the soldiers or cowboysexposed themselves, the figure of the Indian continued to stand in fullview and easy shot, waving the flag that told of a desire to surrender.Or did it?  Was it but a trick?  That remained to be seen.Seeing that his men were in readiness for quick work, Captain Marshall,himself holding his carbine where he could easily get at it, signalledto Lieutenant Stone to advance, under the flag of truce, to listen tothe capitulation of the Yaquis.  A trooper went with the lieutenant,carrying one of the company guidons, which, while not exactly a flag oftruce served the purpose well enough.  Besides the outfit from the fortand Diamond X were not surrendering."Had enough, Yaqui?" asked the lieutenant, as the Indian came down fromhis perch, and advanced to a point midway between the hidden Mexicansand the equally concealed troopers.  In the rear was another band ofsoldiers, so, if it had been necessary, the Indians could have beenwithered by a cross fire."We stop," grunted the Yaqui.It was the giving up.Then followed a talk between the officer and the representative of theIndians.  This was not Paz, who probably was too cowardly to trusthimself in the open under the guns of his rightful enemies."Unconditional surrender, lay down every gun you have, march out and bemade prisoners!" was the ultimatum of Lieutenant Snow.It was the only terms that could be offered the treacherous band thathad broken over the border from Mexico."And tell 'em," shouted Snake, who, with his friends had understood theimport of what was said, "tell the beggar if any harm has come toRosemary or Floyd, we'll kill every one of the Greasers!"Lieutenant Snow waved his hand for silence.  He listened to somethingthe bearer of the flag of truce had to say, and then the officerannounced:"The captives aren't here!""Aren't here!" cried Bud, Nort and Dick together."Don't let nim fool you!" shouted Yellin' Kid."Order them to march out, unarmed and then we'll search their camp,"called Captain Marshall.Seeing that it would be useless to prolong matters, and knowing hisentire band would be wiped out if he continued the fight, now that hisrear was attacked, Paz growled out the necessary orders to hisfollowers, and they came out from amid the rocks—that is those whocould walk.They were a sorry-looking lot.  Always of a nondescript type, dirty,ragged and greasy, the Yaquis were even worse now, for they had been onthe trail for some time, and had taken part in at least two fights.They had had no time to recuperate since making the raid in LaNogalique.As they filed out, miserably enough, they were passed into a sort ofhollow square, formed by the troopers, and there each Indian wassearched for a hidden knife or revolver.  One or two were found andconfiscated amid the snarls of rage on the part of the owners, who,doubtless, meditated treachery.Paz and his followers having been secured, a guard placed over them,and the wounded of the troopers being cared for as well as possible,search was made of the place where the Yaquis had made their stand.Several dead Indians were found, and some so badly wounded that deathwas only a question of a short time.  These were made as comfortable aspossible, for though they were entitled to little consideration whilethe fight was on, matters were different after the surrender."But where can Rosemary and Floyd be?" was the question asked over andover again by the boy ranchers and their friends, when it was seen thatthe captives were not in the Yaquis camp.  At first it was supposedthey had been sent to the rear with the Indians who were guarding theponies.  But there was no trace of the youth and his sister who hadbeen carried away.Then the more sinister thought came."Could they have been made away with?"No one asked this in so many words, but it was in the minds of all, anda careful search was made to disclose if the ground had been recentlydug up.  Nothing of the sort was found, however, and then the boyranchers and their friends breathed more easily.But though the main body of Yaquis had been captured the prisoners werenot found.  And one of the objects of the rescue party—the main objectin fact—was to locate Rosemary and Floyd."We've got to get it out of Paz what has happened to them, if we—if wehave to torture him!" declared Snake.  "Can't you make him talk,Captain?""Well, of course we dare not, for the sake of the good name of UncleSam's men, resort to torture.  But we can try some modern policemethods—putting him through the third degree, so to speak.""That's it!" cried Bud.  "Give Paz the third degree!"Once the prisoners were secured, the wounded attended to and the deadburied, the whole attention of the rescue party was given to locatingRosemary and Floyd.  That Paz knew the secret of their disappearancecould not be doubted—at least our friends did not doubt."Though of course," said Captain Marshall, when preparations were goingon for putting Paz through the third degree series of questions, "ofcourse there may have been several bands involved in this raid, andsome other body of Yaquis may have taken away the young man and hissister.""It was Paz, I'm sure of it!" declared Bud."He looks guilty!"Certainly the Yaquis leader looked ugly and mean enough to haveperpetrated this deed.  But he maintained a scowling silence as he saton the ground before his captors."Now, Paz," began Lieutenant Snow, who acted as interpreter, "you mayas well tell the truth first as last, for we're going to get it out ofyou, if we have to resort to—well, you know what I mean.  Sabe?""No sabe!" grunted the Indian.Then the work began.  It was not a pleasant task, and it was onlyexcusable on the plea of dire necessity.  The Yaquis were entitled tono mercy.But through ft all Paz maintained a grim silence.  When he did speak itwas to deny that he or his followers had even seen Rosemary and Floyd,much less had they kidnapped them for a ransom.It remained for Buck Tooth to expose the trick.  The wily Indian,perhaps knowing the habits of the race he had forsaken, had beenprowling about among the sullen prisoners.  He openly laughed at themfor the plight in which he found them, taunting them as cowards of thefirst water.Then, having wrought them up to the desired pitch of anger, Buck Toothlaughed and played a trump card, so to speak.  In his own way he told agroup of the captives that not only had they been caught, to be sentback to Mexico there to suffer long imprisonment, but the object forwhich they had risked so much had been snatched from them."We have the boy and girl!" boasted Buck Tooth.This was vehemently denied and then, in a burst of anger, as Buck Toothinsisted this was so, the Yaqui blurted out the truth that Paz wasendeavoring to conceal.  Rosemary and Floyd had been taken away fromthe main body by a squad under the leadership of the Indian whomRosemary had dubbed "Mike.""Ugh!" grunted Buck Tooth.  He had found out what he wanted to know.The trick was discovered.CHAPTER XXIIANXIOUS HOURSPaz grunted, with characteristic Indian indifference when the work ofthe third degree ceased, as Buck Tooth, accompanied by the boyranchers, waddled up and made known what he had found out."So that's what the beggar did!" exclaimed Captain Marshall, when heunderstood.  "He split his forces, and sent the young man and girlfarther on up into the mountains.  Well, it means another chase!""And one not so easy to make," added Snake."Why?" asked Bud."Well, the trail will be worse, for one thing, and we won't have asmany men to help.  Got to send a guard back with these," and he wavedhis hand to indicate the Yaquis who had been made prisoners."I'll spare as many of my men as possible," said the captain, "and assoon as I get these imps where they'll be safe for the next few years,I'll have the escort return.  They'll want to see this thing through.I'm coming with you.""Oh, that's good!" exclaimed Nort.  It was not that he did not dependon the cowboys from Diamond X, but there was something about thetroopers that inspired confidence.  The cowboys, too, were glad thatthey would have some regulars with them."And now let's get this story in proper shape," suggested the captain."Lieutenant Snow, you'll get ready to take as many men as you'll needand herd the rascals back over the border, or at least to La Nogalique.It may be that the United States Marshal there will want to deal withthem himself.  In case he does that relieves you all the sooner.  Getin touch with the fort when you have delivered your prisoners, andthere may be orders for you.""Yes, sir," answered the wounded lieutenant, saluting.  He had nothought of quitting though he was painfully hurt.Then Buck Tooth told what his taunts had forced from the captiveYaquis, and the whole trick was plain to the experienced cowboys andthe troopers.  Paz, fearing the result of keeping the captives withhim, had sent them away when he learned that his pursuers were near.How he learned that fact was one of the mysteries.  How the newstraveled, in that wild country, where civilized folk were often atpains to get into communication with each other, will probably never beknown.  But in some manner Paz had become aware of the closing in onhim of the soldiers and the cowboys and he had tried to forestall theirvengeance.  But he did not reckon on the wiliness of Buck Tooth, whosetaunts had caused the truth to be blurted out.So, while Paz and his renegades were being sent back to pay thepenalties for their uprising, Captain Marshall, with some of his pickedmen, and the band from Diamond X got ready to move forward again.  Oneor two of the cowboys, who had been rather badly hit by bullets, wereinduced to go back for treatment.  An effort made to have Bud do thesame was met by a flat refusal."I've got one good hand!" the lad declared, holding up his left, "and Ican shoot an automatic with that after somebody loads it for me.""We'll load!" offered Nort and Dick.So the boy ranchers, like the Three Guardsmen "all for one and one forall," stuck together."There's going to be hard work—and danger ahead of us," Snake hadsaid, and Captain Marshall bore him out in this."That's what we came for," declared Nort."Surest thing you know!" assented his brother, and Bud nodded hisassent.So they moved forward again.This time they were working toward a more certain object than when theywere out scouting around to pick up the trail of the Yaquis.Now they must make their way back to where the party, with Rosemary andFloyd as prisoners, had separated from the main body.This was comparatively simple as regards tracing the way Paz and hisfollowers had descended the mountain into the valley of the plain wherethe last fight and surrender had taken place.  But when the trail ofMike and his men was located—then would come the real test.The way grew more rough as they proceeded back along the route taken bythe fleeing main body of Yaquis.  It was an ascending trail, over apath that was possible only to the tough western ponies.Fortunately they had an ample supply of provisions and the water supplywas adequate, which was a vital necessity.  The only hardship in theway of grub was on the horses, the herbage being scanty at times, sothat as much speed as was desired could not be made, detours beingnecessary in order to come upon fodder for the steeds.This caused them to spend more time on the route than they desired andeach hour of delay made the boy ranchers more and more apprehensive forthe safety of their captured cousins.  However it could not be helped.Certain precautions must be observed if the band of rescuers was toarrive efficient enough to cope with the Yaquis.  Though not a quarterof the original body was now in charge of Rosemary and Floyd, they werepicked fighters, so Buck Tooth had learned.  And they probably wouldmake a stand in some natural fastness which vantage point would be hardto attack and turn.Through two long, hot weary days the march of the rescuers was kept up,and they were all glad when night came that they might camp and be atrest."But we've struck the branching trail," Bud said to his cousins.  "Allwe have to do now is to keep on until we corner the beggars, and getRosemary and Floyd away from them."Bud had sized up the situation correctly, though it remains to bestated that it was easier said than done.  By carefully noting the"sign" along the way, the cowboys and soldiers had reached the placewhere the selected band had ridden away with their captives.  And thiswas the trail now being followed.There was more than hard work—hard work followed hard work—and therewas danger.  It had been hard from the very start—from the time theboy ranchers had left after the first wild alarm over the kidnapping ofRosemary and Floyd.  They had been keyed up to high tension all thewhile, and this, in itself, if you have ever experienced it, iswearing.  There had been absolutely no time for light enjoyment—noneof the humor of the cowboys had a chance to manifest itself.Aside from an occasional burst into song the way had been grim andweary.  There was nothing to lighten it, for over all hung theapprehension that something dreadful would befall Rosemary and herbrother.And that dread was still present.Even at the very end of the trail it might be found that all theirefforts had been in vain, and that the Yaquis, driven into a panic offear, had ended the lives of their captives.So there was this nerve-racking pall of gloom hanging over all, and tothis was added the hard physical work of keeping to a difficult trail,with danger besetting on every hand.That there was danger, not the most optimistic of them would havedenied.  There was danger in urging one's horse up a narrow pathoverhanging some gorge.There was danger that some lurking Yaqui, unable to keep up with themain body of Mike's men, might send a bullet into the back of one ofthe rescuers.  Or Mike could have posted a party in ambush at any oneof a dozen places along the trail, there to surprise and kill off anumber of the vengeful whites following him.All this made it exceedingly hard for the boy ranchers and theirfriends, but they were never daunted.  On they urged their wearyponies, and the trail was as hard on horseflesh as it was on man andyouth.Still no one complained.  Even Bud bore without remark the pain of hiswounded hand, and it was a most painful injury.  However CaptainMarshall had no small skill with what primitive remedies they had withthem, and he saved Bud from the necessity of a surgical operationlater, as the wound was kept clean, so that it healed from within.Though once, when it had grown shut, with the possible danger of pusforming within, and had to be opened, poor Bud saw everything gettingblack before his eyes.  And it was only by gritting his teeth, andremembering how, it was said, Indians bit bullets in twain in theexcess of their agony before uttering a groan, that the lad preventedhimself from fainting under the captain's ministrations.So night settled down on the second day of their rush forward on thetrail of Mike and those he held captive."You get to bed and take it easy," Nort said to Bud, when the lattertalked of standing guard, after camp had been made."That's right," agreed Dick.  "There's enough of us without you.""But I don't want to be a quitter!" Bud said.  "And we're so close toMike and his gang now—or we ought to be—that there may be an attackany hour.""The Yaquis won't attack at night," declared Rolling Stone.  "They'retoo lazy!"This, indeed, is characteristic of many Indian tribes, though perhapsthe real reason may be based on superstition instead of objection toexertion.However, Bud allowed himself to be pursuaded to take his ease rolled upin his blankets.  There were no tents, and, in fact, none were reallyneeded, for though the nights were cooler than the days, a blanket anda fire made every man comfortable.So night settled down, the stars came out, the cooling wind blew thesmoke of the camp fire here and there and the posted sentries walkedtheir beats, waiting for what might happen.That they were near to the hiding place of Mike, and, it was hoped, ofthe captives too, could not be doubted.  The trail had become morefresh with every mile traversed."He's gone into some cave to hold off as long as possible," was theopinion of Captain Marshall.Nort and Dick had adjoining posts.  They had been selected for thefirst four hours of duty, from 8 to 12 o'clock, and it was near thatlast hour when Nort, coming back from having reached the end of hisbeat, called softly to his brother."Did you hear anything?" asked Nort."What do you mean?" asked Dick in turn."Well, like some one walking.  Listen!"CHAPTER XXIIITHE LAST STANDThe boy ranchers—only two of them now, for Bud was taking amuch-needed rest, stood silent in the darkness, on one edge of thecamp.  They listened "with all their ears," for they were, if notexactly in the enemy's territory, at least within striking distance ofthe Yaquis, and every precaution must be taken.So when Nort whispered to Dick that a suspicious noise had been heard,Dick was only too ready to believe it."Where did you hear it?" Dick asked in a cautious voice when, afterseveral seconds of intent listening, neither had caught a sound."Off there," replied Nort rather vaguely, pointing to the darknessahead of them—a darkness where the rays of several camp fires did notpenetrate, and which the starlight did not seem to pierce."I don't hear anything," went on Dick.  "Maybe it was only the wind.We don't want to give an alarm and—""Hark!" interrupted his brother in a low but tense voice.Clearly then, to the ears of both, came the unmistakable sound ofsomeone or something approaching.  There was the crunching of gravel,and the noise of some hard substance moving on a rock."It's the Yaquis!" whispered Nort, as he brought his rifle to bear onthe blackness in front of him.  "They're creeping up to make an attack!"Dick also got his gun in readiness for instant action, and the boyswere just about to fire when a noise, best described as "unearthly,"smote their ears.  It was a long drawn out cry, weird andblood-curdling.  That it was the warwhoop of the Yaquis both boys werebeginning to believe, in spite of knowing that these Mexicans seldom ifever used such romantic if terrible means of terrifying their enemies.I say the boys were on the verge of accepting the noise as that, whenits character suddenly changed, and the stillness of the night wasfairly shattered by a loud:"Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!"The reaction was so great that Nort and Dick nearly dropped their guns,and they turned to look one at the other with sheepish grins that wouldhave been visible had the light been stronger.  And then, with onevoice the brothers exclaimed:"Maud!"It was one of the army transport mules, an animal that helped carry thecamp baggage!  She had strayed.Again rose the cry, not so weird now that its nature was known."Hee-haw!  Hee-haw!"And from the camp came a disgusted complaint from some sleepy trooperas he shouted: "The chump who tied that mule so he could wander oughtto be made to go get him!"There was laughter at this, for many had been awakened by the brayingof the animal.  And then one of the men in charge of the animals cameout and managed to corral the wanderer."Gosh!  I'm glad we didn't shoot!" exclaimed Nort, as their tour ofduty ended and their relief came."Same here!" added his brother.  "How they would have laughed at us ifwe had plugged old Maud!"This was the only disturbing incident of the night, the remainder ofwhich passed quietly.With the first streak of dawn the troopers were up, as were thecowboys, for Rolling Stone had said, and Buck Tooth agreed with him,that if the Yaquis did attack it would be at dawn, since they seldomfought after nightfall.But no attack came, and breakfast was served, with sentries on thewatch to guard against surprise.  Some steaming hot coffee, crisp baconthe odor of which was an aroma in the morning air, flapjacks and sourdough bread for those who wanted it, made the meal, which wellfortified those who partook of it for the day's events, which weredestined to be strenuous.Once again the order was:"Forward—march!"Again they were on the trail of the Yaquis.As they advanced the "sign" became more pronounced that the band hadpassed that way.  Whether they had the captives with them could, ofcourse, only be guessed at.But the trail had been carefully scanned, and there was no evidencethat Rosemary and Floyd had been put out of the way.  As far as couldbe told the captives were still the prisoners of the Indians.  Andthere were no marks to show that any smaller body had branched off fromthis band of Yaquis that had the unfortunate youth and maiden in charge.So it was with the hope of finding their cousins safe, though perhapsin dire distress, that the boy ranchers pressed on with their friendsthe troopers and the cowboys.As the trail became more pronounced, greater precautions were takenagainst a surprise.  And a surprise in the rocky defiles through whichthey were passing would have been well nigh fatal.  So scouts wereconstantly in the lead, ready at the first suspicious sign to send backword to the main body to be on the alert.The morning passed without incident, save for one or two false alarms,and there was a sigh of relief when the midday meal was served withoutinterruption in the shape of hostile bullets.  Then, after a brief restfor the horses, the march was again taken up."I wonder when we'll find them?" asked Nort."It's been quite a while now," added Dick."Poor Rosemary," sighed Bud, trying to find an easy position for hiswounded hand.  "She must have had a tough time.""Yet she had a lot of grit to send that message the way she did,"commented Nort."Yes, only for that we wouldn't have known about it for a longtime—maybe too late," agreed Bud.It was but a few minutes after this talk that, suddenly, a shot rangout well up ahead.  Instantly every nerve tingled for it might mean thebeginning of the last fight.  The shot was almost at once followed byothers, and then a scout came clattering back."We've found 'em!" he cried.  "And it's going to be a dickens of afight!  They're in a regular fort!"The firing in front became more brisk.  Clearly all the van guard wasnow engaged, and quick orders were issued to send up a squad or two ofthe troopers, while the main body prepared for what they hoped would bethe last battle.Captain Marshall rapidly questioned the messenger who had come back.The man told how he and his companions had been riding along when theywere suddenly fired upon.  The shot came from a ledge at one side ofthe defile through which the trail ran, and they had a glimpse of aYaqui warrior shaking his fist at them in defiance as he disappearedamid the rocks after delivering his warning shot.Then the shooting between the outposts of the Indians and the advanceguard of the rescue party became general as the scout rode back toreport.Captain Marshall hurried to the front with his first band of fighters,the cowboys and our youthful heroes being bidden to remain where theywere until the officer had made an observation.  In a little whileCaptain Marshall came back."It will be their last stand!" he exclaimed."How so?" asked Snake."Well, they're there with their backs to the wall.  They can't get outat the rear and we're here in front to stop them if they come this way.It will be a fight to a finish!"And as the boy ranchers wondered at the fate of Rosemary and Floydthere came from the front a burst of firing.CHAPTER XXIVTHE RUSE OF ROSEMARYWell it was that a body of fighters with the experience of the UnitedStates troopers and the cowboys from Diamond X ranch went up againstthe Yaquis, and not some brave but rash band of rescuers.  The latterwould have been defeated almost at once for the Indians had picked outan admirable place in which to make their last stand.They had retreated into the mountains, along a trail that only the mosthardy could follow.  Then, finding, as they doubtless did, that theirpursuers were ever at their heels, they hastened to what was,virtually, a natural fortress—a nook among the rocky walls of thedefile.  From there they shot at the approaching troopers and cowboys."No useless risks!" ordered Captain Marshall, as he and his men came upto the attack.The Yaquis had several distinct advantages in their favor.  They wereup above the rescuers and could fire down on them, while the boyranchers and their friends had not only to fight but to climb up, andthe latter was a handicap.Then the Indians had what was almost like a rocky fort to protect them,while those making the attack had to approach pretty much in the open.Of course there were rocks that could be used as cover, but these wereso scattered that it prevented the approach of the men in a body.Individuals could creep from rock to rock, and so advance, but therecould be no concerted rush against the Yaquis, and that was what wasneeded to overcome them.However the fight was only in its early stages yet, and, like afootball game, one could not tell what would happen until the finalwhistle was blown.  Captain Marshall was a veteran fighter and could bedepended on.  His men realized this, and so did the outfit from DiamondX.There was nothing very spectacular about this fight.  Little of itcould have been seen by an observer, if you except the spurts of smokefrom unseen guns and the echoes caused by the shots.  For each man, onboth sides, was firing from cover.  The Yaquis had the advantage thattheir cover—a big wall of rock—sheltered many of them in an almoststraight line, and they could fire in volleys on signal, while thesoldiers and cowboys had to fire individually and at odd times, as theymade their way from one sheltering stone to another.Thus the Yaquis could concentrate their fire on one man if they had aglimpse of some incautiously exposed arm or leg, while no one soldiercould hope to inflict much damage on a crowd of Indians behind a thickstone wall.But the fight was not so unequal as seemed at first sight.  For whilethe Yaquis were strongly entrenched, they were outnumbered—of thatthere was little doubt.  And they were fighting picked men, who hadbeen in many dangerous skirmishes and fights, whereas the Indians wereat best but a sort of brigand bushwhackers.Each side was desperate, perhaps the Indians more so, for they musthave realized that they would be given short shrift if any harm nowcame to Rosemary and Floyd.  The soldiers and cowboys would nothesitate to take swift and sure vengeance.  So the Indians must fightto the bitter end, selling their lives as dearly as possible."I just wonder if Rosemary and Floyd are up in that nest of beggars?"mused Bud, as he and his cousins were at last allowed to proceed up thedefile, toward where the Yaquis were making their last stand.  Bud hadbegged so hard to be allowed to go to the front, to at least help hiscousins load their weapons if nothing else, that permission had beengranted.The boy ranchers were close together now, each sheltered behind a rock,and almost in line with the foremost of the attackers who were underthe shadow of the natural fort, behind the wall of which the Yaquiswere making their last stand."I hope they are up there," said Nort, answering Bud's question.  "Ifthey brought them this far they probably wouldn't do away with themnow.  They must be up there!""I wish we had them down here," said Dick.  "It's going to be hard workto get the imps out of their den!""You supplied two good earfuls that time, kid!" said Rolling Stone."Ah, you will, will you!" he added quickly, and he fired at an exposedhead over the top of the wall that hid the Indians.There was a howl of pain mingled with rage, that could be heard abovethe din of the fighting."You nipped him!" cried Yellin' Kid."I tried to," grimly said Rolling Stone.And so the fighting went on, in pot-shot fashion, with occasionalvolleys from the Yaquis."They're only wasting their lead," spoke Captain Marshall.  "But Iwonder where they got so many cartridges?""Likely they made another raid," suggested Snake.This, later, was found to be the case.  A store keeper had been killedand his stock looted, provisions and arms being taken.If the boy ranchers and their friends could have looked behind thenatural wall of rock, which constituted the fort that proved to be thelast stand of the Yaquis, and if they could have looked farther, into abig cave, the mouth of which was concealed from a view below by thissame wall, their questions as to Rosemary and Floyd would have beenanswered.For the captives were there.  Weary, apprehensive, tired and fairly illfrom their hardships, Rosemary and her brother had been thrust into thecavern when the Yaquis reached this vantage place, knowing theirpursuers were close behind them."Something's up!" Floyd had said as they were rudely hustled into thehiding place."I hope it's the end," said Rosemary dismally.  Poor girl!  She wasabout done up, and she no longer had her weapon as a means of defence.By a ruse it had been taken from her, though she and Floyd foughtdesperately to retain it.  But Mike, as one of his men snatched itaway, only laughed at them."The end!  What do you mean?" asked Floyd."I mean I think this will be the last fight.  You can tell by the waythey thrust us in here, and hurried out with their guns, that somethingunusual is taking place.  I believe our rescuers are coming!""That's what we thought when they sent us off in charge of Mike and thesmaller gang," observed Floyd."Yes, but this is different!" declared Rosemary.  "They can't get outof this place in a hurry, and once our friends, whether soldiers orcowboys from Uncle Henry's ranch, get this far, they'll never give upuntil they break through the Indians.""If they only do!" murmured Floyd.  He was cut and bruised from a fighthe had with two of the Yaquis, when he endeavored to go to the aid ofhis sister, as her weapon was wrested from her.  Floyd's left arm wasbadly wrenched, so he could hardly use it.And then, after the hurried thrusting into the cave of the captives,had come the first shots of the soldier scouts in response to the fireof the Yaqui sentry."They're here!" cried Floyd, when it became very evident that an attackin force was going on."Oh!  I'm glad!" exclaimed Rosemary, and tears of relief came to soothher ragged nerves.They went as close as they dared to the mouth of the cave to look atthe backs of the Yaquis who were lined up along the wall firing down onthe soldiers and cowboys.  No guard was stationed at the entrance tothe cavern—none was needed.  The rear was a wall of solid rock, asRosemary and her brother had discovered soon after being rushed intoit.  In front of the entrance was a rocky platform, and extending alongthe outer edge of this, in the form of a semicircle, was the defendingwall of stone.This rocky wall dropped abruptly down into the defile where the cowboysand soldiers were making the attack.  It would be almost impossible todescend it.  The way up was by a narrow passage which was now choked byrocks the Indians had piled there.On either side of the cavern's entrance the rock rose in steep slopes,not altogether impossible of being scaled, but a hindrance to a quickretreat.  That is what Captain Marshall meant when he said the Yaquiswere practically backed up against a stone wall.The firing became sharper and quicker and the reports of the guns ofthe attackers sounded nearer.  They were, in fact, creeping up, takingadvantage of every bit of cover.There were casualties on both sides, Dick being put out of the game bya bullet through his right arm.  Fortunately it only entered the flesh,breaking no bones.  But he was ordered to the rear, much to hisdisgust.  Nort and Bud still stuck, Bud helping Nort in loading.Perhaps the situation was hardest on Rosemary and Floyd, for they wereobliged to remain in the cave, doing nothing, and fearing the worst.If the Indians succeeded in standing off the rescuers, or in killing somany of them that the survivors would not dare rush the place, whatwould it mean to the captives?Rosemary dared not think of it.Then, following a period of unusually heavy firing, the plucky girlmade up her mind to act."Floyd!" she exclaimed, "I'm desperate!  I'm going to do something!"Not—you're not going to—"Floyd stumbled over expressing the fear that she was going to rush outand throw herself over the rocky wall."It's just a chance," went on Rosemary, "but I'm going to take it.  Adesperate chance!""But what, Rosemary?""I'm going to play a trick on these Indians!  I think I can do it!""A trick?""Yes.  As soon as the next period of heavy firing quiets down I'm goingto rush out, yelling, and point back to the cave.  I want you to do thesame.""But what good will it do?""It will give the Indians the impression that our friends—or someone—has managed to get up the rocks, and that they are coming from therear.  There may be an entrance into that cave from the back.  I don'tknow, and I don't believe these Indians do.  Anyhow if we rush out, allexcited, yelling as hard as we can, and pointing to the cave back ofus, I think the Yaquis will take the alarm and become so confused thatour friends, whoever they are out there, will be able to rush thisposition."As yet, you must understand, Rosemary and her brother were unaware ofthe identity of the attackers.Rosemary started up from where she was sitting in their extemporizedand miserable prison cave.  It was evidently her intention to put intooperation at once her desperate plan."Wait a minute!" exclaimed her brother."What for?" she questioned."I'm not so sure that it is the best thing to do," he answered.Floyd was rather less impulsive than his sister—that is on occasions.There were times when he could be more hot headed."Well, what else is there to do?" Rosemary asked.She was going to be perfectly fair about it, and if Floyd had anythingbetter to offer as a suggestion she would listen to him."Let's think about it a bit longer," he finally said, with a longintaking of breath, which told more plainly than words, how thesituation was oppressing him.  "I'm sure it's mighty plucky of you,Rosemary, to lay out such a plan as this, but I don't believe I oughtto let you try it.  Something might happen.""Something is going to happen anyhow," she said, with ominous quiet,and a grim tightness showed in the lines of her mouth.  "I believethese Indians have just about reached the end of their rope.  They havebeen very patient with us—that is patient from their standpoint.  Nowthey have met with opposition, and they must know if they areoverpowered it will be to our advantage, and that our friends, orwhoever is out there firing, will take revenge.""That's so," agreed Floyd."Well then, we've just got to do something!" said Rosemary,desperately.  "And I'm going to do it."Again she started up."Wait a minute!" exclaimed her brother again.He seemed to be listening.  He leaned forward, and then softly arosefrom where he was sitting and went forward."What is it?" asked his sister in a low voice."I thought I heard voices—good old United States voices, and not thisjargon of Mexican and Spanish," was the reply.  "Maybe some of theattackers, whoever they are, have broken through."A look of delighted joy came over the face of Rosemary.  But a momentlater it faded away and she seemed hopeless."It can't be," she said.  "There'd be a lot of yelling and shouting ifany of those who are attacking the Yaquis had broken through theirlines," she went on.  "There's no use waiting, Floyd.  Let's try myplan!"But her brother was not yet convinced."It will be all right if it works," he agreed.  "But if it fails, andthey only have the laugh on us, we'll be treated so much the worse.  Idon't mind on my own account—but yours!" and he glanced at his sister."I hadn't thought of that," spoke Rosemary in a low voice.  "If itshould—fail—why—"She did not complete the sentence."It would only make them more angry, I'm afraid," went on Floyd.There was silence, for a time, between brother and sister.  It wasbroken only by occasional and distant shouts, punctuated, now andagain, by a shot.  But the heavy fusillade had subsided for a time."Well?" questioned Rosemary.She was eager to get some action."This is what I'll do," said Floyd, after some tense consideration,"I'll take a look around and see how matters shape up.""Then what?" asked Rosemary.She was evidently not going to let the matter go by default."Well, then if I can't see anything better to do then what youproposed, we'll go to it!" decided Floyd.  "You sit here and I'llscurry around.  I won't be long.""No, please don't," begged Rosemary.  "If we're going to do anythingwe'll have to do it very soon.  This can't last—much longer!"Floyd did not stop to ask his sister just what she meant.  In fact hedid not dare question her as to what it was that could not last "muchlonger."  He had a desperate fear that it was Rosemary's own spiritthat was on the point of breaking.Up to now she had kept up her courage remarkably well.  But there was alimit, and if the breaking point had been reached Floyd did not knowwhat would follow.He shot a quick look at the girl before he started out on what hethought might be a last desperate venture.  He felt that he mightdiscover something to do—some way of escape—that would not make itnecessary for his sister to virtually rush into danger.And he was relieved when he saw the calm and cool look that was onRosemary's face."She isn't going to give up!" decided Floyd.There was an exultant feeling in his heart.During this talk between brother and sister the dirty Indian detailedto guard the captives had sauntered within view of them every now andthen.  To quiet his suspicions, in case he should have any, Rosemaryand Floyd had spoken most casually on these occasions.The lad waited until the guard had come on one of his periodic trips ofinspection and had dropped out of sight on a ledge of rock, and thenFloyd started out."Don't be too long!" called Rosemary in a low voice."I won't!" he promised.Walking as aimlessly as he could pretend, Floyd started toward a breakin the natural wall that ran in front of the prison cavern.  He wantedto see if he could catch a glimpse of the Yaquis below him."And I'd give a whole lot of money—if I had it—to see who is fightingthem," thought Floyd.  "But I haven't much left."He glanced ruefully down at his now soiled and torn garments.  And ashe thrust his hands into his pockets he missed many a trinket andpossession.  For nearly everything had been taken away by Paz, Mike orsome of their rascally followers.Two or three Indians, some of them wounded, were coming back "from thefront," so to speak.  One of them glanced scowlingly at Floyd, as hepassed the lad, evidently associating his wounds with the presence ofthe prisoner."I'd give you a whole lot worse than that if I had a chance—UglyFace!" thought Floyd.Another member of the renegade band grinned or—Floyd took it for agrin—as he passed.  But none of them seemed to care where the lad wentor what he did, and for this Floyd was glad."I seem to be getting somewhere," he murmured.  "Whether I can hit onany scheme to beat Rosemary's is a question, but I don't want her totake the risk unless there's nothing else to do."He had now reached a low spot in the natural rocky wall.  He felt thatif he could once get a glimpse at this point he might see somethingthat would help him and Rosemary.And to his great delight, when he had sauntered, as casually as hecould make it, to an observation point, what he saw made him gasp forbreath.For, grouped closely together, below him, on a sort of big table ofrock, were a number of the Yaquis.  They appeared to be holding a sortof council or parley, and were gathered about an Indian to whom Mikeand Paz often delegated certain duties.But this was not what caused the heart of Floyd to thump so desperatelyagainst his ribs, making such a noise, he wildly feared, that thepounding would be heard by some passing Indian.What caused him fairly to gasp for breath was the sight of a greatboulder, poised on the edge of the natural wall, and hanging almostdirectly over the group of talking Indians."If I can push that rock down on them it will do the trick!" thoughtFloyd.  "It'll put some of 'em out of business, and the rest will be sofrightened that they'll retreat.  Then whoever is out there trying tobreak through to help us, will have matters their own way.  That's whatI'll do.  Ill pry that rock loose and let it dash 'em on the heads."It was a horrible thing to think of, much more horrible to do, but thesituation of Rosemary and Floyd was desperate indeed.  The end seemedto justify the means."The point is," mused Floyd, "can I shove that rock down?"Looking about him he saw that he was not observed.  He quickly made hisway nearer to the rock, and then, reaching out his hands, he pushed.Gently at first he exerted the pressure, and then putting more powerinto the shove he thrust with all his might."It's giving!  It's giving!" thought Floyd, with a desperate catch ofhis breath.  "I can shove it down on 'em and dash 'em all up!"He exerted all his strength.  The rock was moving, and even with allthe villainies the Indians had to their discredit Floyd's nerve almostfailed him as he saw the great boulder sway as if for the plunge.But to his chagrin he felt the rock move back toward him again.  Hetried to hold it away—to thrust it from him—but nature, in the guiseof the attraction of gravitation—pulled the rock back into thesocket-shaped bed where it had rested so long.It rolled back with a grinding sound, and Floyd feared, for a momentthat he had loosened it so that it would topple back and fall upon hisfeet.But this did not happen.  The great half-round stone oscillated to andfro and then came to rest.  Floyd had only caused it to sway a little."Well, I moved it!" he said with a gasp.  "I'll try again.  If I canonly get it started it will do the trick."Again he pushed, with all his might, but again the same thing happened.He managed to make the rock sway outward, a little farther over theedge of the wall, but back it came again into its hollow resting place.Then Floyd understood the nature of the matter."It's a balanced rock," he said to himself.  "She's been resting herefor ages, and you can move it just so far but no farther.  It wouldtake a team of army mules to dislodge it."He looked over the wall again.  The Indians were still in the sameplace, eagerly talking—a score or more of feet below the boy."It's too good a chance to miss!" whispered Floyd desperately.  "Iwonder if I can't find some sort of a lever and pry it loose."He looked about him.  Not far away was part of a dead tree branch,thick as his arm."Just what I need!" he exclaimed.He ran to pick up the branch and, returning with it, set one end underthe balanced rock, that was still swaying slightly from his exertions."Now for a last try!" murmured the lad.He bent his weight on the long end of the improvised lever.  The rockseemed to rise from its socket bed, and to sway outward.  There was anexultation in the boy's heart.  He thought, in another instant, that hecould send the great stone crashing down into the midst of the Yaquis.Then, suddenly there came a sharp report, and Floyd felt himselffalling.His first feeling was that he had been shot and that this was the end.But he felt no pain, save a sudden bump as he sprawled on the rocks,and then he realized what had happened.He had pressed so heavily on the old and dried piece of wood that ithad snapped and broken with a report like that of a pistol, and he haddropped."Too bad!" murmured Floyd.As he picked himself up he saw two of the Yaqui Indians running arounda rocky corner.  They had evidently been drawn to the place by thesound."No good letting them know what I tried to do," quickly decided Floyd."It would only make it worse for us."Having decided on a line of action it did not take the lad an instantto carry it out.  Quickly he picked up the broken pieces of his leverand started back with them toward the cave where he and his sister wereheld captives."Make fire!" he said to the Indians.  "Make fire—cook grub!""Ugh!" they grunted.  They evidently accepted this obvious explanation.Their suspicions lulled, they turned and went back the way they hadcome, pausing long enough, however, to watch Floyd enter the cave whereRosemary waited."Well," she questioned, as he threw the broken ends of his lever on therocky floor."No go," answered Floyd despondently.  "I had a peach of a chance toplay a trump hand on them, but luck was against me."He told what he had tried to do with the rock."Oh?  I—I'm almost glad it didn't succeed!" said Rosemary with ashudder.  "It would have been—terrible!""Nothing is too bad for these devils!" cried Floyd.  "But I give up.  Ican't think of anything more to do.""Then shall I try my way?" asked his sister."It is a desperate chance," Floyd murmured."But don't you think we ought to try it?  We may be able to reach thewall, and get over, or go down the trail we came up.  It was too steepfor the horses, but maybe we can make it."The horses had been abandoned by the Yaquis as they entrenchedthemselves for this last stand.  The animals could not make the ascent."Well?" asked Rosemary of her brother."I'm with you!" he said, with a sharp intaking of his breath.Then they got ready for the ruse Rosemary had proposed.CHAPTER XXV"ALL'S WELL!"What was taking place down below, Rosemary and Floyd could only guessat.  But that the rescuers were taking advantage of everything possiblewas evident from the occasional hits they made among the Yaquis.  Morethan one was killed and several wounded as they fired over the top ofthe wall, or through loopholes amid the rocks.Then, soon after the determination at which Rosemary had arrived, therecame a more violent fusillade than any that had preceded.  In thisseveral Indians were forced to retire because of serious wounds.  Thenthe firing died away.Though the captive lad and his sister did not know it, this suddencessation in the firing of the attackers was due to an order of thecommander of the troopers.  The captain was, also, nominally in commandof the boy ranchers and their friends."There is too much indiscriminate firing," decided Captain Marshall."We haven't an unlimited supply of ammunition.  We've got to go a bitslow.  No telling how long we may have to camp on the trail of theseimps."It was a wise determination as they all agreed, and the word went upand down the line of attackers to be sparing of powder and lead.  Thisis what caused the troopers and cowboys suddenly to cease firing,following a desperate fusillade which they hoped would turn the tide ofbattle in their favor, but it had not done so."We must size the situation up," decided the captain.  "Find out justhow many more rounds we have left—counting also the supply of ourfriends from Diamond X," he ordered an officer.And the taking stock of the situation was soon under way.  That theYaquis were as glad of the respite, as were our friends, need not bedoubted.Advantage was taken of the lull to look after the wounded, and to bringwater to the fighting men, for they were sorely in need of drinks.  Andwarm as the water was, it seemed the best that had ever trickled downtheir throats.Back in their prison, Rosemary and Floyd noted the sudden silence thatfollowed the brisk firing.  Brother and sister looked at each other,and there was fear in their faces."Do you suppose that means they have quit?" asked the girl."Who?" her brother wanted to know."The ones who are out there trying to help us—cowboys from our uncle'sranch, I hope.""I hope so, too, and I hope they haven't had to quit," spoke Floyd."But we've got to go on with what we planned now.  I'm for it as muchas you are, Rosemary.  Something has to be done!  Are you sure youwon't weaken at the last minute, and cave in?""Did you ever know me to do a thing like that?" she asked with flashingeyes."No, I never did.""Well, I'm not going to start now!  Don't worry, Floyd.  Somehow I feelsure that this will pull us through!  I thought of it in thenight—perhaps I dreamed it—and I have a feeling that it is going towork out all right.  Don't be afraid.  Let's try it with all our might!Are you ready?""As ready as I ever shall be," was the grim answer.  "But if you'replaying a 'hunch,' so to speak, that's different.  You always werelucky!"He laughed grimly, and Rosemary joined in.  It was the first time theyhad laughed since being taken captives.As her brother had said, Rosemary was "lucky."For a moment brother and sister looked about them.  They must act soon,and, after all, the consequences could not be much worse than thosewhich continually were hanging over them."Whenever you're ready—give the word!" whispered Floyd."Now!" suddenly called Rosemary to her brother."Come on!" he echoed.Together they rushed from the cave, straight toward the band of Indianslined up, with their backs toward them, along the wall of theimprovised fort.What Rosemary said she never really knew.  It was a burst of wild,hysterical yelling, such as girls and women alone are capable of.  Andas she screamed and ran she pointed back toward the cave.As for Floyd he declared that what he yelled was something like:"They're coming!  They're coming!  They're attacking in the rear!"To this he added some improvised warwhoops of his own devising, andsome football yells, for he had been a cheer leader at one time for hiscollege team.Whatever was said little mattered.  It was the character of theshouting of the desperate youth and maiden, and their actions thatcounted.  Coming as Rosemary's ruse did, after the hardest firing yeton the part of the attackers, it rather got on the nerves of the Yaquisif they had such organs, which is doubtful.To every one of them it appeared, as Rosemary and Floyd intended itshould, that an attack from the rear was about to take place.  AsRosemary had guessed, the Indians knew no more about the cave than shedid.  They had hastily examined it and decided there was no rearentrance or exit, as the case might be.  But they might have overlookedsome hidden passage, and this is what all of them evidently thought hadbeen done.At any rate, as Rosemary and Floyd rushed out, yelling almost likeIndians themselves, a panic started among the Yaquis.  They sawthemselves caught between two fires, with no retreat possible.With whoops of despair some threw themselves over the cliff.  Othersrushed into the cave, while some climbed up the rocky walls at eitherside.  A few remained, firing down at the attackers below.Rosemary's yells, and those of her brother, carried to the soldiers andcowboys.  At first they thought a sally was about to take place.But when they saw some Indians come over the wall, one luckless impslipping and falling to his death, some idea of what was taking placebecame manifest to Captain Marshall."They're in a panic!" he cried.  "Something has frightened 'em!  Comeon, men!"He led a rush forward, just as Rosemary appeared at the top of thewall, waving her neck handkerchief in a frenzied signal."There she is!  Rosemary!" cried Bud, not exactly recognizing hiscousin, but guessing the girl could be none other.The rush of the attackers, together with the panic that had run throughthe ranks of the Indians like wildfire, was all that was needed to turnthe scale.  The Yaquis, with howls of fear, not knowing what it was allabout, threw down their guns and sought for means of escape.Mike, the leader, seemed dazed at the suddenness of it all.  But hegathered his wits together and, seeing Rosemary at the wall, waving tothe soldiers and cowboys below, the desperate Yaquis sprang toward her.But Floyd was watching his sister.  The lad picked up a revolver fromwhere it had fallen as its owner retreated and fired point blank atMike.  The ruffian crumpled up and went down in a heap, as Rosemaryherself, unable to stand the strain longer, sank down half fainting.Her ruse had succeeded.  The Yaquis were on the run.A few minutes later the place was filled with soldiers and cowboys whomade prisoners of such of the renegades as were left alive—and thesewere not many, though they included Mike, who had only been wounded byFloyd."Oh, Bud!  I'm so glad!  So glad!" murmured Rosemary, as her cousin puthis arm around her—only one arm for the other was still sore."So'm I!" murmured Bud.  "This is another cousin—Nort," and he noddedtoward his boy rancher companion.  "And there's a third one downthere—Dick—but he's hurt!""Badly?""Oh, no, just a piece of lead through his arm.  He'll be all right in afew days.  But say, Rosemary, what did you and Floyd do to turn thetables so quickly?""Rosemary did it all," Floyd said with a cheerful grin.  "It was just abluff!" and he told the story."Nerviest thing I ever heard of!" complimented Captain Marshall."Heap good squaw!" was Buck Tooth's opinion, and that seemed to sum itall up.The prisoners secured, the dead on both sides buried and the story ofthe capture and rescue briefly told, arrangements were made forreturning to civilization.The raid of the Yaquis was over, and so severe was the lesson taughtthem that it was many years before another trick like that was tried.Rosemary and Floyd, though they had suffered many hardships, were notphysically harmed, except for the youth's wrenched arm, which waspainful but not dangerous."Oh, but we want some water to wash in!" Rosemary confided to Bud."They've kept us so much on the go, ever since they captured us, that Ican't bear to think of it.  I just dreamed of clean bath tubs filledwith white soap suds!""We'll soon be at the ranch," Bud said."Oh, but I can't wait until then.""Same here!" put in Floyd.  "I don't believe a Yaqui touches water fromthe time he's born until he dies."In order to give everyone a chance to rest, it was decided to camp fora few days in a favorable spot, which was found a few miles from wherethe Indians had made their last stand—a final stand for many, as morethan a dozen were killed.The others were sent back under guard as prisoners, Mike among them,scowling blackly as he was led away.  A scout was sent to the nearestplace where there was a telegraph station, to send the good news backto Diamond X."And now we can take it easy," observed Bud as he with his cowboycousins and the newly rescued captives enjoyed the first real mealwithout anticipations of a fight immediately after it."You must have had a dreadful time, Rosemary," said Dick, whose arm wasin a sling."Well, it seemed so at the time, and yet I want to laugh when I thinkhow I fooled those Indians just by screaming.""It isn't the first time you've brought help by screaming!" laughedBud.  "I remember once when I tried to kiss you—""Tut!  Tut!" laughed Rosemary.  "That's past history."And so, in time, was the raid of the Yaquis.  In due season Rosemaryand her brother, with our boy heroes reached Diamond X, parting fromthe soldier escort.  And once at the ranch, which had been theirobjective before the kidnapping, the visitors were royally entertained."Well, it was the best adventure we ever had," declared Nort, and hisbrother agreed with him.  But it was not to be the last of the excitinghappenings in which they were to be involved.For these were lads of action, ever in the van when there was a chancefor a fight.  And those who wish to follow the further adventures ofBud, Nort and Dick, may do so in the next volume of this series, whichwill be entitled "The Boy Ranchers in the Flood; or Saving the Stock atDiamond X."In that we shall see how they fared when again called on to act theirparts in the face of danger.  But, for the present we shall leave themto enjoy the company of Rosemary and Floyd at Diamond X and in HappyValley.THE END  *** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK *** Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.