START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***The Odysseyby Homerrendered into English prose for the use of those who cannot read theoriginalContents PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION THE ODYSSEY BOOK I. BOOK II. BOOK III. BOOK IV. BOOK V. BOOK VI. BOOK VII. BOOK VIII. BOOK IX. BOOK X. BOOK XI. BOOK XII. BOOK XIII. BOOK XIV. BOOK XV. BOOK XVI. BOOK XVII. BOOK XVIII. BOOK XIX. BOOK XX. BOOK XXI. BOOK XXII. BOOK XXIII. BOOK XXIV. FOOTNOTES:AL PROFESSORECAV. BIAGIO INGROIA,PREZIOSO ALLEATOL’AUTORE RICONOSCENTE.PREFACE TO FIRST EDITIONThis translation is intended to supplement a work entitled “The Authoressof the Odyssey”, which I published in 1897. I could not give the whole“Odyssey” in that book without making it unwieldy, I thereforeepitomised my translation, which was already completed and which I now publishin full.I shall not here argue the two main points dealt with in the work justmentioned; I have nothing either to add to, or to withdraw from, what I havethere written. The points in question are:(1) that the “Odyssey” was written entirely at, and drawn entirelyfrom, the place now called Trapani on the West Coast of Sicily, alike asregards the Phaeacian and the Ithaca scenes; while the voyages of Ulysses, whenonce he is within easy reach of Sicily, solve themselves into a periplus of theisland, practically from Trapani back to Trapani, via the Lipari islands, theStraits of Messina, and the island of Pantellaria.(2) That the poem was entirely written by a very young woman, who lived at theplace now called Trapani, and introduced herself into her work under the nameof Nausicaa.The main arguments on which I base the first of these somewhat startlingcontentions, have been prominently and repeatedly before the English andItalian public ever since they appeared (without rejoinder) in the“Athenaeum” for January 30 and February 20, 1892. Both contentionswere urged (also without rejoinder) in the Johnian “Eagle” for theLent and October terms of the same year. Nothing to which I should reply hasreached me from any quarter, and knowing how anxiously I have endeavoured tolearn the existence of any flaws in my argument, I begin to feel someconfidence that, did such flaws exist, I should have heard, at any rate aboutsome of them, before now. Without, therefore, for a moment pretending to thinkthat scholars generally acquiesce in my conclusions, I shall act as thinkingthem little likely so to gainsay me as that it will be incumbent upon me toreply, and shall confine myself to translating the “Odyssey” forEnglish readers, with such notes as I think will be found useful. Among these Iwould especially call attention to one on xxii. 465-473 which Lord Grimthorpehas kindly allowed me to make public.I have repeated several of the illustrations used in “The Authoress ofthe Odyssey”, and have added two which I hope may bring the outer courtof Ulysses’ house more vividly before the reader. I should like toexplain that the presence of a man and a dog in one illustration is accidental,and was not observed by me till I developed the negative. In an appendix I havealso reprinted the paragraphs explanatory of the plan of Ulysses’ house,together with the plan itself. The reader is recommended to study this planwith some attention.In the preface to my translation of the “Iliad” I have given myviews as to the main principles by which a translator should be guided, andneed not repeat them here, beyond pointing out that the initial liberty oftranslating poetry into prose involves the continual taking of more or lessliberty throughout the translation; for much that is right in poetry is wrongin prose, and the exigencies of readable prose are the first things to beconsidered in a prose translation. That the reader, however, may see how far Ihave departed from strict construe, I will print here Messrs. Butcher andLang’s translation of the sixty lines or so of the “Odyssey.”Their translation runs:Tell me, Muse, of that man, so ready at need, who wandered far and wide, afterhe had sacked the sacred citadel of Troy, and many were the men whose towns hesaw and whose mind he learnt, yea, and many the woes he suffered in his hearton the deep, striving to win his own life and the return of his company. Nay,but even so he saved not his company, though he desired it sore. For throughthe blindness of their own hearts they perished, fools, who devoured the oxenof Helios Hyperion: but the god took from them their day of returning. Of thesethings, goddess, daughter of Zeus, whencesoever thou hast heard thereof,declare thou even unto us.    Now all the rest, as many as fled from sheer destruction, were at home, andhad escaped both war and sea, but Odysseus only, craving for his wife and forhis homeward path, the lady nymph Calypso held, that fair goddess, in herhollow caves, longing to have him for her lord. But when now the year had comein the courses of the seasons, wherein the gods had ordained that he shouldreturn home to Ithaca, not even there was he quit of labours, not even amonghis own; but all the gods had pity on him save Poseidon, who raged continuallyagainst godlike Odysseus, till he came to his own country. Howbeit Poseidon hadnow departed for the distant Ethiopians, the Ethiopians that are sundered intwain, the uttermost of men, abiding some where Hyperion sinks and some wherehe rises. There he looked to receive his hecatomb of bulls and rams, there hemade merry sitting at the feast, but the other gods were gathered in the hallsof Olympian Zeus. Then among them the father of men and gods began to speak,for he bethought him in his heart of noble Aegisthus, whom the son ofAgamemnon, far-famed Orestes, slew. Thinking upon him he spake out among theImmortals:    ‘Lo you now, how vainly mortal men do blame the gods! For of us theysay comes evil, whereas they even of themselves, through the blindness of theirown hearts, have sorrows beyond that which is ordained. Even as of lateAegisthus, beyond that which was ordained, took to him the wedded wife of theson of Atreus, and killed her lord on his return, and that with sheer doombefore his eyes, since we had warned him by the embassy of Hermes thekeen-sighted, the slayer of Argos, that he should neither kill the man, nor woohis wife. For the son of Atreus shall be avenged at the hand of Orestes, sosoon as he shall come to man’s estate and long for his own country. Sospake Hermes, yet he prevailed not on the heart of Aegisthus, for all his goodwill; but now hath he paid one price for all.’    And the goddess, grey-eyed Athene, answered him, saying: ‘O father,our father Cronides, throned in the highest; that man assuredly lies in a deaththat is his due; so perish likewise all who work such deeds! But my heart isrent for wise Odysseus, the hapless one, who far from his friends this longwhile suffereth affliction in a sea-girt isle, where is the navel of the sea, awoodland isle, and therein a goddess hath her habitation, the daughter of thewizard Atlas, who knows the depths of every sea, and himself upholds the tallpillars which keep earth and sky asunder. His daughter it is that holds thehapless man in sorrow: and ever with soft and guileful tales she is wooing himto forgetfulness of Ithaca. But Odysseus yearning to see if it were but thesmoke leap upwards from his own land, hath a desire to die. As for thee, thineheart regardeth it not at all, Olympian! What! Did not Odysseus by the ships ofthe Argives make thee free offering of sacrifice in the wide Trojan land?Wherefore wast thou then so wroth with him, O Zeus?’The “Odyssey” (as every one knows) abounds in passages borrowedfrom the “Iliad”; I had wished to print these in a slightlydifferent type, with marginal references to the “Iliad,” and hadmarked them to this end in my MS. I found, however, that the translation wouldbe thus hopelessly scholasticised, and abandoned my intention. I wouldnevertheless urge on those who have the management of our University presses,that they would render a great service to students if they would publish aGreek text of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passages printed in adifferent type, and with marginal references. I have given the British Museum acopy of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic passages underlined andreferred to in MS.; I have also given an “Iliad” marked with allthe Odyssean passages, and their references; but copies of both the“Iliad” and “Odyssey” so marked ought to be within easyreach of all students.Any one who at the present day discusses the questions that have arisen roundthe “Iliad” since Wolf’s time, without keeping it well beforehis reader’s mind that the “Odyssey” was demonstrably writtenfrom one single neighbourhood, and hence (even though nothing else pointed tothis conclusion) presumably by one person only—that it was writtencertainly before 750, and in all probability before 1000 B.C.—that thewriter of this very early poem was demonstrably familiar with the“Iliad” as we now have it, borrowing as freely from those bookswhose genuineness has been most impugned, as from those which are admitted tobe by Homer—any one who fails to keep these points before his readers, ishardly dealing equitably by them. Any one on the other hand, who will mark his“Iliad” and his “Odyssey” from the copies in theBritish Museum above referred to, and who will draw the only inference thatcommon sense can draw from the presence of so many identical passages in bothpoems, will, I believe, find no difficulty in assigning their proper value to alarge number of books here and on the Continent that at present enjoyconsiderable reputations. Furthermore, and this perhaps is an advantage betterworth securing, he will find that many puzzles of the “Odyssey”cease to puzzle him on the discovery that they arise from over-saturation withthe “Iliad.”Other difficulties will also disappear as soon as the development of the poemin the writer’s mind is understood. I have dealt with this at some lengthin pp. 251-261 of “The Authoress of the Odyssey”. Briefly, the“Odyssey” consists of two distinct poems: (1) The Return ofUlysses, which alone the Muse is asked to sing in the opening lines of thepoem. This poem includes the Phaeacian episode, and the account ofUlysses’ adventures as told by himself in Books ix.-xii. It consists oflines 1-79 (roughly) of Book i., of line 28 of Book v., and thence withoutintermission to the middle of line 187 of Book xiii., at which point theoriginal scheme was abandoned.(2) The story of Penelope and the suitors, with the episode ofTelemachus’ voyage to Pylos. This poem begins with line 80 (roughly) ofBook i., is continued to the end of Book iv., and not resumed till Ulysseswakes in the middle of line 187, Book xiii., from whence it continues to theend of Book xxiv.In “The Authoress of the Odyssey”, I wrote:the introduction of lines xi., 115-137 and of line ix., 535, with the writing anew council of the gods at the beginning of Book v., to take the place of theone that was removed to Book i., 1-79, were the only things that were done togive even a semblance of unity to the old scheme and the new, and to concealthe fact that the Muse, after being asked to sing of one subject, spendtwo-thirds of her time in singing a very different one, with a climax for whichno-one has asked her. For roughly the Return occupies eight Books, and Penelopeand the Suitors sixteen.I believe this to be substantially correct.Lastly, to deal with a very unimportant point, I observe that the LeipsicTeubner edition of 894 makes Books ii. and iii. end with a comma. Stops arethings of such far more recent date than the “Odyssey,” that theredoes not seem much use in adhering to the text in so small a matter; still,from a spirit of mere conservatism, I have preferred to do so. Why [Greek] atthe beginnings of Books ii. and viii., and [Greek], at the beginning of Bookvii. should have initial capitals in an edition far too careful to admit asupposition of inadvertence, when [Greek] at the beginning of Books vi. andxiii., and [Greek] at the beginning of Book xvii. have no initial capitals, Icannot determine. No other Books of the “Odyssey” have initialcapitals except the three mentioned unless the first word of the Book is aproper name.S. BUTLER.July 25, 1900.PREFACE TO SECOND EDITIONButler’s Translation of the “Odyssey” appeared originally in1900, and The Authoress of the Odyssey in 1897. In the preface to the newedition of “The Authoress”, which is published simultaneously withthis new edition of the Translation, I have given some account of the genesisof the two books.The size of the original page has been reduced so as to make both books uniformwith Butler’s other works; and, fortunately, it has been possible, byusing a smaller type, to get the same number of words into each page, so thatthe references remain good, and, with the exception of a few minor alterationsand rearrangements now to be enumerated so far as they affect the Translation,the new editions are faithful reprints of the original editions, with misprintsand obvious errors corrected—no attempt having been made to edit them orto bring them up to date.(a) The Index has been revised.(b) Owing to the reduction in the size of the page it has been necessary toshorten some of the headlines, and here advantage has been taken of variouscorrections of and additions to the headlines and shoulder-notes made by Butlerin his own copies of the two books.(c) For the most part each of the illustrations now occupies a page, whereas inthe original editions they generally appeared two on the page. It has beennecessary to reduce the plan of the House of Ulysses.On page 153 of “The Authoress” Butler says: “No great poetwould compare his hero to a paunch full of blood and fat, cooking before thefire (xx, 24-28).” This passage is not given in the abridged Story of the“Odyssey” at the beginning of the book, but in the Translation itoccurs in these words:“Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but hetossed about as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hotfire, doing it first on one side then on the other, that he may get it cookedas soon as possible; even so did he turn himself about from side to side,thinking all the time how, single-handed as he was, he should contrive to killso large a body of men as the wicked suitors.”It looks as though in the interval between the publication of “TheAuthoress” (1897) and of the Translation (1900) Butler had changed hismind; for in the first case the comparison is between Ulysses and a paunchfull, etc., and in the second it is between Ulysses and a man who turns apaunch full, etc. The second comparison is perhaps one which a great poet mightmake.In seeing the works through the press I have had the invaluable assistance ofMr. A. T. Bartholomew of the University Library, Cambridge, and of Mr. DonaldS. Robertson, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. To both these friends Igive my most cordial thanks for the care and skill exercised by them. Mr.Robertson has found time for the labour of checking and correcting all thequotations from and references to the “Iliad” and“Odyssey,” and I believe that it could not have been betterperformed. It was, I know, a pleasure for him; and it would have been apleasure also for Butler if he could have known that his work was beingshepherded by the son of his old friend, Mr. H. R. Robertson, who more thanhalf a century ago was a fellow-student with him at Cary’s School of Artin Streatham Street, Bloomsbury.HENRY FESTING JONES.120 MAIDA VALE, W.9.4th December, 1921.THE ODYSSEYBOOK ITHE GODS IN COUNCIL—MINERVA’S VISIT TO ITHACA—THE CHALLENGEFROM TELEMACHUS TO THE SUITORS.Tell me, O Muse, of that ingenious hero who travelled far and wide after he hadsacked the famous town of Troy. Many cities did he visit, and many were thenations with whose manners and customs he was acquainted; moreover he sufferedmuch by sea while trying to save his own life and bring his men safely home;but do what he might he could not save his men, for they perished through theirown sheer folly in eating the cattle of the Sun-god Hyperion; so the godprevented them from ever reaching home. Tell me, too, about all these things,oh daughter of Jove, from whatsoever source you may know them.So now all who escaped death in battle or by shipwreck had got safely homeexcept Ulysses, and he, though he was longing to return to his wife andcountry, was detained by the goddess Calypso, who had got him into a large caveand wanted to marry him. But as years went by, there came a time when the godssettled that he should go back to Ithaca; even then, however, when he was amonghis own people, his troubles were not yet over; nevertheless all the gods hadnow begun to pity him except Neptune, who still persecuted him without ceasingand would not let him get home.Now Neptune had gone off to the Ethiopians, who are at the world’s end,and lie in two halves, the one looking West and the other East.[1] He had gone there toaccept a hecatomb of sheep and oxen, and was enjoying himself at his festival;but the other gods met in the house of Olympian Jove, and the sire of gods andmen spoke first. At that moment he was thinking of Aegisthus, who had beenkilled by Agamemnon’s son Orestes; so he said to the other gods:“See now, how men lay blame upon us gods for what is after all nothingbut their own folly. Look at Aegisthus; he must needs make love toAgamemnon’s wife unrighteously and then kill Agamemnon, though he knew itwould be the death of him; for I sent Mercury to warn him not to do either ofthese things, inasmuch as Orestes would be sure to take his revenge when hegrew up and wanted to return home. Mercury told him this in all good will buthe would not listen, and now he has paid for everything in full.”Then Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, it servedAegisthus right, and so it would any one else who does as he did; but Aegisthusis neither here nor there; it is for Ulysses that my heart bleeds, when I thinkof his sufferings in that lonely sea-girt island, far away, poor man, from allhis friends. It is an island covered with forest, in the very middle of thesea, and a goddess lives there, daughter of the magician Atlas, who looks afterthe bottom of the ocean, and carries the great columns that keep heaven andearth asunder. This daughter of Atlas has got hold of poor unhappy Ulysses, andkeeps trying by every kind of blandishment to make him forget his home, so thathe is tired of life, and thinks of nothing but how he may once more see thesmoke of his own chimneys. You, sir, take no heed of this, and yet when Ulysseswas before Troy did he not propitiate you with many a burnt sacrifice? Why thenshould you keep on being so angry with him?”And Jove said, “My child, what are you talking about? How can I forgetUlysses than whom there is no more capable man on earth, nor more liberal inhis offerings to the immortal gods that live in heaven? Bear in mind, however,that Neptune is still furious with Ulysses for having blinded an eye ofPolyphemus king of the Cyclopes. Polyphemus is son to Neptune by the nymphThoosa, daughter to the sea-king Phorcys; therefore though he will not killUlysses outright, he torments him by preventing him from getting home. Still,let us lay our heads together and see how we can help him to return; Neptunewill then be pacified, for if we are all of a mind he can hardly stand outagainst us.”And Minerva said, “Father, son of Saturn, King of kings, if, then, thegods now mean that Ulysses should get home, we should first send Mercury to theOgygian island to tell Calypso that we have made up our minds and that he is toreturn. In the meantime I will go to Ithaca, to put heart into Ulysses’son Telemachus; I will embolden him to call the Achaeans in assembly, and speakout to the suitors of his mother Penelope, who persist in eating up any numberof his sheep and oxen; I will also conduct him to Sparta and to Pylos, to seeif he can hear anything about the return of his dear father—for this willmake people speak well of him.”So saying she bound on her glittering golden sandals, imperishable, with whichshe can fly like the wind over land or sea; she grasped the redoubtablebronze-shod spear, so stout and sturdy and strong, wherewith she quells theranks of heroes who have displeased her, and down she darted from the topmostsummits of Olympus, whereon forthwith she was in Ithaca, at the gateway ofUlysses’ house, disguised as a visitor, Mentes, chief of the Taphians,and she held a bronze spear in her hand. There she found the lordly suitorsseated on hides of the oxen which they had killed and eaten, and playingdraughts in front of the house. Men-servants and pages were bustling about towait upon them, some mixing wine with water in the mixing-bowls, some cleaningdown the tables with wet sponges and laying them out again, and some cutting upgreat quantities of meat.Telemachus saw her long before any one else did. He was sitting moodily amongthe suitors thinking about his brave father, and how he would send them flyingout of the house, if he were to come to his own again and be honoured as indays gone by. Thus brooding as he sat among them, he caught sight of Minervaand went straight to the gate, for he was vexed that a stranger should be keptwaiting for admittance. He took her right hand in his own, and bade her givehim her spear. “Welcome,” said he, “to our house, and whenyou have partaken of food you shall tell us what you have come for.”He led the way as he spoke, and Minerva followed him. When they were within hetook her spear and set it in the spear-stand against a strong bearing-postalong with the many other spears of his unhappy father, and he conducted her toa richly decorated seat under which he threw a cloth of damask. There was afootstool also for her feet,[2] and he set another seat near her forhimself, away from the suitors, that she might not be annoyed while eating bytheir noise and insolence, and that he might ask her more freely about hisfather.A maid servant then brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured itinto a silver basin for them to wash their hands, and she drew a clean tablebeside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered them many goodthings of what there was in the house, the carver fetched them plates of allmanner of meats and set cups of gold by their side, and a manservant broughtthem wine and poured it out for them.Then the suitors came in and took their places on the benches and seats.[3] Forthwith menservants poured water over their hands, maids went round with thebread-baskets, pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and water, and they laidtheir hands upon the good things that were before them. As soon as they had hadenough to eat and drink they wanted music and dancing, which are the crowningembellishments of a banquet, so a servant brought a lyre to Phemius, whom theycompelled perforce to sing to them. As soon as he touched his lyre and began tosing Telemachus spoke low to Minerva, with his head close to hers that no manmight hear.“I hope, sir,” said he, “that you will not be offended withwhat I am going to say. Singing comes cheap to those who do not pay for it, andall this is done at the cost of one whose bones lie rotting in some wildernessor grinding to powder in the surf. If these men were to see my father come backto Ithaca they would pray for longer legs rather than a longer purse, for moneywould not serve them; but he, alas, has fallen on an ill fate, and even whenpeople do sometimes say that he is coming, we no longer heed them; we shallnever see him again. And now, sir, tell me and tell me true, who you are andwhere you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of ship youcame in, how your crew brought you to Ithaca, and of what nation they declaredthemselves to be—for you cannot have come by land. Tell me also truly,for I want to know, are you a stranger to this house, or have you been here inmy father’s time? In the old days we had many visitors for my father wentabout much himself.”And Minerva answered, “I will tell you truly and particularly all aboutit. I am Mentes, son of Anchialus, and I am King of the Taphians. I have comehere with my ship and crew, on a voyage to men of a foreign tongue being boundfor Temesa[4] with acargo of iron, and I shall bring back copper. As for my ship, it lies overyonder off the open country away from the town, in the harbour Rheithron[5] under the woodedmountain Neritum.[6]Our fathers were friends before us, as old Laertes will tell you, if you willgo and ask him. They say, however, that he never comes to town now, and livesby himself in the country, faring hardly, with an old woman to look after himand get his dinner for him, when he comes in tired from pottering about hisvineyard. They told me your father was at home again, and that was why I came,but it seems the gods are still keeping him back, for he is not dead yet not onthe mainland. It is more likely he is on some sea-girt island in mid ocean, ora prisoner among savages who are detaining him against his will. I am noprophet, and know very little about omens, but I speak as it is borne in uponme from heaven, and assure you that he will not be away much longer; for he isa man of such resource that even though he were in chains of iron he would findsome means of getting home again. But tell me, and tell me true, can Ulyssesreally have such a fine looking fellow for a son? You are indeed wonderfullylike him about the head and eyes, for we were close friends before he set sailfor Troy where the flower of all the Argives went also. Since that time we havenever either of us seen the other.”“My mother,” answered Telemachus, “tells me I am son toUlysses, but it is a wise child that knows his own father. Would that I wereson to one who had grown old upon his own estates, for, since you ask me, thereis no more ill-starred man under heaven than he who they tell me is myfather.”And Minerva said, “There is no fear of your race dying out yet, whilePenelope has such a fine son as you are. But tell me, and tell me true, what isthe meaning of all this feasting, and who are these people? What is it allabout? Have you some banquet, or is there a wedding in the family—for noone seems to be bringing any provisions of his own? And the guests—howatrociously they are behaving; what riot they make over the whole house; it isenough to disgust any respectable person who comes near them.”“Sir,” said Telemachus, “as regards your question, so long asmy father was here it was well with us and with the house, but the gods intheir displeasure have willed it otherwise, and have hidden him away moreclosely than mortal man was ever yet hidden. I could have borne it better eventhough he were dead, if he had fallen with his men before Troy, or had diedwith friends around him when the days of his fighting were done; for then theAchaeans would have built a mound over his ashes, and I should myself have beenheir to his renown; but now the storm-winds have spirited him away we know notwhither; he is gone without leaving so much as a trace behind him, and Iinherit nothing but dismay. Nor does the matter end simply with grief for theloss of my father; heaven has laid sorrows upon me of yet another kind; for thechiefs from all our islands, Dulichium, Same, and the woodland island ofZacynthus, as also all the principal men of Ithaca itself, are eating up myhouse under the pretext of paying their court to my mother, who will neitherpoint blank say that she will not marry,[7] nor yet bring matters to an end; sothey are making havoc of my estate, and before long will do so also withmyself.”“Is that so?” exclaimed Minerva, “then you do indeed wantUlysses home again. Give him his helmet, shield, and a couple of lances, and ifhe is the man he was when I first knew him in our house, drinking and makingmerry, he would soon lay his hands about these rascally suitors, were he tostand once more upon his own threshold. He was then coming from Ephyra, wherehe had been to beg poison for his arrows from Ilus, son of Mermerus. Ilusfeared the ever-living gods and would not give him any, but my father let himhave some, for he was very fond of him. If Ulysses is the man he then was thesesuitors will have a short shrift and a sorry wedding.“But there! It rests with heaven to determine whether he is to return,and take his revenge in his own house or no; I would, however, urge you to setabout trying to get rid of these suitors at once. Take my advice, call theAchaean heroes in assembly to-morrow morning—lay your case before them,and call heaven to bear you witness. Bid the suitors take themselves off, eachto his own place, and if your mother’s mind is set on marrying again, lether go back to her father, who will find her a husband and provide her with allthe marriage gifts that so dear a daughter may expect. As for yourself, let meprevail upon you to take the best ship you can get, with a crew of twenty men,and go in quest of your father who has so long been missing. Some one may tellyou something, or (and people often hear things in this way) some heaven-sentmessage may direct you. First go to Pylos and ask Nestor; thence go on toSparta and visit Menelaus, for he got home last of all the Achaeans; if youhear that your father is alive and on his way home, you can put up with thewaste these suitors will make for yet another twelve months. If on the otherhand you hear of his death, come home at once, celebrate his funeral rites withall due pomp, build a barrow to his memory, and make your mother marry again.Then, having done all this, think it well over in your mind how, by fair meansor foul, you may kill these suitors in your own house. You are too old to pleadinfancy any longer; have you not heard how people are singing Orestes’praises for having killed his father’s murderer Aegisthus? You are afine, smart looking fellow; show your mettle, then, and make yourself a name instory. Now, however, I must go back to my ship and to my crew, who will beimpatient if I keep them waiting longer; think the matter over for yourself,and remember what I have said to you.”“Sir,” answered Telemachus, “it has been very kind of you totalk to me in this way, as though I were your own son, and I will do all youtell me; I know you want to be getting on with your voyage, but stay a littlelonger till you have taken a bath and refreshed yourself. I will then give youa present, and you shall go on your way rejoicing; I will give you one of greatbeauty and value—a keepsake such as only dear friends give to oneanother.”Minerva answered, “Do not try to keep me, for I would be on my way atonce. As for any present you may be disposed to make me, keep it till I comeagain, and I will take it home with me. You shall give me a very good one, andI will give you one of no less value in return.”With these words she flew away like a bird into the air, but she had givenTelemachus courage, and had made him think more than ever about his father. Hefelt the change, wondered at it, and knew that the stranger had been a god, sohe went straight to where the suitors were sitting.Phemius was still singing, and his hearers sat rapt in silence as he told thesad tale of the return from Troy, and the ills Minerva had laid upon theAchaeans. Penelope, daughter of Icarius, heard his song from her room upstairs,and came down by the great staircase, not alone, but attended by two of herhandmaids. When she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing poststhat supported the roof of the cloisters[8] with a staid maiden on either side ofher. She held a veil, moreover, before her face, and was weeping bitterly.“Phemius,” she cried, “you know many another feat of gods andheroes, such as poets love to celebrate. Sing the suitors some one of these,and let them drink their wine in silence, but cease this sad tale, for itbreaks my sorrowful heart, and reminds me of my lost husband whom I mourn everwithout ceasing, and whose name was great over all Hellas and middleArgos.”[9]“Mother,” answered Telemachus, “let the bard sing what he hasa mind to; bards do not make the ills they sing of; it is Jove, not they, whomakes them, and who sends weal or woe upon mankind according to his own goodpleasure. This fellow means no harm by singing the ill-fated return of theDanaans, for people always applaud the latest songs most warmly. Make up yourmind to it and bear it; Ulysses is not the only man who never came back fromTroy, but many another went down as well as he. Go, then, within the house andbusy yourself with your daily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the orderingof your servants; for speech is man’s matter, and mine above all others[10]—for itis I who am master here.”She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in herheart. Then, going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned herdear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleep over her eyes. But the suitors wereclamorous throughout the covered cloisters[11], and prayed each one that he might beher bed fellow.Then Telemachus spoke, “Shameless,” he cried, “and insolentsuitors, let us feast at our pleasure now, and let there be no brawling, for itis a rare thing to hear a man with such a divine voice as Phemius has; but inthe morning meet me in full assembly that I may give you formal notice todepart, and feast at one another’s houses, turn and turn about, at yourown cost. If on the other hand you choose to persist in spunging upon one man,heaven help me, but Jove shall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in myfather’s house there shall be no man to avenge you.”The suitors bit their lips as they heard him, and marvelled at the boldness ofhis speech. Then, Antinous, son of Eupeithes, said, “The gods seem tohave given you lessons in bluster and tall talking; may Jove never grant you tobe chief in Ithaca as your father was before you.”Telemachus answered, “Antinous, do not chide with me, but, god willing, Iwill be chief too if I can. Is this the worst fate you can think of for me? Itis no bad thing to be a chief, for it brings both riches and honour. Still, nowthat Ulysses is dead there are many great men in Ithaca both old and young, andsome other may take the lead among them; nevertheless I will be chief in my ownhouse, and will rule those whom Ulysses has won for me.”Then Eurymachus, son of Polybus, answered, “It rests with heaven todecide who shall be chief among us, but you shall be master in your own houseand over your own possessions; no one while there is a man in Ithaca shall doyou violence nor rob you. And now, my good fellow, I want to know about thisstranger. What country does he come from? Of what family is he, and where ishis estate? Has he brought you news about the return of your father, or was heon business of his own? He seemed a well to do man, but he hurried off sosuddenly that he was gone in a moment before we could get to know him.”“My father is dead and gone,” answered Telemachus, “and evenif some rumour reaches me I put no more faith in it now. My mother does indeedsometimes send for a soothsayer and question him, but I give his prophecyingsno heed. As for the stranger, he was Mentes, son of Anchialus, chief of theTaphians, an old friend of my father’s.” But in his heart he knewthat it had been the goddess.The suitors then returned to their singing and dancing until the evening; butwhen night fell upon their pleasuring they went home to bed each in his ownabode.[12]Telemachus’s room was high up in a tower[13] that looked on to the outer court;hither, then, he hied, brooding and full of thought. A good old woman,Euryclea, daughter of Ops, the son of Pisenor, went before him with a couple ofblazing torches. Laertes had bought her with his own money when she was quiteyoung; he gave the worth of twenty oxen for her, and shewed as much respect toher in his household as he did to his own wedded wife, but he did not take herto his bed for he feared his wife’s resentment.[14] She it was who now lighted Telemachusto his room, and she loved him better than any of the other women in the housedid, for she had nursed him when he was a baby. He opened the door of his bedroom and sat down upon the bed; as he took off his shirt[15] he gave it to the good old woman, whofolded it tidily up, and hung it for him over a peg by his bed side, afterwhich she went out, pulled the door to by a silver catch, and drew the bolthome by means of the strap.[16] But Telemachus as he lay covered witha woollen fleece kept thinking all night through of his intended voyage and ofthe counsel that Minerva had given him.BOOK IIASSEMBLY OF THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA—SPEECHES OF TELEMACHUS AND OF THESUITORS—TELEMACHUS MAKES HIS PREPARATIONS AND STARTS FOR PYLOS WITHMINERVA DISGUISED AS MENTOR.Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared Telemachus rose anddressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his swordabout his shoulder, and left his room looking like an immortal god. He at oncesent the criers round to call the people in assembly, so they called them andthe people gathered thereon; then, when they were got together, he went to theplace of assembly spear in hand—not alone, for his two hounds went withhim. Minerva endowed him with a presence of such divine comeliness that allmarvelled at him as he went by, and when he took his place in hisfather’s seat even the oldest councillors made way for him.Aegyptius, a man bent double with age, and of infinite experience, was thefirst to speak. His son Antiphus had gone with Ulysses to Ilius, land of noblesteeds, but the savage Cyclops had killed him when they were all shut up in thecave, and had cooked his last dinner for him.[17] He had three sons left, of whom twostill worked on their father’s land, while the third, Eurynomus, was oneof the suitors; nevertheless their father could not get over the loss ofAntiphus, and was still weeping for him when he began his speech.“Men of Ithaca,” he said, “hear my words. From the dayUlysses left us there has been no meeting of our councillors until now; whothen can it be, whether old or young, that finds it so necessary to convene us?Has he got wind of some host approaching, and does he wish to warn us, or wouldhe speak upon some other matter of public moment? I am sure he is an excellentperson, and I hope Jove will grant him his heart’s desire.”Telemachus took this speech as of good omen and rose at once, for he wasbursting with what he had to say. He stood in the middle of the assembly andthe good herald Pisenor brought him his staff. Then, turning to Aegyptius,“Sir,” said he, “it is I, as you will shortly learn, who haveconvened you, for it is I who am the most aggrieved. I have not got wind of anyhost approaching about which I would warn you, nor is there any matter ofpublic moment on which I would speak. My grievance is purely personal, andturns on two great misfortunes which have fallen upon my house. The first ofthese is the loss of my excellent father, who was chief among all you herepresent, and was like a father to every one of you; the second is much moreserious, and ere long will be the utter ruin of my estate. The sons of all thechief men among you are pestering my mother to marry them against her will.They are afraid to go to her father Icarius, asking him to choose the one helikes best, and to provide marriage gifts for his daughter, but day by day theykeep hanging about my father’s house, sacrificing our oxen, sheep, andfat goats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to thequantity of wine they drink. No estate can stand such recklessness; we have nowno Ulysses to ward off harm from our doors, and I cannot hold my own againstthem. I shall never all my days be as good a man as he was, still I wouldindeed defend myself if I had power to do so, for I cannot stand such treatmentany longer; my house is being disgraced and ruined. Have respect, therefore, toyour own consciences and to public opinion. Fear, too, the wrath of heaven,lest the gods should be displeased and turn upon you. I pray you by Jove andThemis, who is the beginning and the end of councils, [do not] hold back, myfriends, and leave me singlehanded[18]—unless it be that my bravefather Ulysses did some wrong to the Achaeans which you would now avenge on me,by aiding and abetting these suitors. Moreover, if I am to be eaten out ofhouse and home at all, I had rather you did the eating yourselves, for I couldthen take action against you to some purpose, and serve you with notices fromhouse to house till I got paid in full, whereas now I have no remedy.”[19]With this Telemachus dashed his staff to the ground and burst into tears. Everyone was very sorry for him, but they all sat still and no one ventured to makehim an angry answer, save only Antinous, who spoke thus:“Telemachus, insolent braggart that you are, how dare you try to throwthe blame upon us suitors? It is your mother’s fault not ours, for she isa very artful woman. This three years past, and close on four, she had beendriving us out of our minds, by encouraging each one of us, and sending himmessages without meaning one word of what she says. And then there was thatother trick she played us. She set up a great tambour frame in her room, andbegan to work on an enormous piece of fine needlework. ‘Sweethearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead, still do not press meto marry again immediately, wait—for I would not have skill in needleworkperish unrecorded—till I have completed a pall for the hero Laertes, tobe in readiness against the time when death shall take him. He is very rich,and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without a pall.’“This was what she said, and we assented; whereon we could see herworking on her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick thestitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years and wenever found her out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year,one of her maids who knew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in theact of undoing her work, so she had to finish it whether she would or no. Thesuitors, therefore, make you this answer, that both you and the Achaeans mayunderstand—‘Send your mother away, and bid her marry the man of herown and of her father’s choice’; for I do not know what will happenif she goes on plaguing us much longer with the airs she gives herself on thescore of the accomplishments Minerva has taught her, and because she is soclever. We never yet heard of such a woman; we know all about Tyro, Alcmena,Mycene, and the famous women of old, but they were nothing to your mother anyone of them. It was not fair of her to treat us in that way, and as long as shecontinues in the mind with which heaven has now endowed her, so long shall wego on eating up your estate; and I do not see why she should change, for shegets all the honour and glory, and it is you who pay for it, not she.Understand, then, that we will not go back to our lands, neither here norelsewhere, till she has made her choice and married some one or other ofus.”Telemachus answered, “Antinous, how can I drive the mother who bore mefrom my father’s house? My father is abroad and we do not know whether heis alive or dead. It will be hard on me if I have to pay Icarius the large sumwhich I must give him if I insist on sending his daughter back to him. Not onlywill he deal rigorously with me, but heaven will also punish me; for my motherwhen she leaves the house will call on the Erinyes to avenge her; besides, itwould not be a creditable thing to do, and I will have nothing to say to it. Ifyou choose to take offence at this, leave the house and feast elsewhere at oneanother’s houses at your own cost turn and turn about. If, on the otherhand, you elect to persist in spunging upon one man, heaven help me, but Joveshall reckon with you in full, and when you fall in my father’s housethere shall be no man to avenge you.”As he spoke Jove sent two eagles from the top of the mountain, and they flew onand on with the wind, sailing side by side in their own lordly flight. Whenthey were right over the middle of the assembly they wheeled and circled about,beating the air with their wings and glaring death into the eyes of them thatwere below; then, fighting fiercely and tearing at one another, they flew offtowards the right over the town. The people wondered as they saw them, andasked each other what all this might be; whereon Halitherses, who was the bestprophet and reader of omens among them, spoke to them plainly and in allhonesty, saying:“Hear me, men of Ithaca, and I speak more particularly to the suitors,for I see mischief brewing for them. Ulysses is not going to be away muchlonger; indeed he is close at hand to deal out death and destruction, not onthem alone, but on many another of us who live in Ithaca. Let us then be wisein time, and put a stop to this wickedness before he comes. Let the suitors doso of their own accord; it will be better for them, for I am not prophesyingwithout due knowledge; everything has happened to Ulysses as I foretold whenthe Argives set out for Troy, and he with them. I said that after going throughmuch hardship and losing all his men he should come home again in the twentiethyear and that no one would know him; and now all this is coming true.”Eurymachus son of Polybus then said, “Go home, old man, and prophesy toyour own children, or it may be worse for them. I can read these omens myselfmuch better than you can; birds are always flying about in the sunshinesomewhere or other, but they seldom mean anything. Ulysses has died in a farcountry, and it is a pity you are not dead along with him, instead of pratinghere about omens and adding fuel to the anger of Telemachus which is fierceenough as it is. I suppose you think he will give you something for yourfamily, but I tell you—and it shall surely be—when an old man likeyou, who should know better, talks a young one over till he becomestroublesome, in the first place his young friend will only fare so much theworse—he will take nothing by it, for the suitors will preventthis—and in the next, we will lay a heavier fine, sir, upon yourself thanyou will at all like paying, for it will bear hardly upon you. As forTelemachus, I warn him in the presence of you all to send his mother back toher father, who will find her a husband and provide her with all the marriagegifts so dear a daughter may expect. Till then we shall go on harassing himwith our suit; for we fear no man, and care neither for him, with all his finespeeches, nor for any fortune-telling of yours. You may preach as much as youplease, but we shall only hate you the more. We shall go back and continue toeat up Telemachus’s estate without paying him, till such time as hismother leaves off tormenting us by keeping us day after day on the tiptoe ofexpectation, each vying with the other in his suit for a prize of such rareperfection. Besides we cannot go after the other women whom we should marry indue course, but for the way in which she treats us.”Then Telemachus said, “Eurymachus, and you other suitors, I shall say nomore, and entreat you no further, for the gods and the people of Ithaca nowknow my story. Give me, then, a ship and a crew of twenty men to take me hitherand thither, and I will go to Sparta and to Pylos in quest of my father who hasso long been missing. Some one may tell me something, or (and people often hearthings in this way) some heaven-sent message may direct me. If I can hear ofhim as alive and on his way home I will put up with the waste you suitors willmake for yet another twelve months. If on the other hand I hear of his death, Iwill return at once, celebrate his funeral rites with all due pomp, build abarrow to his memory, and make my mother marry again.”With these words he sat down, and Mentor[20] who had been a friend of Ulysses, andhad been left in charge of everything with full authority over the servants,rose to speak. He, then, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus:“Hear me, men of Ithaca, I hope that you may never have a kind andwell-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern you equitably; I hopethat all your chiefs henceforward may be cruel and unjust, for there is not oneof you but has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled you as though he were your father.I am not half so angry with the suitors, for if they choose to do violence inthe naughtiness of their hearts, and wager their heads that Ulysses will notreturn, they can take the high hand and eat up his estate, but as for youothers I am shocked at the way in which you all sit still without even tryingto stop such scandalous goings on—which you could do if you chose, foryou are many and they are few.”Leiocritus, son of Evenor, answered him saying, “Mentor, what folly isall this, that you should set the people to stay us? It is a hard thing for oneman to fight with many about his victuals. Even though Ulysses himself were toset upon us while we are feasting in his house, and do his best to oust us, hiswife, who wants him back so very badly, would have small cause for rejoicing,and his blood would be upon his own head if he fought against such great odds.There is no sense in what you have been saying. Now, therefore, do you peoplego about your business, and let his father’s old friends, Mentor andHalitherses, speed this boy on his journey, if he goes at all—which I donot think he will, for he is more likely to stay where he is till some onecomes and tells him something.”On this he broke up the assembly, and every man went back to his own abode,while the suitors returned to the house of Ulysses.Then Telemachus went all alone by the sea side, washed his hands in the greywaves, and prayed to Minerva.“Hear me,” he cried, “you god who visited me yesterday, andbade me sail the seas in search of my father who has so long been missing. Iwould obey you, but the Achaeans, and more particularly the wicked suitors, arehindering me that I cannot do so.”As he thus prayed, Minerva came close up to him in the likeness and with thevoice of Mentor. “Telemachus,” said she, “if you are made ofthe same stuff as your father you will be neither fool nor coward henceforward,for Ulysses never broke his word nor left his work half done. If, then, youtake after him, your voyage will not be fruitless, but unless you have theblood of Ulysses and of Penelope in your veins I see no likelihood of yoursucceeding. Sons are seldom as good men as their fathers; they are generallyworse, not better; still, as you are not going to be either fool or cowardhenceforward, and are not entirely without some share of your father’swise discernment, I look with hope upon your undertaking. But mind you nevermake common cause with any of those foolish suitors, for they have neithersense nor virtue, and give no thought to death and to the doom that willshortly fall on one and all of them, so that they shall perish on the same day.As for your voyage, it shall not be long delayed; your father was such an oldfriend of mine that I will find you a ship, and will come with you myself. Now,however, return home, and go about among the suitors; begin getting provisionsready for your voyage; see everything well stowed, the wine in jars, and thebarley meal, which is the staff of life, in leathern bags, while I go round thetown and beat up volunteers at once. There are many ships in Ithaca both oldand new; I will run my eye over them for you and will choose the best; we willget her ready and will put out to sea without delay.”Thus spoke Minerva daughter of Jove, and Telemachus lost no time in doing asthe goddess told him. He went moodily home, and found the suitors flaying goatsand singeing pigs in the outer court. Antinous came up to him at once andlaughed as he took his hand in his own, saying, “Telemachus, my finefire-eater, bear no more ill blood neither in word nor deed, but eat and drinkwith us as you used to do. The Achaeans will find you in everything—aship and a picked crew to boot—so that you can set sail for Pylos at onceand get news of your noble father.”“Antinous,” answered Telemachus, “I cannot eat in peace, nortake pleasure of any kind with such men as you are. Was it not enough that youshould waste so much good property of mine while I was yet a boy? Now that I amolder and know more about it, I am also stronger, and whether here among thispeople, or by going to Pylos, I will do you all the harm I can. I shall go, andmy going will not be in vain—though, thanks to you suitors, I haveneither ship nor crew of my own, and must be passenger not captain.”As he spoke he snatched his hand from that of Antinous. Meanwhile the otherswent on getting dinner ready about the buildings,[21] jeering at him tauntingly as they didso.“Telemachus,” said one youngster, “means to be the death ofus; I suppose he thinks he can bring friends to help him from Pylos, or againfrom Sparta, where he seems bent on going. Or will he go to Ephyra as well, forpoison to put in our wine and kill us?”Another said, “Perhaps if Telemachus goes on board ship, he will be likehis father and perish far from his friends. In this case we should have plentyto do, for we could then divide up his property amongst us: as for the house wecan let his mother and the man who marries her have that.”This was how they talked. But Telemachus went down into the lofty and spaciousstore-room where his father’s treasure of gold and bronze lay heaped upupon the floor, and where the linen and spare clothes were kept in open chests.Here, too, there was a store of fragrant olive oil, while casks of old,well-ripened wine, unblended and fit for a god to drink, were ranged againstthe wall in case Ulysses should come home again after all. The room was closedwith well-made doors opening in the middle; moreover the faithful oldhouse-keeper Euryclea, daughter of Ops the son of Pisenor, was in charge ofeverything both night and day. Telemachus called her to the store-room andsaid:“Nurse, draw me off some of the best wine you have, after what you arekeeping for my father’s own drinking, in case, poor man, he should escapedeath, and find his way home again after all. Let me have twelve jars, and seethat they all have lids; also fill me some well-sewn leathern bags with barleymeal—about twenty measures in all. Get these things put together at once,and say nothing about it. I will take everything away this evening as soon asmy mother has gone upstairs for the night. I am going to Sparta and to Pylos tosee if I can hear anything about the return of my dear father.”When Euryclea heard this she began to cry, and spoke fondly to him, saying,“My dear child, what ever can have put such notion as that into yourhead? Where in the world do you want to go to—you, who are the one hopeof the house? Your poor father is dead and gone in some foreign country nobodyknows where, and as soon as your back is turned these wicked ones here will bescheming to get you put out of the way, and will share all your possessionsamong themselves; stay where you are among your own people, and do not gowandering and worrying your life out on the barren ocean.”“Fear not, nurse,” answered Telemachus, “my scheme is notwithout heaven’s sanction; but swear that you will say nothing about allthis to my mother, till I have been away some ten or twelve days, unless shehears of my having gone, and asks you; for I do not want her to spoil herbeauty by crying.”The old woman swore most solemnly that she would not, and when she hadcompleted her oath, she began drawing off the wine into jars, and getting thebarley meal into the bags, while Telemachus went back to the suitors.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. She took his shape, and wentround the town to each one of the crew, telling them to meet at the ship bysundown. She went also to Noemon son of Phronius, and asked him to let her havea ship—which he was very ready to do. When the sun had set and darknesswas over all the land, she got the ship into the water, put all the tackle onboard her that ships generally carry, and stationed her at the end of theharbour. Presently the crew came up, and the goddess spoke encouragingly toeach of them.Furthermore she went to the house of Ulysses, and threw the suitors into a deepslumber. She caused their drink to fuddle them, and made them drop their cupsfrom their hands, so that instead of sitting over their wine, they went backinto the town to sleep, with their eyes heavy and full of drowsiness. Then shetook the form and voice of Mentor, and called Telemachus to come outside.“Telemachus,” said she, “the men are on board and at theiroars, waiting for you to give your orders, so make haste and let us beoff.”On this she led the way, while Telemachus followed in her steps. When they gotto the ship they found the crew waiting by the water side, and Telemachus said,“Now my men, help me to get the stores on board; they are all puttogether in the cloister, and my mother does not know anything about it, norany of the maid servants except one.”With these words he led the way and the others followed after. When they hadbrought the things as he told them, Telemachus went on board, Minerva goingbefore him and taking her seat in the stern of the vessel, while Telemachus satbeside her. Then the men loosed the hawsers and took their places on thebenches. Minerva sent them a fair wind from the West,[22] that whistled over the deep bluewaves[23] whereonTelemachus told them to catch hold of the ropes and hoist sail, and they did ashe told them. They set the mast in its socket in the cross plank, raised it,and made it fast with the forestays; then they hoisted their white sails aloftwith ropes of twisted ox hide. As the sail bellied out with the wind, the shipflew through the deep blue water, and the foam hissed against her bows as shesped onward. Then they made all fast throughout the ship, filled the mixingbowls to the brim, and made drink offerings to the immortal gods that are fromeverlasting, but more particularly to the grey-eyed daughter of Jove.Thus, then, the ship sped on her way through the watches of the night from darktill dawn.BOOK IIITELEMACHUS VISITS NESTOR AT PYLOS.but as the sun was rising from the fair sea[24] into the firmament of heaven to shedlight on mortals and immortals, they reached Pylos the city of Neleus. Now thepeople of Pylos were gathered on the sea shore to offer sacrifice of blackbulls to Neptune lord of the Earthquake. There were nine guilds with fivehundred men in each, and there were nine bulls to each guild. As they wereeating the inward meats[25] and burning the thigh bones [on theembers] in the name of Neptune, Telemachus and his crew arrived, furled theirsails, brought their ship to anchor, and went ashore.Minerva led the way and Telemachus followed her. Presently she said,“Telemachus, you must not be in the least shy or nervous; you have takenthis voyage to try and find out where your father is buried and how he came byhis end; so go straight up to Nestor that we may see what he has got to tellus. Beg of him to speak the truth, and he will tell no lies, for he is anexcellent person.”“But how, Mentor,” replied Telemachus, “dare I go up toNestor, and how am I to address him? I have never yet been used to holding longconversations with people, and am ashamed to begin questioning one who is somuch older than myself.”“Some things, Telemachus,” answered Minerva, “will besuggested to you by your own instinct, and heaven will prompt you further; forI am assured that the gods have been with you from the time of your birth untilnow.”She then went quickly on, and Telemachus followed in her steps till theyreached the place where the guilds of the Pylian people were assembled. Therethey found Nestor sitting with his sons, while his company round him were busygetting dinner ready, and putting pieces of meat on to the spits[26] while otherpieces were cooking. When they saw the strangers they crowded round them, tookthem by the hand and bade them take their places. Nestor’s sonPisistratus at once offered his hand to each of them, and seated them on somesoft sheepskins that were lying on the sands near his father and his brotherThrasymedes. Then he gave them their portions of the inward meats and pouredwine for them into a golden cup, handing it to Minerva first, and saluting herat the same time.“Offer a prayer, sir,” said he, “to King Neptune, for it ishis feast that you are joining; when you have duly prayed and made your drinkoffering, pass the cup to your friend that he may do so also. I doubt not thathe too lifts his hands in prayer, for man cannot live without God in the world.Still he is younger than you are, and is much of an age with myself, so I willgive you the precedence.”As he spoke he handed her the cup. Minerva thought it very right and proper ofhim to have given it to herself first;[27] she accordingly began prayingheartily to Neptune. “O thou,” she cried, “that encirclestthe earth, vouchsafe to grant the prayers of thy servants that call upon thee.More especially we pray thee send down thy grace on Nestor and on his sons;thereafter also make the rest of the Pylian people some handsome return for thegoodly hecatomb they are offering you. Lastly, grant Telemachus and myself ahappy issue, in respect of the matter that has brought us in our ship toPylos.”When she had thus made an end of praying, she handed the cup to Telemachus andhe prayed likewise. By and by, when the outer meats were roasted and had beentaken off the spits, the carvers gave every man his portion and they all madean excellent dinner. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, Nestor,knight of Gerene, began to speak.“Now,” said he, “that our guests have done their dinner, itwill be best to ask them who they are. Who, then, sir strangers, are you, andfrom what port have you sailed? Are you traders? or do you sail the seas asrovers with your hand against every man, and every man’s hand againstyou?”Telemachus answered boldly, for Minerva had given him courage to ask about hisfather and get himself a good name.“Nestor,” said he, “son of Neleus, honour to the Achaeanname, you ask whence we come, and I will tell you. We come from Ithaca underNeritum,[28] andthe matter about which I would speak is of private not public import. I seeknews of my unhappy father Ulysses, who is said to have sacked the town of Troyin company with yourself. We know what fate befell each one of the other heroeswho fought at Troy, but as regards Ulysses heaven has hidden from us theknowledge even that he is dead at all, for no one can certify us in what placehe perished, nor say whether he fell in battle on the mainland, or was lost atsea amid the waves of Amphitrite. Therefore I am suppliant at your knees, ifhaply you may be pleased to tell me of his melancholy end, whether you saw itwith your own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller, for he was a manborn to trouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for me, but tell me inall plainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did youloyal service, either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed amongthe Trojans, bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.”“My friend,” answered Nestor, “you recall a time of muchsorrow to my mind, for the brave Achaeans suffered much both at sea, whileprivateering under Achilles, and when fighting before the great city of kingPriam. Our best men all of them fell there—Ajax, Achilles, Patroclus peerof gods in counsel, and my own dear son Antilochus, a man singularly fleet offoot and in fight valiant. But we suffered much more than this; what mortaltongue indeed could tell the whole story? Though you were to stay here andquestion me for five years, or even six, I could not tell you all that theAchaeans suffered, and you would turn homeward weary of my tale before itended. Nine long years did we try every kind of stratagem, but the hand ofheaven was against us; during all this time there was no one who could comparewith your father in subtlety—if indeed you are his son—I can hardlybelieve my eyes—and you talk just like him too—no one would saythat people of such different ages could speak so much alike. He and I neverhad any kind of difference from first to last neither in camp nor council, butin singleness of heart and purpose we advised the Argives how all might beordered for the best.“When, however, we had sacked the city of Priam, and were setting sail inour ships as heaven had dispersed us, then Jove saw fit to vex the Argives ontheir homeward voyage; for they had not all been either wise or understanding,and hence many came to a bad end through the displeasure of Jove’sdaughter Minerva, who brought about a quarrel between the two sons of Atreus.“The sons of Atreus called a meeting which was not as it should be, forit was sunset and the Achaeans were heavy with wine. When they explained whythey had called the people together, it seemed that Menelaus was for sailinghomeward at once, and this displeased Agamemnon, who thought that we shouldwait till we had offered hecatombs to appease the anger of Minerva. Fool thathe was, he might have known that he would not prevail with her, for when thegods have made up their minds they do not change them lightly. So the two stoodbandying hard words, whereon the Achaeans sprang to their feet with a cry thatrent the air, and were of two minds as to what they should do.“That night we rested and nursed our anger, for Jove was hatchingmischief against us. But in the morning some of us drew our ships into thewater and put our goods with our women on board, while the rest, about half innumber, stayed behind with Agamemnon. We—the other half—embarkedand sailed; and the ships went well, for heaven had smoothed the sea. When wereached Tenedos we offered sacrifices to the gods, for we were longing to gethome; cruel Jove, however, did not yet mean that we should do so, and raised asecond quarrel in the course of which some among us turned their ships backagain, and sailed away under Ulysses to make their peace with Agamemnon; but I,and all the ships that were with me pressed forward, for I saw that mischiefwas brewing. The son of Tydeus went on also with me, and his crews with him.Later on Menelaus joined us at Lesbos, and found us making up our minds aboutour course—for we did not know whether to go outside Chios by the islandof Psyra, keeping this to our left, or inside Chios, over against the stormyheadland of Mimas. So we asked heaven for a sign, and were shown one to theeffect that we should be soonest out of danger if we headed our ships acrossthe open sea to Euboea. This we therefore did, and a fair wind sprang up whichgave us a quick passage during the night to Geraestus,[29] where we offered many sacrifices toNeptune for having helped us so far on our way. Four days later Diomed and hismen stationed their ships in Argos, but I held on for Pylos, and the wind neverfell light from the day when heaven first made it fair for me.“Therefore, my dear young friend, I returned without hearing anythingabout the others. I know neither who got home safely nor who were lost but, asin duty bound, I will give you without reserve the reports that have reached mesince I have been here in my own house. They say the Myrmidons returned homesafely under Achilles’ son Neoptolemus; so also did the valiant son ofPoias, Philoctetes. Idomeneus, again, lost no men at sea, and all his followerswho escaped death in the field got safe home with him to Crete. No matter howfar out of the world you live, you will have heard of Agamemnon and the bad endhe came to at the hands of Aegisthus—and a fearful reckoning didAegisthus presently pay. See what a good thing it is for a man to leave a sonbehind him to do as Orestes did, who killed false Aegisthus the murderer of hisnoble father. You too, then—for you are a tall smart-lookingfellow—show your mettle and make yourself a name in story.”“Nestor son of Neleus,” answered Telemachus, “honour to theAchaean name, the Achaeans applaud Orestes and his name will live through alltime for he has avenged his father nobly. Would that heaven might grant me todo like vengeance on the insolence of the wicked suitors, who are ill treatingme and plotting my ruin; but the gods have no such happiness in store for meand for my father, so we must bear it as best we may.”“My friend,” said Nestor, “now that you remind me, I rememberto have heard that your mother has many suitors, who are ill disposed towardsyou and are making havoc of your estate. Do you submit to this tamely, or arepublic feeling and the voice of heaven against you? Who knows but what Ulyssesmay come back after all, and pay these scoundrels in full, either single-handedor with a force of Achaeans behind him? If Minerva were to take as great aliking to you as she did to Ulysses when we were fighting before Troy (for Inever yet saw the gods so openly fond of any one as Minerva then was of yourfather), if she would take as good care of you as she did of him, these wooerswould soon some of them forget their wooing.”Telemachus answered, “I can expect nothing of the kind; it would be fartoo much to hope for. I dare not let myself think of it. Even though the godsthemselves willed it no such good fortune could befall me.”On this Minerva said, “Telemachus, what are you talking about? Heaven hasa long arm if it is minded to save a man; and if it were me, I should not carehow much I suffered before getting home, provided I could be safe when I wasonce there. I would rather this, than get home quickly, and then be killed inmy own house as Agamemnon was by the treachery of Aegisthus and his wife.Still, death is certain, and when a man’s hour is come, not even the godscan save him, no matter how fond they are of him.”“Mentor,” answered Telemachus, “do not let us talk about itany more. There is no chance of my father’s ever coming back; the godshave long since counselled his destruction. There is something else, however,about which I should like to ask Nestor, for he knows much more than any oneelse does. They say he has reigned for three generations so that it is liketalking to an immortal. Tell me, therefore, Nestor, and tell me true; how didAgamemnon come to die in that way? What was Menelaus doing? And how came falseAegisthus to kill so far better a man than himself? Was Menelaus away fromAchaean Argos, voyaging elsewhither among mankind, that Aegisthus took heartand killed Agamemnon?”“I will tell you truly,” answered Nestor, “and indeed youhave yourself divined how it all happened. If Menelaus when he got back fromTroy had found Aegisthus still alive in his house, there would have been nobarrow heaped up for him, not even when he was dead, but he would have beenthrown outside the city to dogs and vultures, and not a woman would havemourned him, for he had done a deed of great wickedness; but we were overthere, fighting hard at Troy, and Aegisthus, who was taking his ease quietly inthe heart of Argos, cajoled Agamemnon’s wife Clytemnestra with incessantflattery.“At first she would have nothing to do with his wicked scheme, for shewas of a good natural disposition;[30] moreover there was a bard with her,to whom Agamemnon had given strict orders on setting out for Troy, that he wasto keep guard over his wife; but when heaven had counselled her destruction,Aegisthus carried this bard off to a desert island and left him there for crowsand seagulls to batten upon—after which she went willingly enough to thehouse of Aegisthus. Then he offered many burnt sacrifices to the gods, anddecorated many temples with tapestries and gilding, for he had succeeded farbeyond his expectations.“Meanwhile Menelaus and I were on our way home from Troy, on good termswith one another. When we got to Sunium, which is the point of Athens, Apollowith his painless shafts killed Phrontis the steersman of Menelaus’ ship(and never man knew better how to handle a vessel in rough weather) so that hedied then and there with the helm in his hand, and Menelaus, though veryanxious to press forward, had to wait in order to bury his comrade and give himhis due funeral rites. Presently, when he too could put to sea again, and hadsailed on as far as the Malean heads, Jove counselled evil against him and madeit blow hard till the waves ran mountains high. Here he divided his fleet andtook the one half towards Crete where the Cydonians dwell round about thewaters of the river Iardanus. There is a high headland hereabouts stretchingout into the sea from a place called Gortyn, and all along this part of thecoast as far as Phaestus the sea runs high when there is a south wind blowing,but after Phaestus the coast is more protected, for a small headland can make agreat shelter. Here this part of the fleet was driven on to the rocks andwrecked; but the crews just managed to save themselves. As for the other fiveships, they were taken by winds and seas to Egypt, where Menelaus gathered muchgold and substance among people of an alien speech. Meanwhile Aegisthus here athome plotted his evil deed. For seven years after he had killed Agamemnon heruled in Mycene, and the people were obedient under him, but in the eighth yearOrestes came back from Athens to be his bane, and killed the murderer of hisfather. Then he celebrated the funeral rites of his mother and of falseAegisthus by a banquet to the people of Argos, and on that very day Menelauscame home,[31] withas much treasure as his ships could carry.“Take my advice then, and do not go travelling about for long so far fromhome, nor leave your property with such dangerous people in your house; theywill eat up everything you have among them, and you will have been on afool’s errand. Still, I should advise you by all means to go and visitMenelaus, who has lately come off a voyage among such distant peoples as no mancould ever hope to get back from, when the winds had once carried him so farout of his reckoning; even birds cannot fly the distance in a twelve-month, sovast and terrible are the seas that they must cross. Go to him, therefore, bysea, and take your own men with you; or if you would rather travel by land youcan have a chariot, you can have horses, and here are my sons who can escortyou to Lacedaemon where Menelaus lives. Beg of him to speak the truth, and hewill tell you no lies, for he is an excellent person.”As he spoke the sun set and it came on dark, whereon Minerva said, “Sir,all that you have said is well; now, however, order the tongues of the victimsto be cut, and mix wine that we may make drink-offerings to Neptune, and theother immortals, and then go to bed, for it is bed time. People should go awayearly and not keep late hours at a religious festival.”Thus spoke the daughter of Jove, and they obeyed her saying. Men servantspoured water over the hands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowlswith wine and water, and handed it round after giving every man his drinkoffering; then they threw the tongues of the victims into the fire, and stoodup to make their drink offerings. When they had made their offerings and haddrunk each as much as he was minded, Minerva and Telemachus were for going onboard their ship, but Nestor caught them up at once and stayed them.“Heaven and the immortal gods,” he exclaimed, “forbid thatyou should leave my house to go on board of a ship. Do you think I am so poorand short of clothes, or that I have so few cloaks and as to be unable to findcomfortable beds both for myself and for my guests? Let me tell you I havestore both of rugs and cloaks, and shall not permit the son of my old friendUlysses to camp down on the deck of a ship—not while I live—nor yetwill my sons after me, but they will keep open house as I have done.”Then Minerva answered, “Sir, you have spoken well, and it will be muchbetter that Telemachus should do as you have said; he, therefore, shall returnwith you and sleep at your house, but I must go back to give orders to my crew,and keep them in good heart. I am the only older person among them; the restare all young men of Telemachus’ own age, who have taken this voyage outof friendship; so I must return to the ship and sleep there. Moreover to-morrowI must go to the Cauconians where I have a large sum of money long owing to me.As for Telemachus, now that he is your guest, send him to Lacedaemon in achariot, and let one of your sons go with him. Be pleased to also provide himwith your best and fleetest horses.”When she had thus spoken, she flew away in the form of an eagle, and allmarvelled as they beheld it. Nestor was astonished, and took Telemachus by thehand. “My friend,” said he, “I see that you are going to be agreat hero some day, since the gods wait upon you thus while you are still soyoung. This can have been none other of those who dwell in heaven thanJove’s redoubtable daughter, the Trito-born, who shewed such favourtowards your brave father among the Argives. Holy queen,” he continued,“vouchsafe to send down thy grace upon myself, my good wife, and mychildren. In return, I will offer you in sacrifice a broad-browed heifer of ayear old, unbroken, and never yet brought by man under the yoke. I will gildher horns, and will offer her up to you in sacrifice.”Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer. He then led the way to his ownhouse, followed by his sons and sons in law. When they had got there and hadtaken their places on the benches and seats, he mixed them a bowl of sweet winethat was eleven years old when the housekeeper took the lid off the jar thatheld it. As he mixed the wine, he prayed much and made drink offerings toMinerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove. Then, when they had made their drinkofferings and had drunk each as much as he was minded, the others went home tobed each in his own abode; but Nestor put Telemachus to sleep in the room thatwas over the gateway along with Pisistratus, who was the only unmarried son nowleft him. As for himself, he slept in an inner room of the house, with thequeen his wife by his side.Now when the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Nestor left hiscouch and took his seat on the benches of white and polished marble that stoodin front of his house. Here aforetime sat Neleus, peer of gods in counsel, buthe was now dead, and had gone to the house of Hades; so Nestor sat in his seatsceptre in hand, as guardian of the public weal. His sons as they left theirrooms gathered round him, Echephron, Stratius, Perseus, Aretus, andThrasymedes; the sixth son was Pisistratus, and when Telemachus joined themthey made him sit with them. Nestor then addressed them.“My sons,” said he, “make haste to do as I shall bid you. Iwish first and foremost to propitiate the great goddess Minerva, who manifestedherself visibly to me during yesterday’s festivities. Go, then, one orother of you to the plain, tell the stockman to look me out a heifer, and comeon here with it at once. Another must go to Telemachus’ ship, and inviteall the crew, leaving two men only in charge of the vessel. Some one else willrun and fetch Laerceus the goldsmith to gild the horns of the heifer. The rest,stay all of you where you are; tell the maids in the house to prepare anexcellent dinner, and to fetch seats, and logs of wood for a burnt offering.Tell them also to bring me some clear spring water.”On this they hurried off on their several errands. The heifer was brought infrom the plain, and Telemachus’s crew came from the ship; the goldsmithbrought the anvil, hammer, and tongs, with which he worked his gold, andMinerva herself came to accept the sacrifice. Nestor gave out the gold, and thesmith gilded the horns of the heifer that the goddess might have pleasure intheir beauty. Then Stratius and Echephron brought her in by the horns; Aretusfetched water from the house in a ewer that had a flower pattern on it, and inhis other hand he held a basket of barley meal; sturdy Thrasymedes stood bywith a sharp axe, ready to strike the heifer, while Perseus held a bucket. ThenNestor began with washing his hands and sprinkling the barley meal, and heoffered many a prayer to Minerva as he threw a lock from the heifer’shead upon the fire.When they had done praying and sprinkling the barley meal[32] Thrasymedes dealt his blow, andbrought the heifer down with a stroke that cut through the tendons at the baseof her neck, whereon the daughters and daughters in law of Nestor, and hisvenerable wife Eurydice (she was eldest daughter to Clymenus) screamed withdelight. Then they lifted the heifer’s head from off the ground, andPisistratus cut her throat. When she had done bleeding and was quite dead, theycut her up. They cut out the thigh bones all in due course, wrapped them roundin two layers of fat, and set some pieces of raw meat on the top of them; thenNestor laid them upon the wood fire and poured wine over them, while the youngmen stood near him with five-pronged spits in their hands. When the thighs wereburned and they had tasted the inward meats, they cut the rest of the meat upsmall, put the pieces on the spits and toasted them over the fire.Meanwhile lovely Polycaste, Nestor’s youngest daughter, washedTelemachus. When she had washed him and anointed him with oil, she brought hima fair mantle and shirt,[33] and he looked like a god as he camefrom the bath and took his seat by the side of Nestor. When the outer meatswere done they drew them off the spits and sat down to dinner where they werewaited upon by some worthy henchmen, who kept pouring them out their wine incups of gold. As soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Nestor said,“Sons, put Telemachus’s horses to the chariot that he may start atonce.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said, and yoked the fleet horsesto the chariot. The housekeeper packed them up a provision of bread, wine, andsweet meats fit for the sons of princes. Then Telemachus got into the chariot,while Pisistratus gathered up the reins and took his seat beside him. He lashedthe horses on and they flew forward nothing loth into the open country, leavingthe high citadel of Pylos behind them. All that day did they travel, swayingthe yoke upon their necks till the sun went down and darkness was over all theland. Then they reached Pherae where Diocles lived, who was son to Ortilochusand grandson to Alpheus. Here they passed the night and Diocles entertainedthem hospitably. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, theyagain yoked their horses and drove out through the gateway under the echoinggatehouse.[34]Pisistratus lashed the horses on and they flew forward nothing loth; presentlythey came to the corn lands of the open country, and in the course of timecompleted their journey, so well did their steeds take them.[35]Now when the sun had set and darkness was over the land,BOOK IVTHE VISIT TO KING MENELAUS, WHO TELLS HIS STORY—MEANWHILE THE SUITORS INITHACA PLOT AGAINST TELEMACHUS.they reached the low lying city of Lacedaemon, where they drove straight to theabode of Menelaus[36] [and found him in his own house,feasting with his many clansmen in honour of the wedding of his son, and alsoof his daughter, whom he was marrying to the son of that valiant warriorAchilles. He had given his consent and promised her to him while he was stillat Troy, and now the gods were bringing the marriage about; so he was sendingher with chariots and horses to the city of the Myrmidons over whomAchilles’ son was reigning. For his only son he had found a bride fromSparta,[37] thedaughter of Alector. This son, Megapenthes, was born to him of a bondwoman, forheaven vouchsafed Helen no more children after she had borne Hermione, who wasfair as golden Venus herself.So the neighbours and kinsmen of Menelaus were feasting and making merry in hishouse. There was a bard also to sing to them and play his lyre, while twotumblers went about performing in the midst of them when the man struck up withhis tune.[38]Telemachus and the son of Nestor stayed their horses at the gate, whereonEteoneus servant to Menelaus came out, and as soon as he saw them ran hurryingback into the house to tell his Master. He went close up to him and said,“Menelaus, there are some strangers come here, two men, who look likesons of Jove. What are we to do? Shall we take their horses out, or tell themto find friends elsewhere as they best can?”Menelaus was very angry and said, “Eteoneus, son of Boethous, you neverused to be a fool, but now you talk like a simpleton. Take their horses out, ofcourse, and show the strangers in that they may have supper; you and I havestaid often enough at other people’s houses before we got back here,where heaven grant that we may rest in peace henceforward.”So Eteoneus bustled back and bade the other servants come with him. They tooktheir sweating steeds from under the yoke, made them fast to the mangers, andgave them a feed of oats and barley mixed. Then they leaned the chariot againstthe end wall of the courtyard, and led the way into the house. Telemachus andPisistratus were astonished when they saw it, for its splendour was as that ofthe sun and moon; then, when they had admired everything to their heart’scontent, they went into the bath room and washed themselves.When the servants had washed them and anointed them with oil, they brought themwoollen cloaks and shirts, and the two took their seats by the side ofMenelaus. A maid-servant brought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, andpoured it into a silver basin for them to wash their hands; and she drew aclean table beside them. An upper servant brought them bread, and offered themmany good things of what there was in the house, while the carver fetched themplates of all manner of meats and set cups of gold by their side.Menelaus then greeted them saying, “Fall to, and welcome; when you havedone supper I shall ask who you are, for the lineage of such men as you cannothave been lost. You must be descended from a line of sceptre-bearing kings, forpoor people do not have such sons as you are.”On this he handed them[39] a piece of fat roast loin, which hadbeen set near him as being a prime part, and they laid their hands on the goodthings that were before them; as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink,Telemachus said to the son of Nestor, with his head so close that no one mighthear, “Look, Pisistratus, man after my own heart, see the gleam of bronzeand gold—of amber,[40] ivory, and silver. Everything is sosplendid that it is like seeing the palace of Olympian Jove. I am lost inadmiration.”Menelaus overheard him and said, “No one, my sons, can hold his own withJove, for his house and everything about him is immortal; but among mortalmen—well, there may be another who has as much wealth as I have, or theremay not; but at all events I have travelled much and have undergone muchhardship, for it was nearly eight years before I could get home with my fleet.I went to Cyprus, Phoenicia and the Egyptians; I went also to the Ethiopians,the Sidonians, and the Erembians, and to Libya where the lambs have horns assoon as they are born, and the sheep lamb down three times a year. Every one inthat country, whether master or man, has plenty of cheese, meat, and good milk,for the ewes yield all the year round. But while I was travelling and gettinggreat riches among these people, my brother was secretly and shockinglymurdered through the perfidy of his wicked wife, so that I have no pleasure inbeing lord of all this wealth. Whoever your parents may be they must have toldyou about all this, and of my heavy loss in the ruin[41] of a stately mansion fully andmagnificently furnished. Would that I had only a third of what I now have sothat I had stayed at home, and all those were living who perished on the plainof Troy, far from Argos. I often grieve, as I sit here in my house, for one andall of them. At times I cry aloud for sorrow, but presently I leave off again,for crying is cold comfort and one soon tires of it. Yet grieve for these as Imay, I do so for one man more than for them all. I cannot even think of himwithout loathing both food and sleep, so miserable does he make me, for no oneof all the Achaeans worked so hard or risked so much as he did. He took nothingby it, and has left a legacy of sorrow to myself, for he has been gone a longtime, and we know not whether he is alive or dead. His old father, hislong-suffering wife Penelope, and his son Telemachus, whom he left behind himan infant in arms, are plunged in grief on his account.”Thus spoke Menelaus, and the heart of Telemachus yearned as he bethought him ofhis father. Tears fell from his eyes as he heard him thus mentioned, so that heheld his cloak before his face with both hands. When Menelaus saw this hedoubted whether to let him choose his own time for speaking, or to ask him atonce and find what it was all about.While he was thus in two minds Helen came down from her high vaulted andperfumed room, looking as lovely as Diana herself. Adraste brought her a seat,Alcippe a soft woollen rug while Phylo fetched her the silver work-box whichAlcandra wife of Polybus had given her. Polybus lived in Egyptian Thebes, whichis the richest city in the whole world; he gave Menelaus two baths, both ofpure silver, two tripods, and ten talents of gold; besides all this, his wifegave Helen some beautiful presents, to wit, a golden distaff, and a silver workbox that ran on wheels, with a gold band round the top of it. Phylo now placedthis by her side, full of fine spun yarn, and a distaff charged with violetcoloured wool was laid upon the top of it. Then Helen took her seat, put herfeet upon the footstool, and began to question her husband.[42]“Do we know, Menelaus,” said she, “the names of thesestrangers who have come to visit us? Shall I guess right or wrong?—but Icannot help saying what I think. Never yet have I seen either man or woman solike somebody else (indeed when I look at him I hardly know what to think) asthis young man is like Telemachus, whom Ulysses left as a baby behind him, whenyou Achaeans went to Troy with battle in your hearts, on account of my mostshameless self.”“My dear wife,” replied Menelaus, “I see the likeness just asyou do. His hands and feet are just like Ulysses; so is his hair, with theshape of his head and the expression of his eyes. Moreover, when I was talkingabout Ulysses, and saying how much he had suffered on my account, tears fellfrom his eyes, and he hid his face in his mantle.”Then Pisistratus said, “Menelaus, son of Atreus, you are right inthinking that this young man is Telemachus, but he is very modest, and isashamed to come here and begin opening up discourse with one whose conversationis so divinely interesting as your own. My father, Nestor, sent me to escorthim hither, for he wanted to know whether you could give him any counsel orsuggestion. A son has always trouble at home when his father has gone awayleaving him without supporters; and this is how Telemachus is now placed, forhis father is absent, and there is no one among his own people to stand byhim.”“Bless my heart,” replied Menelaus, “then I am receiving avisit from the son of a very dear friend, who suffered much hardship for mysake. I had always hoped to entertain him with most marked distinction whenheaven had granted us a safe return from beyond the seas. I should have foundeda city for him in Argos, and built him a house. I should have made him leaveIthaca with his goods, his son, and all his people, and should have sacked forthem some one of the neighbouring cities that are subject to me. We should thushave seen one another continually, and nothing but death could have interruptedso close and happy an intercourse. I suppose, however, that heaven grudged ussuch great good fortune, for it has prevented the poor fellow from ever gettinghome at all.”Thus did he speak, and his words set them all a weeping. Helen wept, Telemachuswept, and so did Menelaus, nor could Pisistratus keep his eyes from filling,when he remembered his dear brother Antilochus whom the son of bright Dawn hadkilled. Thereon he said to Menelaus,“Sir, my father Nestor, when we used to talk about you at home, told meyou were a person of rare and excellent understanding. If, then, it bepossible, do as I would urge you. I am not fond of crying while I am getting mysupper. Morning will come in due course, and in the forenoon I care not howmuch I cry for those that are dead and gone. This is all we can do for the poorthings. We can only shave our heads for them and wring the tears from ourcheeks. I had a brother who died at Troy; he was by no means the worst manthere; you are sure to have known him—his name was Antilochus; I neverset eyes upon him myself, but they say that he was singularly fleet of foot andin fight valiant.”“Your discretion, my friend,” answered Menelaus, “is beyondyour years. It is plain you take after your father. One can soon see when a manis son to one whom heaven has blessed both as regards wife andoffspring—and it has blessed Nestor from first to last all his days,giving him a green old age in his own house, with sons about him who are bothwell disposed and valiant. We will put an end therefore to all this weeping,and attend to our supper again. Let water be poured over our hands. Telemachusand I can talk with one another fully in the morning.”On this Asphalion, one of the servants, poured water over their hands and theylaid their hands on the good things that were before them.Then Jove’s daughter Helen bethought her of another matter. She druggedthe wine with an herb that banishes all care, sorrow, and ill humour. Whoeverdrinks wine thus drugged cannot shed a single tear all the rest of the day, noteven though his father and mother both of them drop down dead, or he sees abrother or a son hewn in pieces before his very eyes. This drug, of suchsovereign power and virtue, had been given to Helen by Polydamna wife of Thon,a woman of Egypt, where there grow all sorts of herbs, some good to put intothe mixing bowl and others poisonous. Moreover, every one in the whole countryis a skilled physician, for they are of the race of Paeeon. When Helen had putthis drug in the bowl, and had told the servants to serve the wine round, shesaid:“Menelaus, son of Atreus, and you my good friends, sons of honourable men(which is as Jove wills, for he is the giver both of good and evil, and can dowhat he chooses), feast here as you will, and listen while I tell you a tale inseason. I cannot indeed name every single one of the exploits of Ulysses, but Ican say what he did when he was before Troy, and you Achaeans were in all sortsof difficulties. He covered himself with wounds and bruises, dressed himselfall in rags, and entered the enemy’s city looking like a menial or abeggar, and quite different from what he did when he was among his own people.In this disguise he entered the city of Troy, and no one said anything to him.I alone recognised him and began to question him, but he was too cunning forme. When, however, I had washed and anointed him and had given him clothes, andafter I had sworn a solemn oath not to betray him to the Trojans till he hadgot safely back to his own camp and to the ships, he told me all that theAchaeans meant to do. He killed many Trojans and got much information before hereached the Argive camp, for all which things the Trojan women madelamentation, but for my own part I was glad, for my heart was beginning toyearn after my home, and I was unhappy about the wrong that Venus had done mein taking me over there, away from my country, my girl, and my lawful weddedhusband, who is indeed by no means deficient either in person orunderstanding.”Then Menelaus said, “All that you have been saying, my dear wife, istrue. I have travelled much, and have had much to do with heroes, but I havenever seen such another man as Ulysses. What endurance too, and what courage hedisplayed within the wooden horse, wherein all the bravest of the Argives werelying in wait to bring death and destruction upon the Trojans.[43] At that momentyou came up to us; some god who wished well to the Trojans must have set you onto it and you had Deiphobus with you. Three times did you go all round ourhiding place and pat it; you called our chiefs each by his own name, andmimicked all our wives—Diomed, Ulysses, and I from our seats inside heardwhat a noise you made. Diomed and I could not make up our minds whether tospring out then and there, or to answer you from inside, but Ulysses held usall in check, so we sat quite still, all except Anticlus, who was beginning toanswer you, when Ulysses clapped his two brawny hands over his mouth, and keptthem there. It was this that saved us all, for he muzzled Anticlus till Minervatook you away again.”“How sad,” exclaimed Telemachus, “that all this was of noavail to save him, nor yet his own iron courage. But now, sir, be pleased tosend us all to bed, that we may lie down and enjoy the blessed boon ofsleep.”On this Helen told the maid servants to set beds in the room that was in thegatehouse, and to make them with good red rugs, and spread coverlets on the topof them with woollen cloaks for the guests to wear. So the maids went out,carrying a torch, and made the beds, to which a man-servant presently conductedthe strangers. Thus, then, did Telemachus and Pisistratus sleep there in theforecourt, while the son of Atreus lay in an inner room with lovely Helen byhis side.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Menelaus rose anddressed himself. He bound his sandals on to his comely feet, girded his swordabout his shoulders, and left his room looking like an immortal god. Then,taking a seat near Telemachus he said:“And what, Telemachus, has led you to take this long sea voyage toLacedaemon? Are you on public, or private business? Tell me all aboutit.”“I have come, sir,” replied Telemachus, “to see if you cantell me anything about my father. I am being eaten out of house and home; myfair estate is being wasted, and my house is full of miscreants who keepkilling great numbers of my sheep and oxen, on the pretence of paying theiraddresses to my mother. Therefore, I am suppliant at your knees if haply youmay tell me about my father’s melancholy end, whether you saw it withyour own eyes, or heard it from some other traveller; for he was a man born totrouble. Do not soften things out of any pity for myself, but tell me in allplainness exactly what you saw. If my brave father Ulysses ever did you loyalservice either by word or deed, when you Achaeans were harassed by the Trojans,bear it in mind now as in my favour and tell me truly all.”Menelaus on hearing this was very much shocked. “So,” he exclaimed,“these cowards would usurp a brave man’s bed? A hind might as welllay her new born young in the lair of a lion, and then go off to feed in theforest or in some grassy dell: the lion when he comes back to his lair willmake short work with the pair of them—and so will Ulysses with thesesuitors. By father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, if Ulysses is still the man thathe was when he wrestled with Philomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavilythat all the Achaeans cheered him—if he is still such and were to comenear these suitors, they would have a short shrift and a sorry wedding. Asregards your questions, however, I will not prevaricate nor deceive you, butwill tell you without concealment all that the old man of the sea told me.“I was trying to come on here, but the gods detained me in Egypt, for myhecatombs had not given them full satisfaction, and the gods are very strictabout having their dues. Now off Egypt, about as far as a ship can sail in aday with a good stiff breeze behind her, there is an island calledPharos—it has a good harbour from which vessels can get out into open seawhen they have taken in water—and here the gods becalmed me twenty dayswithout so much as a breath of fair wind to help me forward. We should have runclean out of provisions and my men would have starved, if a goddess had nottaken pity upon me and saved me in the person of Idothea, daughter to Proteus,the old man of the sea, for she had taken a great fancy to me.“She came to me one day when I was by myself, as I often was, for the menused to go with their barbed hooks, all over the island in the hope of catchinga fish or two to save them from the pangs of hunger. ‘Stranger,’said she, ‘it seems to me that you like starving in this way—at anyrate it does not greatly trouble you, for you stick here day after day, withouteven trying to get away though your men are dying by inches.’“‘Let me tell you,’ said I, ‘whichever of the goddessesyou may happen to be, that I am not staying here of my own accord, but musthave offended the gods that live in heaven. Tell me, therefore, for the godsknow everything, which of the immortals it is that is hindering me in this way,and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as to reach my home.’“‘Stranger,’ replied she, ‘I will make it all quiteclear to you. There is an old immortal who lives under the sea hereabouts andwhose name is Proteus. He is an Egyptian, and people say he is my father; he isNeptune’s head man and knows every inch of ground all over the bottom ofthe sea. If you can snare him and hold him tight, he will tell you about yourvoyage, what courses you are to take, and how you are to sail the sea so as toreach your home. He will also tell you, if you so will, all that has been goingon at your house both good and bad, while you have been away on your long anddangerous journey.’“‘Can you show me,’ said I, ‘some stratagem by means ofwhich I may catch this old god without his suspecting it and finding me out?For a god is not easily caught—not by a mortal man.’“‘Stranger,’ said she, ‘I will make it all quite clearto you. About the time when the sun shall have reached mid heaven, the old manof the sea comes up from under the waves, heralded by the West wind that fursthe water over his head. As soon as he has come up he lies down, and goes tosleep in a great sea cave, where the seals—Halosydne’s chickens asthey call them—come up also from the grey sea, and go to sleep in shoalsall round him; and a very strong and fish-like smell do they bring with them.[44] Earlyto-morrow morning I will take you to this place and will lay you in ambush.Pick out, therefore, the three best men you have in your fleet, and I will tellyou all the tricks that the old man will play you.“‘First he will look over all his seals, and count them; then, whenhe has seen them and tallied them on his five fingers, he will go to sleepamong them, as a shepherd among his sheep. The moment you see that he is asleepseize him; put forth all your strength and hold him fast, for he will do hisvery utmost to get away from you. He will turn himself into every kind ofcreature that goes upon the earth, and will become also both fire and water;but you must hold him fast and grip him tighter and tighter, till he begins totalk to you and comes back to what he was when you saw him go to sleep; thenyou may slacken your hold and let him go; and you can ask him which of the godsit is that is angry with you, and what you must do to reach your home over theseas.’“Having so said she dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to theplace where my ships were ranged upon the shore; and my heart was clouded withcare as I went along. When I reached my ship we got supper ready, for night wasfalling, and camped down upon the beach.“When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, I took the threemen on whose prowess of all kinds I could most rely, and went along by thesea-side, praying heartily to heaven. Meanwhile the goddess fetched me up fourseal skins from the bottom of the sea, all of them just skinned, for she meantplaying a trick upon her father. Then she dug four pits for us to lie in, andsat down to wait till we should come up. When we were close to her, she made uslie down in the pits one after the other, and threw a seal skin over each ofus. Our ambuscade would have been intolerable, for the stench of the fishyseals was most distressing[45]—who would go to bed with a seamonster if he could help it?—but here, too, the goddess helped us, andthought of something that gave us great relief, for she put some ambrosia undereach man’s nostrils, which was so fragrant that it killed the smell ofthe seals.[46]“We waited the whole morning and made the best of it, watching the sealscome up in hundreds to bask upon the sea shore, till at noon the old man of thesea came up too, and when he had found his fat seals he went over them andcounted them. We were among the first he counted, and he never suspected anyguile, but laid himself down to sleep as soon as he had done counting. Then werushed upon him with a shout and seized him; on which he began at once with hisold tricks, and changed himself first into a lion with a great mane; then allof a sudden he became a dragon, a leopard, a wild boar; the next moment he wasrunning water, and then again directly he was a tree, but we stuck to him andnever lost hold, till at last the cunning old creature became distressed, andsaid, ‘Which of the gods was it, Son of Atreus, that hatched this plotwith you for snaring me and seizing me against my will? What do youwant?’“‘You know that yourself, old man,’ I answered, ‘youwill gain nothing by trying to put me off. It is because I have been kept solong in this island, and see no sign of my being able to get away. I am losingall heart; tell me, then, for you gods know everything, which of the immortalsit is that is hindering me, and tell me also how I may sail the sea so as toreach my home?’“Then,’ he said, ‘if you would finish your voyage and gethome quickly, you must offer sacrifices to Jove and to the rest of the godsbefore embarking; for it is decreed that you shall not get back to yourfriends, and to your own house, till you have returned to the heaven-fed streamof Egypt, and offered holy hecatombs to the immortal gods that reign in heaven.When you have done this they will let you finish your voyage.’“I was broken hearted when I heard that I must go back all that long andterrible voyage to Egypt;[47] nevertheless, I answered, ‘Iwill do all, old man, that you have laid upon me; but now tell me, and tell metrue, whether all the Achaeans whom Nestor and I left behind us when we setsail from Troy have got home safely, or whether any one of them came to a badend either on board his own ship or among his friends when the days of hisfighting were done.’“‘Son of Atreus,’ he answered, ‘why ask me? You hadbetter not know what I can tell you, for your eyes will surely fill when youhave heard my story. Many of those about whom you ask are dead and gone, butmany still remain, and only two of the chief men among the Achaeans perishedduring their return home. As for what happened on the field of battle—youwere there yourself. A third Achaean leader is still at sea, alive, buthindered from returning. Ajax was wrecked, for Neptune drove him on to thegreat rocks of Gyrae; nevertheless, he let him get safe out of the water, andin spite of all Minerva’s hatred he would have escaped death, if he hadnot ruined himself by boasting. He said the gods could not drown him eventhough they had tried to do so, and when Neptune heard this large talk, heseized his trident in his two brawny hands, and split the rock of Gyrae in twopieces. The base remained where it was, but the part on which Ajax was sittingfell headlong into the sea and carried Ajax with it; so he drank salt water andwas drowned.“‘Your brother and his ships escaped, for Juno protected him, butwhen he was just about to reach the high promontory of Malea, he was caught bya heavy gale which carried him out to sea again sorely against his will, anddrove him to the foreland where Thyestes used to dwell, but where Aegisthus wasthen living. By and by, however, it seemed as though he was to return safelyafter all, for the gods backed the wind into its old quarter and they reachedhome; whereon Agamemnon kissed his native soil, and shed tears of joy atfinding himself in his own country.“‘Now there was a watchman whom Aegisthus kept always on the watch,and to whom he had promised two talents of gold. This man had been looking outfor a whole year to make sure that Agamemnon did not give him the slip andprepare war; when, therefore, this man saw Agamemnon go by, he went and toldAegisthus, who at once began to lay a plot for him. He picked twenty of hisbravest warriors and placed them in ambuscade on one side the cloister, whileon the opposite side he prepared a banquet. Then he sent his chariots andhorsemen to Agamemnon, and invited him to the feast, but he meant foul play. Hegot him there, all unsuspicious of the doom that was awaiting him, and killedhim when the banquet was over as though he were butchering an ox in theshambles; not one of Agamemnon’s followers was left alive, nor yet one ofAegisthus’, but they were all killed there in the cloisters.’“Thus spoke Proteus, and I was broken hearted as I heard him. I sat downupon the sands and wept; I felt as though I could no longer bear to live norlook upon the light of the sun. Presently, when I had had my fill of weepingand writhing upon the ground, the old man of the sea said, ‘Son ofAtreus, do not waste any more time in crying so bitterly; it can do no mannerof good; find your way home as fast as ever you can, for Aegisthus may be stillalive, and even though Orestes has been beforehand with you in killing him, youmay yet come in for his funeral.’“On this I took comfort in spite of all my sorrow, and said, ‘Iknow, then, about these two; tell me, therefore, about the third man of whomyou spoke; is he still alive, but at sea, and unable to get home? or is hedead? Tell me, no matter how much it may grieve me.’“‘The third man,’ he answered, ‘is Ulysses who dwellsin Ithaca. I can see him in an island sorrowing bitterly in the house of thenymph Calypso, who is keeping him prisoner, and he cannot reach his home for hehas no ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. As for your own end,Menelaus, you shall not die in Argos, but the gods will take you to the Elysianplain, which is at the ends of the world. There fair-haired Rhadamanthusreigns, and men lead an easier life than any where else in the world, for inElysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow, but Oceanus breathes everwith a West wind that sings softly from the sea, and gives fresh life to allmen. This will happen to you because you have married Helen, and areJove’s son-in-law.’“As he spoke he dived under the waves, whereon I turned back to the shipswith my companions, and my heart was clouded with care as I went along. When wereached the ships we got supper ready, for night was falling, and camped downupon the beach. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we drewour ships into the water, and put our masts and sails within them; then we wenton board ourselves, took our seats on the benches, and smote the grey sea withour oars. I again stationed my ships in the heaven-fed stream of Egypt, andoffered hecatombs that were full and sufficient. When I had thus appeasedheaven’s anger, I raised a barrow to the memory of Agamemnon that hisname might live for ever, after which I had a quick passage home, for the godssent me a fair wind.“And now for yourself—stay here some ten or twelve days longer, andI will then speed you on your way. I will make you a noble present of a chariotand three horses. I will also give you a beautiful chalice that so long as youlive you may think of me whenever you make a drink-offering to the immortalgods.”“Son of Atreus,” replied Telemachus, “do not press me to staylonger; I should be contented to remain with you for another twelve months; Ifind your conversation so delightful that I should never once wish myself athome with my parents; but my crew whom I have left at Pylos are alreadyimpatient, and you are detaining me from them. As for any present you may bedisposed to make me, I had rather that it should be a piece of plate. I willtake no horses back with me to Ithaca, but will leave them to adorn your ownstables, for you have much flat ground in your kingdom where lotus thrives, asalso meadow-sweet and wheat and barley, and oats with their white and spreadingears; whereas in Ithaca we have neither open fields nor racecourses, and thecountry is more fit for goats than horses, and I like it the better for that.[48] None of ourislands have much level ground, suitable for horses, and Ithaca least ofall.”Menelaus smiled and took Telemachus’s hand within his own. “Whatyou say,” said he, “shows that you come of good family. I both can,and will, make this exchange for you, by giving you the finest and mostprecious piece of plate in all my house. It is a mixing bowl by Vulcan’sown hand, of pure silver, except the rim, which is inlaid with gold. Phaedimus,king of the Sidonians, gave it me in the course of a visit which I paid himwhen I returned thither on my homeward journey. I will make you a present ofit.”Thus did they converse [and guests kept coming to the king’s house. Theybrought sheep and wine, while their wives had put up bread for them to takewith them; so they were busy cooking their dinners in the courts].[49]Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs or aiming with spears at a mark onthe levelled ground in front of Ulysses’ house, and were behaving withall their old insolence. Antinous and Eurymachus, who were their ringleadersand much the foremost among them all, were sitting together when Noemon son ofPhronius came up and said to Antinous,“Have we any idea, Antinous, on what day Telemachus returns from Pylos?He has a ship of mine, and I want it, to cross over to Elis: I have twelvebrood mares there with yearling mule foals by their side not yet broken in, andI want to bring one of them over here and break him.”They were astounded when they heard this, for they had made sure thatTelemachus had not gone to the city of Neleus. They thought he was only awaysomewhere on the farms, and was with the sheep, or with the swineherd; soAntinous said, “When did he go? Tell me truly, and what young men did hetake with him? Were they freemen or his own bondsmen—for he might managethat too? Tell me also, did you let him have the ship of your own free willbecause he asked you, or did he take it without your leave?”“I lent it him,” answered Noemon, “what else could I do whena man of his position said he was in a difficulty, and asked me to oblige him?I could not possibly refuse. As for those who went with him they were the bestyoung men we have, and I saw Mentor go on board as captain—or some godwho was exactly like him. I cannot understand it, for I saw Mentor here myselfyesterday morning, and yet he was then setting out for Pylos.”Noemon then went back to his father’s house, but Antinous and Eurymachuswere very angry. They told the others to leave off playing, and to come and sitdown along with themselves. When they came, Antinous son of Eupeithes spoke inanger. His heart was black with rage, and his eyes flashed fire as he said:“Good heavens, this voyage of Telemachus is a very serious matter; we hadmade sure that it would come to nothing, but the young fellow has got away inspite of us, and with a picked crew too. He will be giving us troublepresently; may Jove take him before he is full grown. Find me a ship,therefore, with a crew of twenty men, and I will lie in wait for him in thestraits between Ithaca and Samos; he will then rue the day that he set out totry and get news of his father.”Thus did he speak, and the others applauded his saying; they then all of themwent inside the buildings.It was not long ere Penelope came to know what the suitors were plotting; for aman servant, Medon, overheard them from outside the outer court as they werelaying their schemes within, and went to tell his mistress. As he crossed thethreshold of her room Penelope said: “Medon, what have the suitors sentyou here for? Is it to tell the maids to leave their master’s businessand cook dinner for them? I wish they may neither woo nor dine henceforward,neither here nor anywhere else, but let this be the very last time, for thewaste you all make of my son’s estate. Did not your fathers tell you whenyou were children, how good Ulysses had been to them—never doing anythinghigh-handed, nor speaking harshly to anybody? Kings may say things sometimes,and they may take a fancy to one man and dislike another, but Ulysses never didan unjust thing by anybody—which shows what bad hearts you have, and thatthere is no such thing as gratitude left in this world.”Then Medon said, “I wish, Madam, that this were all; but they areplotting something much more dreadful now—may heaven frustrate theirdesign. They are going to try and murder Telemachus as he is coming home fromPylos and Lacedaemon, where he has been to get news of his father.”Then Penelope’s heart sank within her, and for a long time she wasspeechless; her eyes filled with tears, and she could find no utterance. Atlast, however, she said, “Why did my son leave me? What business had heto go sailing off in ships that make long voyages over the ocean likesea-horses? Does he want to die without leaving any one behind him to keep uphis name?”“I do not know,” answered Medon, “whether some god set him onto it, or whether he went on his own impulse to see if he could find out if hisfather was dead, or alive and on his way home.”Then he went downstairs again, leaving Penelope in an agony of grief. Therewere plenty of seats in the house, but she had no heart for sitting on any oneof them; she could only fling herself on the floor of her own room and cry;whereon all the maids in the house, both old and young, gathered round her andbegan to cry too, till at last in a transport of sorrow she exclaimed,“My dears, heaven has been pleased to try me with more affliction thanany other woman of my age and country. First I lost my brave and lion-heartedhusband, who had every good quality under heaven, and whose name was great overall Hellas and middle Argos, and now my darling son is at the mercy of thewinds and waves, without my having heard one word about his leaving home. Youhussies, there was not one of you would so much as think of giving me a callout of my bed, though you all of you very well knew when he was starting. If Ihad known he meant taking this voyage, he would have had to give it up, nomatter how much he was bent upon it, or leave me a corpse behind him—oneor other. Now, however, go some of you and call old Dolius, who was given me bymy father on my marriage, and who is my gardener. Bid him go at once and telleverything to Laertes, who may be able to hit on some plan for enlisting publicsympathy on our side, as against those who are trying to exterminate his ownrace and that of Ulysses.”Then the dear old nurse Euryclea said, “You may kill me, Madam, or let melive on in your house, whichever you please, but I will tell you the realtruth. I knew all about it, and gave him everything he wanted in the way ofbread and wine, but he made me take my solemn oath that I would not tell youanything for some ten or twelve days, unless you asked or happened to hear ofhis having gone, for he did not want you to spoil your beauty by crying. Andnow, Madam, wash your face, change your dress, and go upstairs with your maidsto offer prayers to Minerva, daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove, for she can savehim even though he be in the jaws of death. Do not trouble Laertes: he hastrouble enough already. Besides, I cannot think that the gods hate the race ofthe son of Arceisius so much, but there will be a son left to come up afterhim, and inherit both the house and the fair fields that lie far all roundit.”With these words she made her mistress leave off crying, and dried the tearsfrom her eyes. Penelope washed her face, changed her dress, and went upstairswith her maids. She then put some bruised barley into a basket and beganpraying to Minerva.“Hear me,” she cried, “Daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove,unweariable. If ever Ulysses while he was here burned you fat thigh bones ofsheep or heifer, bear it in mind now as in my favour, and save my darling sonfrom the villainy of the suitors.”She cried aloud as she spoke, and the goddess heard her prayer; meanwhile thesuitors were clamorous throughout the covered cloister, and one of them said:“The queen is preparing for her marriage with one or other of us. Littledoes she dream that her son has now been doomed to die.”This was what they said, but they did not know what was going to happen. ThenAntinous said, “Comrades, let there be no loud talking, lest some of itget carried inside. Let us be up and do that in silence, about which we are allof a mind.”He then chose twenty men, and they went down to their ship and to the sea side;they drew the vessel into the water and got her mast and sails inside her; theybound the oars to the thole-pins with twisted thongs of leather, all in duecourse, and spread the white sails aloft, while their fine servants broughtthem their armour. Then they made the ship fast a little way out, came on shoreagain, got their suppers, and waited till night should fall.But Penelope lay in her own room upstairs unable to eat or drink, and wonderingwhether her brave son would escape, or be overpowered by the wicked suitors.Like a lioness caught in the toils with huntsmen hemming her in on every sideshe thought and thought till she sank into a slumber, and lay on her bed bereftof thought and motion.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter, and made a vision in the likenessof Penelope’s sister Iphthime daughter of Icarius who had married Eumelusand lived in Pherae. She told the vision to go to the house of Ulysses, and tomake Penelope leave off crying, so it came into her room by the hole throughwhich the thong went for pulling the door to, and hovered over her head saying,“You are asleep, Penelope: the gods who live at ease will not suffer youto weep and be so sad. Your son has done them no wrong, so he will yet comeback to you.”Penelope, who was sleeping sweetly at the gates of dreamland, answered,“Sister, why have you come here? You do not come very often, but Isuppose that is because you live such a long way off. Am I, then, to leave offcrying and refrain from all the sad thoughts that torture me? I, who have lostmy brave and lion-hearted husband, who had every good quality under heaven, andwhose name was great over all Hellas and middle Argos; and now my darling sonhas gone off on board of a ship—a foolish fellow who has never been usedto roughing it, nor to going about among gatherings of men. I am even moreanxious about him than about my husband; I am all in a tremble when I think ofhim, lest something should happen to him, either from the people among whom hehas gone, or by sea, for he has many enemies who are plotting against him, andare bent on killing him before he can return home.”Then the vision said, “Take heart, and be not so much dismayed. There isone gone with him whom many a man would be glad enough to have stand by hisside, I mean Minerva; it is she who has compassion upon you, and who has sentme to bear you this message.”“Then,” said Penelope, “if you are a god or have been senthere by divine commission, tell me also about that other unhappy one—ishe still alive, or is he already dead and in the house of Hades?”And the vision said, “I shall not tell you for certain whether he isalive or dead, and there is no use in idle conversation.”Then it vanished through the thong-hole of the door and was dissipated intothin air; but Penelope rose from her sleep refreshed and comforted, so vividhad been her dream.Meantime the suitors went on board and sailed their ways over the sea, intenton murdering Telemachus. Now there is a rocky islet called Asteris, of no greatsize, in mid channel between Ithaca and Samos, and there is a harbour on eitherside of it where a ship can lie. Here then the Achaeans placed themselves inambush.BOOK VCALYPSO—ULYSSES REACHES SCHERIA ON A RAFT.And now, as Dawn rose from her couch beside Tithonus—harbinger of lightalike to mortals and immortals—the gods met in council and with them,Jove the lord of thunder, who is their king. Thereon Minerva began to tell themof the many sufferings of Ulysses, for she pitied him away there in the houseof the nymph Calypso.“Father Jove,” said she, “and all you other gods that live ineverlasting bliss, I hope there may never be such a thing as a kind andwell-disposed ruler any more, nor one who will govern equitably. I hope theywill be all henceforth cruel and unjust, for there is not one of his subjectsbut has forgotten Ulysses, who ruled them as though he were their father. Therehe is, lying in great pain in an island where dwells the nymph Calypso, whowill not let him go; and he cannot get back to his own country, for he can findneither ships nor sailors to take him over the sea. Furthermore, wicked peopleare now trying to murder his only son Telemachus, who is coming home from Pylosand Lacedaemon, where he has been to see if he can get news of hisfather.”“What, my dear, are you talking about?” replied her father,“did you not send him there yourself, because you thought it would helpUlysses to get home and punish the suitors? Besides, you are perfectly able toprotect Telemachus, and to see him safely home again, while the suitors have tocome hurry-skurrying back without having killed him.”When he had thus spoken, he said to his son Mercury, “Mercury, you areour messenger, go therefore and tell Calypso we have decreed that poor Ulyssesis to return home. He is to be convoyed neither by gods nor men, but after aperilous voyage of twenty days upon a raft he is to reach fertile Scheria,[50] the land of thePhaeacians, who are near of kin to the gods, and will honour him as though hewere one of ourselves. They will send him in a ship to his own country, andwill give him more bronze and gold and raiment than he would have brought backfrom Troy, if he had had all his prize money and had got home without disaster.This is how we have settled that he shall return to his country and hisfriends.”Thus he spoke, and Mercury, guide and guardian, slayer of Argus, did as he wastold. Forthwith he bound on his glittering golden sandals with which he couldfly like the wind over land and sea. He took the wand with which he sealsmen’s eyes in sleep or wakes them just as he pleases, and flew holding itin his hand over Pieria; then he swooped down through the firmament till hereached the level of the sea, whose waves he skimmed like a cormorant thatflies fishing every hole and corner of the ocean, and drenching its thickplumage in the spray. He flew and flew over many a weary wave, but when at lasthe got to the island which was his journey’s end, he left the sea andwent on by land till he came to the cave where the nymph Calypso lived.He found her at home. There was a large fire burning on the hearth, and onecould smell from far the fragrant reek of burning cedar and sandal wood. As forherself, she was busy at her loom, shooting her golden shuttle through the warpand singing beautifully. Round her cave there was a thick wood of alder,poplar, and sweet smelling cypress trees, wherein all kinds of great birds hadbuilt their nests—owls, hawks, and chattering sea-crows that occupy theirbusiness in the waters. A vine loaded with grapes was trained and grewluxuriantly about the mouth of the cave; there were also four running rills ofwater in channels cut pretty close together, and turned hither and thither soas to irrigate the beds of violets and luscious herbage over which they flowed.[51] Even a godcould not help being charmed with such a lovely spot, so Mercury stood stilland looked at it; but when he had admired it sufficiently he went inside thecave.Calypso knew him at once—for the gods all know each other, no matter howfar they live from one another—but Ulysses was not within; he was on thesea-shore as usual, looking out upon the barren ocean with tears in his eyes,groaning and breaking his heart for sorrow. Calypso gave Mercury a seat andsaid: “Why have you come to see me, Mercury—honoured, and everwelcome—for you do not visit me often? Say what you want; I will do itfor you at once if I can, and if it can be done at all; but come inside, andlet me set refreshment before you.”As she spoke she drew a table loaded with ambrosia beside him and mixed himsome red nectar, so Mercury ate and drank till he had had enough, and thensaid:“We are speaking god and goddess to one another, and you ask me why Ihave come here, and I will tell you truly as you would have me do. Jove sentme; it was no doing of mine; who could possibly want to come all this way overthe sea where there are no cities full of people to offer me sacrifices orchoice hecatombs? Nevertheless I had to come, for none of us other gods cancross Jove, nor transgress his orders. He says that you have here the mostill-starred of all those who fought nine years before the city of King Priamand sailed home in the tenth year after having sacked it. On their way homethey sinned against Minerva,[52] who raised both wind and wavesagainst them, so that all his brave companions perished, and he alone wascarried hither by wind and tide. Jove says that you are to let this man go atonce, for it is decreed that he shall not perish here, far from his own people,but shall return to his house and country and see his friends again.”Calypso trembled with rage when she heard this, “You gods,” sheexclaimed, “ought to be ashamed of yourselves. You are always jealous andhate seeing a goddess take a fancy to a mortal man, and live with him in openmatrimony. So when rosy-fingered Dawn made love to Orion, you precious godswere all of you furious till Diana went and killed him in Ortygia. So againwhen Ceres fell in love with Iasion, and yielded to him in a thrice-ploughedfallow field, Jove came to hear of it before so very long and killed Iasionwith his thunderbolts. And now you are angry with me too because I have a manhere. I found the poor creature sitting all alone astride of a keel, for Jovehad struck his ship with lightning and sunk it in mid ocean, so that all hiscrew were drowned, while he himself was driven by wind and waves on to myisland. I got fond of him and cherished him, and had set my heart on making himimmortal, so that he should never grow old all his days; still I cannot crossJove, nor bring his counsels to nothing; therefore, if he insists upon it, letthe man go beyond the seas again; but I cannot send him anywhere myself for Ihave neither ships nor men who can take him. Nevertheless I will readily givehim such advice, in all good faith, as will be likely to bring him safely tohis own country.”“Then send him away,” said Mercury, “or Jove will be angrywith you and punish you”.On this he took his leave, and Calypso went out to look for Ulysses, for shehad heard Jove’s message. She found him sitting upon the beach with hiseyes ever filled with tears, and dying of sheer home sickness; for he had gottired of Calypso, and though he was forced to sleep with her in the cave bynight, it was she, not he, that would have it so. As for the day time, he spentit on the rocks and on the sea shore, weeping, crying aloud for his despair,and always looking out upon the sea. Calypso then went close up to him said:“My poor fellow, you shall not stay here grieving and fretting your lifeout any longer. I am going to send you away of my own free will; so go, cutsome beams of wood, and make yourself a large raft with an upper deck that itmay carry you safely over the sea. I will put bread, wine, and water on boardto save you from starving. I will also give you clothes, and will send you afair wind to take you home, if the gods in heaven so will it—for theyknow more about these things, and can settle them better than I can.”Ulysses shuddered as he heard her. “Now goddess,” he answered,“there is something behind all this; you cannot be really meaning to helpme home when you bid me do such a dreadful thing as put to sea on a raft. Noteven a well found ship with a fair wind could venture on such a distant voyage:nothing that you can say or do shall make me go on board a raft unless youfirst solemnly swear that you mean me no mischief.”Calypso smiled at this and caressed him with her hand: “You know a greatdeal,” said she, “but you are quite wrong here. May heaven aboveand earth below be my witnesses, with the waters of the river Styx—andthis is the most solemn oath which a blessed god can take—that I mean youno sort of harm, and am only advising you to do exactly what I should do myselfin your place. I am dealing with you quite straightforwardly; my heart is notmade of iron, and I am very sorry for you.”When she had thus spoken she led the way rapidly before him, and Ulyssesfollowed in her steps; so the pair, goddess and man, went on and on till theycame to Calypso’s cave, where Ulysses took the seat that Mercury had justleft. Calypso set meat and drink before him of the food that mortals eat; buther maids brought ambrosia and nectar for herself, and they laid their hands onthe good things that were before them. When they had satisfied themselves withmeat and drink, Calypso spoke, saying:“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, so you would start home to your own landat once? Good luck go with you, but if you could only know how much sufferingis in store for you before you get back to your own country, you would staywhere you are, keep house along with me, and let me make you immortal, nomatter how anxious you may be to see this wife of yours, of whom you arethinking all the time day after day; yet I flatter myself that I am no whitless tall or well-looking than she is, for it is not to be expected that amortal woman should compare in beauty with an immortal.”“Goddess,” replied Ulysses, “do not be angry with me aboutthis. I am quite aware that my wife Penelope is nothing like so tall or sobeautiful as yourself. She is only a woman, whereas you are an immortal.Nevertheless, I want to get home, and can think of nothing else. If some godwrecks me when I am on the sea, I will bear it and make the best of it. I havehad infinite trouble both by land and sea already, so let this go with therest.”Presently the sun set and it became dark, whereon the pair retired into theinner part of the cave and went to bed.When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ulysses put on his shirtand cloak, while the goddess wore a dress of a light gossamer fabric, very fineand graceful, with a beautiful golden girdle about her waist and a veil tocover her head. She at once set herself to think how she could speed Ulysses onhis way. So she gave him a great bronze axe that suited his hands; it wassharpened on both sides, and had a beautiful olive-wood handle fitted firmly onto it. She also gave him a sharp adze, and then led the way to the far end ofthe island where the largest trees grew—alder, poplar and pine, thatreached the sky—very dry and well seasoned, so as to sail light for himin the water.[53]Then, when she had shown him where the best trees grew, Calypso went home,leaving him to cut them, which he soon finished doing. He cut down twenty treesin all and adzed them smooth, squaring them by rule in good workmanlikefashion. Meanwhile Calypso came back with some augers, so he bored holes withthem and fitted the timbers together with bolts and rivets. He made the raft asbroad as a skilled shipwright makes the beam of a large vessel, and he fixed adeck on top of the ribs, and ran a gunwale all round it. He also made a mastwith a yard arm, and a rudder to steer with. He fenced the raft all round withwicker hurdles as a protection against the waves, and then he threw on aquantity of wood. By and by Calypso brought him some linen to make the sails,and he made these too, excellently, making them fast with braces and sheets.Last of all, with the help of levers, he drew the raft down into the water.In four days he had completed the whole work, and on the fifth Calypso sent himfrom the island after washing him and giving him some clean clothes. She gavehim a goat skin full of black wine, and another larger one of water; she alsogave him a wallet full of provisions, and found him in much good meat.Moreover, she made the wind fair and warm for him, and gladly did Ulyssesspread his sail before it, while he sat and guided the raft skilfully by meansof the rudder. He never closed his eyes, but kept them fixed on the Pleiads, onlate-setting Bootes, and on the Bear—which men also call the wain, andwhich turns round and round where it is, facing Orion, and alone never dippinginto the stream of Oceanus—for Calypso had told him to keep this to hisleft. Days seven and ten did he sail over the sea, and on the eighteenth thedim outlines of the mountains on the nearest part of the Phaeacian coastappeared, rising like a shield on the horizon.But King Neptune, who was returning from the Ethiopians, caught sight ofUlysses a long way off, from the mountains of the Solymi. He could see himsailing upon the sea, and it made him very angry, so he wagged his head andmuttered to himself, saying, “Good heavens, so the gods have beenchanging their minds about Ulysses while I was away in Ethiopia, and now he isclose to the land of the Phaeacians, where it is decreed that he shall escapefrom the calamities that have befallen him. Still, he shall have plenty ofhardship yet before he has done with it.”Thereon he gathered his clouds together, grasped his trident, stirred it roundin the sea, and roused the rage of every wind that blows till earth, sea, andsky were hidden in cloud, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. Winds fromEast, South, North, and West fell upon him all at the same time, and atremendous sea got up, so that Ulysses’ heart began to fail him.“Alas,” he said to himself in his dismay, “what ever willbecome of me? I am afraid Calypso was right when she said I should have troubleby sea before I got back home. It is all coming true. How black is Jove makingheaven with his clouds, and what a sea the winds are raising from every quarterat once. I am now safe to perish. Blest and thrice blest were those Danaans whofell before Troy in the cause of the sons of Atreus. Would that I had beenkilled on the day when the Trojans were pressing me so sorely about the deadbody of Achilles, for then I should have had due burial and the Achaeans wouldhave honoured my name; but now it seems that I shall come to a most pitiableend.”As he spoke a sea broke over him with such terrific fury that the raft reeledagain, and he was carried overboard a long way off. He let go the helm, and theforce of the hurricane was so great that it broke the mast half way up, andboth sail and yard went over into the sea. For a long time Ulysses was underwater, and it was all he could do to rise to the surface again, for the clothesCalypso had given him weighed him down; but at last he got his head above waterand spat out the bitter brine that was running down his face in streams. Inspite of all this, however, he did not lose sight of his raft, but swam as fastas he could towards it, got hold of it, and climbed on board again so as toescape drowning. The sea took the raft and tossed it about as Autumn windswhirl thistledown round and round upon a road. It was as though the South,North, East, and West winds were all playing battledore and shuttlecock with itat once.When he was in this plight, Ino daughter of Cadmus, also called Leucothea, sawhim. She had formerly been a mere mortal, but had been since raised to the rankof a marine goddess. Seeing in what great distress Ulysses now was, she hadcompassion upon him, and, rising like a sea-gull from the waves, took her seatupon the raft.“My poor good man,” said she, “why is Neptune so furiouslyangry with you? He is giving you a great deal of trouble, but for all hisbluster he will not kill you. You seem to be a sensible person, do then as Ibid you; strip, leave your raft to drive before the wind, and swim to thePhaeacian coast where better luck awaits you. And here, take my veil and put itround your chest; it is enchanted, and you can come to no harm so long as youwear it. As soon as you touch land take it off, throw it back as far as you caninto the sea, and then go away again.” With these words she took off herveil and gave it him. Then she dived down again like a sea-gull and vanishedbeneath the dark blue waters.But Ulysses did not know what to think. “Alas,” he said to himselfin his dismay, “this is only some one or other of the gods who is luringme to ruin by advising me to quit my raft. At any rate I will not do so atpresent, for the land where she said I should be quit of all troubles seemed tobe still a good way off. I know what I will do—I am sure it will bebest—no matter what happens I will stick to the raft as long as hertimbers hold together, but when the sea breaks her up I will swim for it; I donot see how I can do any better than this.”While he was thus in two minds, Neptune sent a terrible great wave that seemedto rear itself above his head till it broke right over the raft, which thenwent to pieces as though it were a heap of dry chaff tossed about by awhirlwind. Ulysses got astride of one plank and rode upon it as if he were onhorseback; he then took off the clothes Calypso had given him, boundIno’s veil under his arms, and plunged into the sea—meaning to swimon shore. King Neptune watched him as he did so, and wagged his head, mutteringto himself and saying, “There now, swim up and down as you best can tillyou fall in with well-to-do people. I do not think you will be able to say thatI have let you off too lightly.” On this he lashed his horses and droveto Aegae where his palace is.But Minerva resolved to help Ulysses, so she bound the ways of all the windsexcept one, and made them lie quite still; but she roused a good stiff breezefrom the North that should lay the waters till Ulysses reached the land of thePhaeacians where he would be safe.Thereon he floated about for two nights and two days in the water, with a heavyswell on the sea and death staring him in the face; but when the third daybroke, the wind fell and there was a dead calm without so much as a breath ofair stirring. As he rose on the swell he looked eagerly ahead, and could seeland quite near. Then, as children rejoice when their dear father begins to getbetter after having for a long time borne sore affliction sent him by someangry spirit, but the gods deliver him from evil, so was Ulysses thankful whenhe again saw land and trees, and swam on with all his strength that he mightonce more set foot upon dry ground. When, however, he got within earshot, hebegan to hear the surf thundering up against the rocks, for the swell stillbroke against them with a terrific roar. Everything was enveloped in spray;there were no harbours where a ship might ride, nor shelter of any kind, butonly headlands, low-lying rocks, and mountain tops.Ulysses’ heart now began to fail him, and he said despairingly tohimself, “Alas, Jove has let me see land after swimming so far that I hadgiven up all hope, but I can find no landing place, for the coast is rocky andsurf-beaten, the rocks are smooth and rise sheer from the sea, with deep waterclose under them so that I cannot climb out for want of foot hold. I am afraidsome great wave will lift me off my legs and dash me against the rocks as Ileave the water—which would give me a sorry landing. If, on the otherhand, I swim further in search of some shelving beach or harbour, a hurricanemay carry me out to sea again sorely against my will, or heaven may send somegreat monster of the deep to attack me; for Amphitrite breeds many such, and Iknow that Neptune is very angry with me.”While he was thus in two minds a wave caught him and took him with such forceagainst the rocks that he would have been smashed and torn to pieces if Minervahad not shown him what to do. He caught hold of the rock with both hands andclung to it groaning with pain till the wave retired, so he was saved thattime; but presently the wave came on again and carried him back with it farinto the sea—tearing his hands as the suckers of a polypus are torn whensome one plucks it from its bed, and the stones come up along withit—even so did the rocks tear the skin from his strong hands, and thenthe wave drew him deep down under the water.Here poor Ulysses would have certainly perished even in spite of his owndestiny, if Minerva had not helped him to keep his wits about him. He swamseaward again, beyond reach of the surf that was beating against the land, andat the same time he kept looking towards the shore to see if he could find somehaven, or a spit that should take the waves aslant. By and by, as he swam on,he came to the mouth of a river, and here he thought would be the best place,for there were no rocks, and it afforded shelter from the wind. He felt thatthere was a current, so he prayed inwardly and said:“Hear me, O King, whoever you may be, and save me from the anger of thesea-god Neptune, for I approach you prayerfully. Any one who has lost his wayhas at all times a claim even upon the gods, wherefore in my distress I drawnear to your stream, and cling to the knees of your riverhood. Have mercy uponme, O king, for I declare myself your suppliant.”Then the god staid his stream and stilled the waves, making all calm beforehim, and bringing him safely into the mouth of the river. Here at lastUlysses’ knees and strong hands failed him, for the sea had completelybroken him. His body was all swollen, and his mouth and nostrils ran down likea river with sea-water, so that he could neither breathe nor speak, and layswooning from sheer exhaustion; presently, when he had got his breath and cameto himself again, he took off the scarf that Ino had given him and threw itback into the salt[54] stream of the river, whereon Inoreceived it into her hands from the wave that bore it towards her. Then he leftthe river, laid himself down among the rushes, and kissed the bounteous earth.“Alas,” he cried to himself in his dismay, “what ever willbecome of me, and how is it all to end? If I stay here upon the river bedthrough the long watches of the night, I am so exhausted that the bitter coldand damp may make an end of me—for towards sunrise there will be a keenwind blowing from off the river. If, on the other hand, I climb the hill side,find shelter in the woods, and sleep in some thicket, I may escape the cold andhave a good night’s rest, but some savage beast may take advantage of meand devour me.”In the end he deemed it best to take to the woods, and he found one upon somehigh ground not far from the water. There he crept beneath two shoots of olivethat grew from a single stock—the one an ungrafted sucker, while theother had been grafted. No wind, however squally, could break through the coverthey afforded, nor could the sun’s rays pierce them, nor the rain getthrough them, so closely did they grow into one another. Ulysses crept underthese and began to make himself a bed to lie on, for there was a great litterof dead leaves lying about—enough to make a covering for two or three meneven in hard winter weather. He was glad enough to see this, so he laid himselfdown and heaped the leaves all round him. Then, as one who lives alone in thecountry, far from any neighbor, hides a brand as fire-seed in the ashes to savehimself from having to get a light elsewhere, even so did Ulysses cover himselfup with leaves; and Minerva shed a sweet sleep upon his eyes, closed hiseyelids, and made him lose all memories of his sorrows.BOOK VITHE MEETING BETWEEN NAUSICAA AND ULYSSES.So here Ulysses slept, overcome by sleep and toil; but Minerva went off to thecountry and city of the Phaeacians—a people who used to live in the fairtown of Hypereia, near the lawless Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes were strongerthan they and plundered them, so their king Nausithous moved them thence andsettled them in Scheria, far from all other people. He surrounded the city witha wall, built houses and temples, and divided the lands among his people; buthe was dead and gone to the house of Hades, and King Alcinous, whose counselswere inspired of heaven, was now reigning. To his house, then, did Minerva hiein furtherance of the return of Ulysses.She went straight to the beautifully decorated bedroom in which there slept agirl who was as lovely as a goddess, Nausicaa, daughter to King Alcinous. Twomaid servants were sleeping near her, both very pretty, one on either side ofthe doorway, which was closed with well made folding doors. Minerva took theform of the famous sea captain Dymas’s daughter, who was a bosom friendof Nausicaa and just her own age; then, coming up to the girl’s bedsidelike a breath of wind, she hovered over her head and said:“Nausicaa, what can your mother have been about, to have such a lazydaughter? Here are your clothes all lying in disorder, yet you are going to bemarried almost immediately, and should not only be well dressed yourself, butshould find good clothes for those who attend you. This is the way to getyourself a good name, and to make your father and mother proud of you. Suppose,then, that we make tomorrow a washing day, and start at daybreak. I will comeand help you so that you may have everything ready as soon as possible, for allthe best young men among your own people are courting you, and you are notgoing to remain a maid much longer. Ask your father, therefore, to have awaggon and mules ready for us at daybreak, to take the rugs, robes, andgirdles, and you can ride, too, which will be much pleasanter for you thanwalking, for the washing-cisterns are some way from the town.”When she had said this Minerva went away to Olympus, which they say is theeverlasting home of the gods. Here no wind beats roughly, and neither rain norsnow can fall; but it abides in everlasting sunshine and in a greatpeacefulness of light, wherein the blessed gods are illumined for ever andever. This was the place to which the goddess went when she had giveninstructions to the girl.By and by morning came and woke Nausicaa, who began wondering about her dream;she therefore went to the other end of the house to tell her father and motherall about it, and found them in their own room. Her mother was sitting by thefireside spinning her purple yarn with her maids around her, and she happenedto catch her father just as he was going out to attend a meeting of the towncouncil, which the Phaeacian aldermen had convened. She stopped him and said:“Papa dear, could you manage to let me have a good big waggon? I want totake all our dirty clothes to the river and wash them. You are the chief manhere, so it is only right that you should have a clean shirt when you attendmeetings of the council. Moreover, you have five sons at home, two of themmarried, while the other three are good looking bachelors; you know they alwayslike to have clean linen when they go to a dance, and I have been thinkingabout all this.”She did not say a word about her own wedding, for she did not like to, but herfather knew and said, “You shall have the mules, my love, and whateverelse you have a mind for. Be off with you, and the men shall get you a goodstrong waggon with a body to it that will hold all your clothes.”On this he gave his orders to the servants, who got the waggon out, harnessedthe mules, and put them to, while the girl brought the clothes down from thelinen room and placed them on the waggon. Her mother prepared her a basket ofprovisions with all sorts of good things, and a goat skin full of wine; thegirl now got into the waggon, and her mother gave her also a golden cruse ofoil, that she and her women might anoint themselves. Then she took the whip andreins and lashed the mules on, whereon they set off, and their hoofs clatteredon the road. They pulled without flagging, and carried not only Nausicaa andher wash of clothes, but the maids also who were with her.When they reached the water side they went to the washing cisterns, throughwhich there ran at all times enough pure water to wash any quantity of linen,no matter how dirty. Here they unharnessed the mules and turned them out tofeed on the sweet juicy herbage that grew by the water side. They took theclothes out of the waggon, put them in the water, and vied with one another intreading them in the pits to get the dirt out. After they had washed them andgot them quite clean, they laid them out by the sea side, where the waves hadraised a high beach of shingle, and set about washing themselves and anointingthemselves with olive oil. Then they got their dinner by the side of thestream, and waited for the sun to finish drying the clothes. When they had donedinner they threw off the veils that covered their heads and began to play atball, while Nausicaa sang for them. As the huntress Diana goes forth upon themountains of Taygetus or Erymanthus to hunt wild boars or deer, and the woodnymphs, daughters of Aegis-bearing Jove, take their sport along with her (thenis Leto proud at seeing her daughter stand a full head taller than the others,and eclipse the loveliest amid a whole bevy of beauties), even so did the girloutshine her handmaids.When it was time for them to start home, and they were folding the clothes andputting them into the waggon, Minerva began to consider how Ulysses should wakeup and see the handsome girl who was to conduct him to the city of thePhaeacians. The girl, therefore, threw a ball at one of the maids, which missedher and fell into deep water. On this they all shouted, and the noise they madewoke Ulysses, who sat up in his bed of leaves and began to wonder what it mightall be.“Alas,” said he to himself, “what kind of people have I comeamongst? Are they cruel, savage, and uncivilised, or hospitable and humane? Iseem to hear the voices of young women, and they sound like those of the nymphsthat haunt mountain tops, or springs of rivers and meadows of green grass. Atany rate I am among a race of men and women. Let me try if I cannot manage toget a look at them.”As he said this he crept from under his bush, and broke off a bough coveredwith thick leaves to hide his nakedness. He looked like some lion of thewilderness that stalks about exulting in his strength and defying both wind andrain; his eyes glare as he prowls in quest of oxen, sheep, or deer, for he isfamished, and will dare break even into a well fenced homestead, trying to getat the sheep—even such did Ulysses seem to the young women, as he drewnear to them all naked as he was, for he was in great want. On seeing one sounkempt and so begrimed with salt water, the others scampered off along thespits that jutted out into the sea, but the daughter of Alcinous stood firm,for Minerva put courage into her heart and took away all fear from her. Shestood right in front of Ulysses, and he doubted whether he should go up to her,throw himself at her feet, and embrace her knees as a suppliant, or stay wherehe was and entreat her to give him some clothes and show him the way to thetown. In the end he deemed it best to entreat her from a distance in case thegirl should take offence at his coming near enough to clasp her knees, so headdressed her in honeyed and persuasive language.“O queen,” he said, “I implore your aid—but tell me,are you a goddess or are you a mortal woman? If you are a goddess and dwell inheaven, I can only conjecture that you are Jove’s daughter Diana, foryour face and figure resemble none but hers; if on the other hand you are amortal and live on earth, thrice happy are your father and mother—thricehappy, too, are your brothers and sisters; how proud and delighted they mustfeel when they see so fair a scion as yourself going out to a dance; mosthappy, however, of all will he be whose wedding gifts have been the richest,and who takes you to his own home. I never yet saw any one so beautiful,neither man nor woman, and am lost in admiration as I behold you. I can onlycompare you to a young palm tree which I saw when I was at Delos growing nearthe altar of Apollo—for I was there, too, with much people after me, whenI was on that journey which has been the source of all my troubles. Never yetdid such a young plant shoot out of the ground as that was, and I admired andwondered at it exactly as I now admire and wonder at yourself. I dare not claspyour knees, but I am in great distress; yesterday made the twentieth day that Ihad been tossing about upon the sea. The winds and waves have taken me all theway from the Ogygian island,[55] and now fate has flung me upon thiscoast that I may endure still further suffering; for I do not think that I haveyet come to the end of it, but rather that heaven has still much evil in storefor me.“And now, O queen, have pity upon me, for you are the first person I havemet, and I know no one else in this country. Show me the way to your town, andlet me have anything that you may have brought hither to wrap your clothes in.May heaven grant you in all things your heart’s desire—husband,house, and a happy, peaceful home; for there is nothing better in this worldthan that man and wife should be of one mind in a house. It discomfits theirenemies, makes the hearts of their friends glad, and they themselves know moreabout it than any one.”To this Nausicaa answered, “Stranger, you appear to be a sensible,well-disposed person. There is no accounting for luck; Jove gives prosperity torich and poor just as he chooses, so you must take what he has seen fit to sendyou, and make the best of it. Now, however, that you have come to this ourcountry, you shall not want for clothes nor for anything else that a foreignerin distress may reasonably look for. I will show you the way to the town, andwill tell you the name of our people; we are called Phaeacians, and I amdaughter to Alcinous, in whom the whole power of the state is vested.”Then she called her maids and said, “Stay where you are, you girls. Canyou not see a man without running away from him? Do you take him for a robberor a murderer? Neither he nor any one else can come here to do us Phaeaciansany harm, for we are dear to the gods, and live apart on a land’s endthat juts into the sounding sea, and have nothing to do with any other people.This is only some poor man who has lost his way, and we must be kind to him,for strangers and foreigners in distress are under Jove’s protection, andwill take what they can get and be thankful; so, girls, give the poor fellowsomething to eat and drink, and wash him in the stream at some place that issheltered from the wind.”On this the maids left off running away and began calling one another back.They made Ulysses sit down in the shelter as Nausicaa had told them, andbrought him a shirt and cloak. They also brought him the little golden cruse ofoil, and told him to go and wash in the stream. But Ulysses said, “Youngwomen, please to stand a little on one side that I may wash the brine from myshoulders and anoint myself with oil, for it is long enough since my skin hashad a drop of oil upon it. I cannot wash as long as you all keep standingthere. I am ashamed to strip[56] before a number of good looking youngwomen.”Then they stood on one side and went to tell the girl, while Ulysses washedhimself in the stream and scrubbed the brine from his back and from his broadshoulders. When he had thoroughly washed himself, and had got the brine out ofhis hair, he anointed himself with oil, and put on the clothes which the girlhad given him; Minerva then made him look taller and stronger than before, shealso made the hair grow thick on the top of his head, and flow down in curlslike hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the head and shoulders as askilful workman who has studied art of all kinds under Vulcan and Minervaenriches a piece of silver plate by gilding it—and his work is full ofbeauty. Then he went and sat down a little way off upon the beach, lookingquite young and handsome, and the girl gazed on him with admiration; then shesaid to her maids:“Hush, my dears, for I want to say something. I believe the gods who livein heaven have sent this man to the Phaeacians. When I first saw him I thoughthim plain, but now his appearance is like that of the gods who dwell in heaven.I should like my future husband to be just such another as he is, if he wouldonly stay here and not want to go away. However, give him something to eat anddrink.”They did as they were told, and set food before Ulysses, who ate and drankravenously, for it was long since he had had food of any kind. Meanwhile,Nausicaa bethought her of another matter. She got the linen folded and placedin the waggon, she then yoked the mules, and, as she took her seat, she calledUlysses:“Stranger,” said she, “rise and let us be going back to thetown; I will introduce you at the house of my excellent father, where I cantell you that you will meet all the best people among the Phaeacians. But besure and do as I bid you, for you seem to be a sensible person. As long as weare going past the fields and farm lands, follow briskly behind the waggonalong with the maids and I will lead the way myself. Presently, however, weshall come to the town, where you will find a high wall running all round it,and a good harbour on either side with a narrow entrance into the city, and theships will be drawn up by the road side, for every one has a place where hisown ship can lie. You will see the market place with a temple of Neptune in themiddle of it, and paved with large stones bedded in the earth. Here people dealin ship’s gear of all kinds, such as cables and sails, and here, too, arethe places where oars are made, for the Phaeacians are not a nation of archers;they know nothing about bows and arrows, but are a sea-faring folk, and pridethemselves on their masts, oars, and ships, with which they travel far over thesea.“I am afraid of the gossip and scandal that may be set on foot against melater on; for the people here are very ill-natured, and some low fellow, if hemet us, might say, ‘Who is this fine-looking stranger that is going aboutwith Nausicaa? Where did she find him? I suppose she is going to marry him.Perhaps he is a vagabond sailor whom she has taken from some foreign vessel,for we have no neighbours; or some god has at last come down from heaven inanswer to her prayers, and she is going to live with him all the rest of herlife. It would be a good thing if she would take herself off and find a husbandsomewhere else, for she will not look at one of the many excellent youngPhaeacians who are in love with her.’ This is the kind of disparagingremark that would be made about me, and I could not complain, for I shouldmyself be scandalised at seeing any other girl do the like, and go about withmen in spite of everybody, while her father and mother were still alive, andwithout having been married in the face of all the world.“If, therefore, you want my father to give you an escort and to help youhome, do as I bid you; you will see a beautiful grove of poplars by the roadside dedicated to Minerva; it has a well in it and a meadow all round it. Heremy father has a field of rich garden ground, about as far from the town as aman’s voice will carry. Sit down there and wait for a while till the restof us can get into the town and reach my father’s house. Then, when youthink we must have done this, come into the town and ask the way to the houseof my father Alcinous. You will have no difficulty in finding it; any childwill point it out to you, for no one else in the whole town has anything likesuch a fine house as he has. When you have got past the gates and through theouter court, go right across the inner court till you come to my mother. Youwill find her sitting by the fire and spinning her purple wool by firelight. Itis a fine sight to see her as she leans back against one of the bearing-postswith her maids all ranged behind her. Close to her seat stands that of myfather, on which he sits and topes like an immortal god. Never mind him, but goup to my mother, and lay your hands upon her knees if you would get homequickly. If you can gain her over, you may hope to see your own country again,no matter how distant it may be.”So saying she lashed the mules with her whip and they left the river. The mulesdrew well, and their hoofs went up and down upon the road. She was careful notto go too fast for Ulysses and the maids who were following on foot along withthe waggon, so she plied her whip with judgement. As the sun was going downthey came to the sacred grove of Minerva, and there Ulysses sat down and prayedto the mighty daughter of Jove.“Hear me,” he cried, “daughter of Aegis-bearing Jove,unweariable, hear me now, for you gave no heed to my prayers when Neptune waswrecking me. Now, therefore, have pity upon me and grant that I may findfriends and be hospitably received by the Phaeacians.”Thus did he pray, and Minerva heard his prayer, but she would not show herselfto him openly, for she was afraid of her uncle Neptune, who was still furiousin his endeavors to prevent Ulysses from getting home.BOOK VIIRECEPTION OF ULYSSES AT THE PALACE OF KING ALCINOUS.Thus, then, did Ulysses wait and pray; but the girl drove on to the town. Whenshe reached her father’s house she drew up at the gateway, and herbrothers—comely as the gods—gathered round her, took the mules outof the waggon, and carried the clothes into the house, while she went to herown room, where an old servant, Eurymedusa of Apeira, lit the fire for her.This old woman had been brought by sea from Apeira, and had been chosen as aprize for Alcinous because he was king over the Phaeacians, and the peopleobeyed him as though he were a god.[57] She had been nurse to Nausicaa, andhad now lit the fire for her, and brought her supper for her into her own room.Presently Ulysses got up to go towards the town; and Minerva shed a thick mistall round him to hide him in case any of the proud Phaeacians who met himshould be rude to him, or ask him who he was. Then, as he was just entering thetown, she came towards him in the likeness of a little girl carrying a pitcher.She stood right in front of him, and Ulysses said:“My dear, will you be so kind as to show me the house of king Alcinous? Iam an unfortunate foreigner in distress, and do not know one in your town andcountry.”Then Minerva said, “Yes, father stranger, I will show you the house youwant, for Alcinous lives quite close to my own father. I will go before you andshow the way, but say not a word as you go, and do not look at any man, nor askhim questions; for the people here cannot abide strangers, and do not like menwho come from some other place. They are a sea-faring folk, and sail the seasby the grace of Neptune in ships that glide along like thought, or as a bird inthe air.”On this she led the way, and Ulysses followed in her steps; but not one of thePhaeacians could see him as he passed through the city in the midst of them;for the great goddess Minerva in her good will towards him had hidden him in athick cloud of darkness. He admired their harbours, ships, places of assembly,and the lofty walls of the city, which, with the palisade on top of them, werevery striking, and when they reached the king’s house Minerva said:“This is the house, father stranger, which you would have me show you.You will find a number of great people sitting at table, but do not be afraid;go straight in, for the bolder a man is the more likely he is to carry hispoint, even though he is a stranger. First find the queen. Her name is Arete,and she comes of the same family as her husband Alcinous. They both descendoriginally from Neptune, who was father to Nausithous by Periboea, a woman ofgreat beauty. Periboea was the youngest daughter of Eurymedon, who at one timereigned over the giants, but he ruined his ill-fated people and lost his ownlife to boot.“Neptune, however, lay with his daughter, and she had a son by him, thegreat Nausithous, who reigned over the Phaeacians. Nausithous had two sonsRhexenor and Alcinous;[58] Apollo killed the first of them whilehe was still a bridegroom and without male issue; but he left a daughter Arete,whom Alcinous married, and honours as no other woman is honoured of all thosethat keep house along with their husbands.“Thus she both was, and still is, respected beyond measure by herchildren, by Alcinous himself, and by the whole people, who look upon her as agoddess, and greet her whenever she goes about the city, for she is athoroughly good woman both in head and heart, and when any women are friends ofhers, she will help their husbands also to settle their disputes. If you cangain her good will, you may have every hope of seeing your friends again, andgetting safely back to your home and country.”Then Minerva left Scheria and went away over the sea. She went to Marathon[59] and to thespacious streets of Athens, where she entered the abode of Erechtheus; butUlysses went on to the house of Alcinous, and he pondered much as he paused awhile before reaching the threshold of bronze, for the splendour of the palacewas like that of the sun or moon. The walls on either side were of bronze fromend to end, and the cornice was of blue enamel. The doors were gold, and hungon pillars of silver that rose from a floor of bronze, while the lintel wassilver and the hook of the door was of gold.On either side there stood gold and silver mastiffs which Vulcan, with hisconsummate skill, had fashioned expressly to keep watch over the palace of kingAlcinous; so they were immortal and could never grow old. Seats were ranged allalong the wall, here and there from one end to the other, with coverings offine woven work which the women of the house had made. Here the chief personsof the Phaeacians used to sit and eat and drink, for there was abundance at allseasons; and there were golden figures of young men with lighted torches intheir hands, raised on pedestals, to give light by night to those who were attable. There are[60] fifty maid servants in the house,some of whom are always grinding rich yellow grain at the mill, while otherswork at the loom, or sit and spin, and their shuttles go backwards and forwardslike the fluttering of aspen leaves, while the linen is so closely woven thatit will turn oil. As the Phaeacians are the best sailors in the world, so theirwomen excel all others in weaving, for Minerva has taught them all manner ofuseful arts, and they are very intelligent.Outside the gate of the outer court there is a large garden of about four acreswith a wall all round it. It is full of beautiful trees—pears,pomegranates, and the most delicious apples. There are luscious figs also, andolives in full growth. The fruits never rot nor fail all the year round,neither winter nor summer, for the air is so soft that a new crop ripens beforethe old has dropped. Pear grows on pear, apple on apple, and fig on fig, and soalso with the grapes, for there is an excellent vineyard: on the level groundof a part of this, the grapes are being made into raisins; in another part theyare being gathered; some are being trodden in the wine tubs, others further onhave shed their blossom and are beginning to show fruit, others again are justchanging colour. In the furthest part of the ground there are beautifullyarranged beds of flowers that are in bloom all the year round. Two streams gothrough it, the one turned in ducts throughout the whole garden, while theother is carried under the ground of the outer court to the house itself, andthe town’s people draw water from it. Such, then, were the splendourswith which the gods had endowed the house of king Alcinous.So here Ulysses stood for a while and looked about him, but when he had lookedlong enough he crossed the threshold and went within the precincts of thehouse. There he found all the chief people among the Phaeacians making theirdrink offerings to Mercury, which they always did the last thing before goingaway for the night.[61] He went straight through the court,still hidden by the cloak of darkness in which Minerva had enveloped him, tillhe reached Arete and King Alcinous; then he laid his hands upon the knees ofthe queen, and at that moment the miraculous darkness fell away from him and hebecame visible. Every one was speechless with surprise at seeing a man there,but Ulysses began at once with his petition.“Queen Arete,” he exclaimed, “daughter of great Rhexenor, inmy distress I humbly pray you, as also your husband and these your guests (whommay heaven prosper with long life and happiness, and may they leave theirpossessions to their children, and all the honours conferred upon them by thestate) to help me home to my own country as soon as possible; for I have beenlong in trouble and away from my friends.”Then he sat down on the hearth among the ashes and they all held their peace,till presently the old hero Echeneus, who was an excellent speaker and an elderamong the Phaeacians, plainly and in all honesty addressed them thus:“Alcinous,” said he, “it is not creditable to you that astranger should be seen sitting among the ashes of your hearth; every one iswaiting to hear what you are about to say; tell him, then, to rise and take aseat on a stool inlaid with silver, and bid your servants mix some wine andwater that we may make a drink offering to Jove the lord of thunder, who takesall well disposed suppliants under his protection; and let the housekeeper givehim some supper, of whatever there may be in the house.”When Alcinous heard this he took Ulysses by the hand, raised him from thehearth, and bade him take the seat of Laodamas, who had been sitting besidehim, and was his favourite son. A maid servant then brought him water in abeautiful golden ewer and poured it into a silver basin for him to wash hishands, and she drew a clean table beside him; an upper servant brought himbread and offered him many good things of what there was in the house, andUlysses ate and drank. Then Alcinous said to one of the servants,“Pontonous, mix a cup of wine and hand it round that we may makedrink-offerings to Jove the lord of thunder, who is the protector of allwell-disposed suppliants.”Pontonous then mixed wine and water, and handed it round after giving every manhis drink-offering. When they had made their offerings, and had drunk each asmuch as he was minded, Alcinous said:“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, hear my words. You havehad your supper, so now go home to bed. To-morrow morning I shall invite astill larger number of aldermen, and will give a sacrificial banquet in honourof our guest; we can then discuss the question of his escort, and consider howwe may at once send him back rejoicing to his own country without trouble orinconvenience to himself, no matter how distant it may be. We must see that hecomes to no harm while on his homeward journey, but when he is once at home hewill have to take the luck he was born with for better or worse like otherpeople. It is possible, however, that the stranger is one of the immortals whohas come down from heaven to visit us; but in this case the gods are departingfrom their usual practice, for hitherto they have made themselves perfectlyclear to us when we have been offering them hecatombs. They come and sit at ourfeasts just like one of our selves, and if any solitary wayfarer happens tostumble upon some one or other of them, they affect no concealment, for we areas near of kin to the gods as the Cyclopes and the savage giants are.”[62]Then Ulysses said: “Pray, Alcinous, do not take any such notion into yourhead. I have nothing of the immortal about me, neither in body nor mind, andmost resemble those among you who are the most afflicted. Indeed, were I totell you all that heaven has seen fit to lay upon me, you would say that I wasstill worse off than they are. Nevertheless, let me sup in spite of sorrow, foran empty stomach is a very importunate thing, and thrusts itself on aman’s notice no matter how dire is his distress. I am in great trouble,yet it insists that I shall eat and drink, bids me lay aside all memory of mysorrows and dwell only on the due replenishing of itself. As for yourselves, doas you propose, and at break of day set about helping me to get home. I shallbe content to die if I may first once more behold my property, my bondsmen, andall the greatness of my house.”[63]Thus did he speak. Every one approved his saying, and agreed that he shouldhave his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Then when they had madetheir drink offerings, and had drunk each as much as he was minded they wenthome to bed every man in his own abode, leaving Ulysses in the cloister withArete and Alcinous while the servants were taking the things away after supper.Arete was the first to speak, for she recognised the shirt, cloak, and goodclothes that Ulysses was wearing, as the work of herself and of her maids; soshe said, “Stranger, before we go any further, there is a question Ishould like to ask you. Who, and whence are you, and who gave you thoseclothes? Did you not say you had come here from beyond the sea?”And Ulysses answered, “It would be a long story Madam, were I to relatein full the tale of my misfortunes, for the hand of heaven has been laid heavyupon me; but as regards your question, there is an island far away in the seawhich is called ‘the Ogygian.’ Here dwells the cunning and powerfulgoddess Calypso, daughter of Atlas. She lives by herself far from allneighbours human or divine. Fortune, however, brought me to her hearth alldesolate and alone, for Jove struck my ship with his thunderbolts, and broke itup in mid-ocean. My brave comrades were drowned every man of them, but I stuckto the keel and was carried hither and thither for the space of nine days, tillat last during the darkness of the tenth night the gods brought me to theOgygian island where the great goddess Calypso lives. She took me in andtreated me with the utmost kindness; indeed she wanted to make me immortal thatI might never grow old, but she could not persuade me to let her do so.“I stayed with Calypso seven years straight on end, and watered the goodclothes she gave me with my tears during the whole time; but at last when theeighth year came round she bade me depart of her own free will, either becauseJove had told her she must, or because she had changed her mind. She sent mefrom her island on a raft, which she provisioned with abundance of bread andwine. Moreover she gave me good stout clothing, and sent me a wind that blewboth warm and fair. Days seven and ten did I sail over the sea, and on theeighteenth I caught sight of the first outlines of the mountains upon yourcoast—and glad indeed was I to set eyes upon them. Nevertheless there wasstill much trouble in store for me, for at this point Neptune would let me gono further, and raised a great storm against me; the sea was so terribly highthat I could no longer keep to my raft, which went to pieces under the fury ofthe gale, and I had to swim for it, till wind and current brought me to yourshores.“There I tried to land, but could not, for it was a bad place and thewaves dashed me against the rocks, so I again took to the sea and swam on tillI came to a river that seemed the most likely landing place, for there were norocks and it was sheltered from the wind. Here, then, I got out of the waterand gathered my senses together again. Night was coming on, so I left theriver, and went into a thicket, where I covered myself all over with leaves,and presently heaven sent me off into a very deep sleep. Sick and sorry as Iwas I slept among the leaves all night, and through the next day tillafternoon, when I woke as the sun was westering, and saw your daughter’smaid servants playing upon the beach, and your daughter among them looking likea goddess. I besought her aid, and she proved to be of an excellentdisposition, much more so than could be expected from so young aperson—for young people are apt to be thoughtless. She gave me plenty ofbread and wine, and when she had had me washed in the river she also gave methe clothes in which you see me. Now, therefore, though it has pained me to doso, I have told you the whole truth.”Then Alcinous said, “Stranger, it was very wrong of my daughter not tobring you on at once to my house along with the maids, seeing that she was thefirst person whose aid you asked.”“Pray do not scold her,” replied Ulysses; “she is not toblame. She did tell me to follow along with the maids, but I was ashamed andafraid, for I thought you might perhaps be displeased if you saw me. Everyhuman being is sometimes a little suspicious and irritable.”“Stranger,” replied Alcinous, “I am not the kind of man toget angry about nothing; it is always better to be reasonable; but by FatherJove, Minerva, and Apollo, now that I see what kind of person you are, and howmuch you think as I do, I wish you would stay here, marry my daughter, andbecome my son-in-law. If you will stay I will give you a house and an estate,but no one (heaven forbid) shall keep you here against your own wish, and thatyou may be sure of this I will attend tomorrow to the matter of your escort.You can sleep[64]during the whole voyage if you like, and the men shall sail you over smoothwaters either to your own home, or wherever you please, even though it be along way further off than Euboea, which those of my people who saw it when theytook yellow-haired Rhadamanthus to see Tityus the son of Gaia, tell me is thefurthest of any place—and yet they did the whole voyage in a single daywithout distressing themselves, and came back again afterwards. You will thussee how much my ships excel all others, and what magnificent oarsmen my sailorsare.”Then was Ulysses glad and prayed aloud saying, “Father Jove, grant thatAlcinous may do all as he has said, for so he will win an imperishable nameamong mankind, and at the same time I shall return to my country.”Thus did they converse. Then Arete told her maids to set a bed in the room thatwas in the gatehouse, and make it with good red rugs, and to spread coverletson the top of them with woollen cloaks for Ulysses to wear. The maids thereonwent out with torches in their hands, and when they had made the bed they cameup to Ulysses and said, “Rise, sir stranger, and come with us for yourbed is ready,” and glad indeed was he to go to his rest.So Ulysses slept in a bed placed in a room over the echoing gateway; butAlcinous lay in the inner part of the house, with the queen his wife by hisside.BOOK VIIIBANQUET IN THE HOUSE OF ALCINOUS—THE GAMES.Now when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Alcinous andUlysses both rose, and Alcinous led the way to the Phaeacian place of assembly,which was near the ships. When they got there they sat down side by side on aseat of polished stone, while Minerva took the form of one of Alcinous’servants, and went round the town in order to help Ulysses to get home. Shewent up to the citizens, man by man, and said, “Aldermen and towncouncillors of the Phaeacians, come to the assembly all of you and listen tothe stranger who has just come off a long voyage to the house of King Alcinous;he looks like an immortal god.”With these words she made them all want to come, and they flocked to theassembly till seats and standing room were alike crowded. Every one was struckwith the appearance of Ulysses, for Minerva had beautified him about the headand shoulders, making him look taller and stouter than he really was, that hemight impress the Phaeacians favourably as being a very remarkable man, andmight come off well in the many trials of skill to which they would challengehim. Then, when they were got together, Alcinous spoke:“Hear me,” said he, “aldermen and town councillors of thePhaeacians, that I may speak even as I am minded. This stranger, whoever he maybe, has found his way to my house from somewhere or other either East or West.He wants an escort and wishes to have the matter settled. Let us then get oneready for him, as we have done for others before him; indeed, no one who everyet came to my house has been able to complain of me for not speeding on hisway soon enough. Let us draw a ship into the sea—one that has never yetmade a voyage—and man her with two and fifty of our smartest youngsailors. Then when you have made fast your oars each by his own seat, leave theship and come to my house to prepare a feast.[65] I will find you in everything. I amgiving these instructions to the young men who will form the crew, for asregards you aldermen and town councillors, you will join me in entertaining ourguest in the cloisters. I can take no excuses, and we will have Demodocus tosing to us; for there is no bard like him whatever he may choose to singabout.”Alcinous then led the way, and the others followed after, while a servant wentto fetch Demodocus. The fifty-two picked oarsmen went to the sea shore as theyhad been told, and when they got there they drew the ship into the water, gother mast and sails inside her, bound the oars to the thole-pins with twistedthongs of leather, all in due course, and spread the white sails aloft. Theymoored the vessel a little way out from land, and then came on shore and wentto the house of King Alcinous. The out houses,[66] yards, and all the precincts werefilled with crowds of men in great multitudes both old and young; and Alcinouskilled them a dozen sheep, eight full grown pigs, and two oxen. These theyskinned and dressed so as to provide a magnificent banquet.A servant presently led in the famous bard Demodocus, whom the muse had dearlyloved, but to whom she had given both good and evil, for though she had endowedhim with a divine gift of song, she had robbed him of his eyesight. Pontonousset a seat for him among the guests, leaning it up against a bearing-post. Hehung the lyre for him on a peg over his head, and showed him where he was tofeel for it with his hands. He also set a fair table with a basket of victualsby his side, and a cup of wine from which he might drink whenever he was sodisposed.The company then laid their hands upon the good things that were before them,but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink, the muse inspiredDemodocus to sing the feats of heroes, and more especially a matter that wasthen in the mouths of all men, to wit, the quarrel between Ulysses andAchilles, and the fierce words that they heaped on one another as they sattogether at a banquet. But Agamemnon was glad when he heard his chieftainsquarrelling with one another, for Apollo had foretold him this at Pytho when hecrossed the stone floor to consult the oracle. Here was the beginning of theevil that by the will of Jove fell both upon Danaans and Trojans.Thus sang the bard, but Ulysses drew his purple mantle over his head andcovered his face, for he was ashamed to let the Phaeacians see that he wasweeping. When the bard left off singing he wiped the tears from his eyes,uncovered his face, and, taking his cup, made a drink-offering to the gods; butwhen the Phaeacians pressed Demodocus to sing further, for they delighted inhis lays, then Ulysses again drew his mantle over his head and wept bitterly.No one noticed his distress except Alcinous, who was sitting near him, andheard the heavy sighs that he was heaving. So he at once said, “Aldermenand town councillors of the Phaeacians, we have had enough now, both of thefeast, and of the minstrelsy that is its due accompaniment; let us proceedtherefore to the athletic sports, so that our guest on his return home may beable to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as boxers,wrestlers, jumpers, and runners.”With these words he led the way, and the others followed after. A servant hungDemodocus’s lyre on its peg for him, led him out of the cloister, and sethim on the same way as that along which all the chief men of the Phaeacianswere going to see the sports; a crowd of several thousands of people followedthem, and there were many excellent competitors for all the prizes. Acroneos,Ocyalus, Elatreus, Nauteus, Prymneus, Anchialus, Eretmeus, Ponteus, Proreus,Thoon, Anabesineus, and Amphialus son of Polyneus son of Tecton. There was alsoEuryalus son of Naubolus, who was like Mars himself, and was the best lookingman among the Phaeacians except Laodamas. Three sons of Alcinous, Laodamas,Halios, and Clytoneus, competed also.The foot races came first. The course was set out for them from the startingpost, and they raised a dust upon the plain as they all flew forward at thesame moment. Clytoneus came in first by a long way; he left every one elsebehind him by the length of the furrow that a couple of mules can plough in afallow field.[67]They then turned to the painful art of wrestling, and here Euryalus proved tobe the best man. Amphialus excelled all the others in jumping, while atthrowing the disc there was no one who could approach Elatreus.Alcinous’s son Laodamas was the best boxer, and he it was who presentlysaid, when they had all been diverted with the games, “Let us ask thestranger whether he excels in any of these sports; he seems very powerfullybuilt; his thighs, calves, hands, and neck are of prodigious strength, nor ishe at all old, but he has suffered much lately, and there is nothing like thesea for making havoc with a man, no matter how strong he is.”“You are quite right, Laodamas,” replied Euryalus, “go up toyour guest and speak to him about it yourself.”When Laodamas heard this he made his way into the middle of the crowd and saidto Ulysses, “I hope, Sir, that you will enter yourself for some one orother of our competitions if you are skilled in any of them—and you musthave gone in for many a one before now. There is nothing that does any one somuch credit all his life long as the showing himself a proper man with hishands and feet. Have a try therefore at something, and banish all sorrow fromyour mind. Your return home will not be long delayed, for the ship is alreadydrawn into the water, and the crew is found.”Ulysses answered, “Laodamas, why do you taunt me in this way? my mind isset rather on cares than contests; I have been through infinite trouble, and amcome among you now as a suppliant, praying your king and people to further meon my return home.”Then Euryalus reviled him outright and said, “I gather, then, that youare unskilled in any of the many sports that men generally delight in. Isuppose you are one of those grasping traders that go about in ships ascaptains or merchants, and who think of nothing but of their outward freightsand homeward cargoes. There does not seem to be much of the athlete aboutyou.”“For shame, Sir,” answered Ulysses, fiercely, “you are aninsolent fellow—so true is it that the gods do not grace all men alike inspeech, person, and understanding. One man may be of weak presence, but heavenhas adorned this with such a good conversation that he charms every one whosees him; his honeyed moderation carries his hearers with him so that he isleader in all assemblies of his fellows, and wherever he goes he is looked upto. Another may be as handsome as a god, but his good looks are not crownedwith discretion. This is your case. No god could make a finer looking fellowthan you are, but you are a fool. Your ill-judged remarks have made meexceedingly angry, and you are quite mistaken, for I excel in a great manyathletic exercises; indeed, so long as I had youth and strength, I was amongthe first athletes of the age. Now, however, I am worn out by labour andsorrow, for I have gone through much both on the field of battle and by thewaves of the weary sea; still, in spite of all this I will compete, for yourtaunts have stung me to the quick.”So he hurried up without even taking his cloak off, and seized a disc, larger,more massive and much heavier than those used by the Phaeacians whendisc-throwing among themselves.[68] Then, swinging it back, he threw itfrom his brawny hand, and it made a humming sound in the air as he did so. ThePhaeacians quailed beneath the rushing of its flight as it sped gracefully fromhis hand, and flew beyond any mark that had been made yet. Minerva, in the formof a man, came and marked the place where it had fallen. “A blind man,Sir,” said she, “could easily tell your mark by groping forit—it is so far ahead of any other. You may make your mind easy aboutthis contest, for no Phaeacian can come near to such a throw as yours.”Ulysses was glad when he found he had a friend among the lookers-on, so hebegan to speak more pleasantly. “Young men,” said he, “comeup to that throw if you can, and I will throw another disc as heavy or evenheavier. If anyone wants to have a bout with me let him come on, for I amexceedingly angry; I will box, wrestle, or run, I do not care what it is, withany man of you all except Laodamas, but not with him because I am his guest,and one cannot compete with one’s own personal friend. At least I do notthink it a prudent or a sensible thing for a guest to challenge hishost’s family at any game, especially when he is in a foreign country. Hewill cut the ground from under his own feet if he does; but I make no exceptionas regards any one else, for I want to have the matter out and know which isthe best man. I am a good hand at every kind of athletic sport known amongmankind. I am an excellent archer. In battle I am always the first to bring aman down with my arrow, no matter how many more are taking aim at him alongsideof me. Philoctetes was the only man who could shoot better than I could when weAchaeans were before Troy and in practice. I far excel every one else in thewhole world, of those who still eat bread upon the face of the earth, but Ishould not like to shoot against the mighty dead, such as Hercules, or Eurytusthe Oechalian—men who could shoot against the gods themselves. This infact was how Eurytus came prematurely by his end, for Apollo was angry with himand killed him because he challenged him as an archer. I can throw a dartfarther than any one else can shoot an arrow. Running is the only point inrespect of which I am afraid some of the Phaeacians might beat me, for I havebeen brought down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I amstill weak.”They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, we havehad much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which I understandthat you are willing to show your prowess, as having been displeased with someinsolent remarks that have been made to you by one of our athletes, and whichcould never have been uttered by any one who knows how to talk with propriety.I hope you will apprehend my meaning, and will explain to any one of your chiefmen who may be dining with yourself and your family when you get home, that wehave an hereditary aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are notparticularly remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we aresingularly fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond ofgood dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen, warmbaths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best dancers setabout dancing, that our guest on his return home may be able to tell hisfriends how much we surpass all other nations as sailors, runners, dancers, andminstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre at my house, so run some one or other ofyou and fetch it for him.”On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was theirbusiness to manage everything connected with the sports, so they made theground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers. Presently the servantcame back with Demodocus’s lyre, and he took his place in the midst ofthem, whereon the best young dancers in the town began to foot and trip it sonimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the merry twinkling of their feet.Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how theyfirst began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus manypresents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who sawwhat they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he heard suchdreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief, got his great anvilinto its place, and began to forge some chains which none could either unlooseor break, so that they might stay there in that place.[69] When he had finished his snare hewent into his bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains likecobwebs; he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Noteven a god could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he hadspread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting out forthe fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was the one he wasmost fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as soon as he saw him start,hurried off to his house, burning with love for Venus.Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was aboutsitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took her hand inhis own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at home, but isgone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is barbarous.”She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest, whereonthey were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread for them, andcould neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too late that they werein a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had turned back before reachingLemnos, when his scout the sun told him what was going on. He was in a furiouspassion, and stood in the vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted toall the gods.“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods wholive for ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that Iwill show you. Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because Iam lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built, whereas Iam a cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not I; they oughtnever to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together asleep on my bed. Itmakes me furious to look at them. They are very fond of one another, but I donot think they will lie there longer than they can help, nor do I think thatthey will sleep much; there, however, they shall stay till her father hasrepaid me the sum I gave him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but nothonest.”On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling Neptunecame, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the goddesses staidat home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all good things stood in thedoorway, and the blessed gods roared with inextinguishable laughter, as theysaw how cunning Vulcan had been, whereon one would turn towards his neighboursaying:“Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See howlimping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god inheaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.”Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “MessengerMercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains were,would you, if you could sleep with Venus?”“King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get thechance, though there were three times as many chains—and you might lookon, all of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if Icould.”The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune took it allseriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free again. “Let himgo,” he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require, that he shallpay you all the damages that are held reasonable among the immortalgods.”“Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a badman’s bond is bad security; what remedy could I enforce against you ifMars should go away and leave his debts behind him along with hischains?”“Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying hisdamages, I will pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this caseI cannot and must not refuse you.”Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were free theyscampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to Cyprus and toPaphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with burnt offerings. Herethe Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil of ambrosia such as theimmortal gods make use of, and they clothed her in raiment of the mostenchanting beauty.Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were charmedas they heard him.Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no one tocompete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had made for them, andone of them bent himself backwards and threw it up towards the clouds, whilethe other jumped from off the ground and caught it with ease before it camedown again. When they had done throwing the ball straight up into the air theybegan to dance, and at the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwardsto one another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a greatstamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said:“King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in theworld, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was astonished as Isaw them.”The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians,“Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person ofsingular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he mayreasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and counting myselfthere are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean cloak, a shirt, and atalent of fine gold; let us give him all this in a lump down at once, so thatwhen he gets his supper he may do so with a light heart. As for Euryalus hewill have to make a formal apology and a present too, for he has beenrude.”Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and sent theirservants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, “King Alcinous, Iwill give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He shall have mysword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of silver. I will alsogive him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into which it fits. It will be wortha great deal to him.”As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Goodluck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the windsblow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return, for Iunderstand you have been long away from home, and have gone through muchhardship.”To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may thegods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you havegiven me along with your apology.”With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards sundownthe presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of the donors keptbringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his sons received them, andplaced them under their mother’s charge. Then Alcinous led the way to thehouse and bade his guests take their seats.“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the bestchest we have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on thefire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to thecareful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made him; hewill thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that will follow. Ishall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of exquisiteworkmanship—that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his lifewhenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of the gods.”[70]Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast as theycould, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a clear fire; theythrew on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became hot as the flame playedabout the belly of the tripod.[71] Meanwhile Arete brought a magnificentchest from her own room, and inside it she packed all the beautiful presents ofgold and raiment which the Phaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak anda good shirt from Alcinous, and said to Ulysses:“See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, forfear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your ship.”[72]When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast with abond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper servant told himto come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad of a warm bath, for hehad had no one to wait upon him ever since he left the house of Calypso, who aslong as he remained with her had taken as good care of him as though he hadbeen a god. When the servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, andhad given him a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined theguests who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of thebearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as she sawhim pass. “Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget mewhen you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransomfor having saved your life.”And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove themighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I bless you asmy guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved me.”When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was thenserved, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the favouritebard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near one of thebearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean against it. ThenUlysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of fat (for there wasabundance left on the joint) and said to a servant, “Take this piece ofpork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for all the pain his lays maycause me I will salute him none the less; bards are honoured and respectedthroughout the world, for the muse teaches them their songs and lovesthem.”The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took it andwas very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good things that werebefore them, and as soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulysses said toDemodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in the world whom I admire morethan I do you. You must have studied under the Muse, Jove’s daughter, andunder Apollo, so accurately do you sing the return of the Achaeans with alltheir sufferings and adventures. If you were not there yourself, you must haveheard it all from some one who was. Now, however, change your song and tell usof the wooden horse which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and whichUlysses got by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the menwho afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will tellall the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some of theArgives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others, hidden within thehorse,[73] werewaiting with Ulysses in the Trojan place of assembly. For the Trojansthemselves had drawn the horse into their fortress, and it stood there whilethey sat in council round it, and were in three minds as to what they shoulddo. Some were for breaking it up then and there; others would have it draggedto the top of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down theprecipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering andpropitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the end, for thecity was doomed when it took in that horse, within which were all the bravestof the Argives waiting to bring death and destruction on the Trojans. Anon hesang how the sons of the Achaeans issued from the horse, and sacked the town,breaking out from their ambuscade. He sang how they overran the city hither andthither and ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along withMenelaus to the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged mostfuriously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his cheeks werewet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws herself on the body ofher husband who has fallen before his own city and people, fighting bravely indefence of his home and children. She screams aloud and flings her arms abouthim as he lies gasping for breath and dying, but her enemies beat her frombehind about the back and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a lifeof labour and sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even sopiteously did Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tearsexcept Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighsthat he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease hissong, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From the momentthat we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our guest has been all thetime groaning and lamenting. He is evidently in great trouble, so let the bardleave off, that we may all enjoy ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will bemuch more as it should be, for all these festivities, with the escort and thepresents that we are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour,and any one with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought totreat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment norreserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more polite inyou to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your father and motherover yonder used to call you, and by which you were known among your neighboursand fellow-citizens. There is no one, neither rich nor poor, who is absolutelywithout any name whatever, for people’s fathers and mothers give themnames as soon as they are born. Tell me also your country, nation, and city,that our ships may shape their purpose accordingly and take you there. For thePhaeacians have no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of othernations have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we arethinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the wholeworld, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is covered with mistand cloud, so that there is no danger of being wrecked or coming to any harm.Still I do remember hearing my father say that Neptune was angry with us forbeing too easy-going in the matter of giving people escorts. He said that oneof these days he should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from havingescorted some one,[74] and bury our city under a highmountain. This is what my father used to say, but whether the god will carryout his threat or no is a matter which he will decide for himself.“And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and inwhat countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples themselves, and oftheir cities—who were hostile, savage and uncivilised, and who, on theother hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us also why you are made so unhappy onhearing about the return of the Argive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged allthis, and sent them their misfortunes in order that future generations mighthave something to sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of yourwife’s when you were before Troy? a son-in-law orfather-in-law—which are the nearest relations a man has outside his ownflesh and blood? or was it some brave and kindly-natured comrade—for agood friend is as dear to a man as his own brother?”BOOK IXULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI, ANDCYCLOPES.And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bardwith such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or moredelightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the guestssitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread and meats, andthe cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every man. This is indeed asfair a sight as a man can see. Now, however, since you are inclined to ask thestory of my sorrows, and rekindle my own sad memories in respect of them, I donot know how to begin, nor yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for thehand of heaven has been laid heavily upon me.“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and oneday, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though I live sofar away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes, renowned among mankindfor all manner of subtlety, so that my fame ascends to heaven. I live inIthaca, where there is a high mountain called Neritum, covered with forests;and not far from it there is a group of islands very near to oneanother—Dulichium, Same, and the wooded island of Zacynthus. It liessquat on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the sunset, while theothers lie away from it towards dawn.[75] It is a rugged island, but it breedsbrave men, and my eyes know none that they better love to look upon. Thegoddess Calypso kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, asdid also the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of thempersuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own country and hisparents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreign country, if it befar from father or mother, he does not care about it. Now, however, I will tellyou of the many hazardous adventures which by Jove’s will I met with onmy return from Troy.“When I had set sail thence the wind took me first to Ismarus, which isthe city of the Cicons. There I sacked the town and put the people to thesword. We took their wives and also much booty, which we divided equitablyamongst us, so that none might have reason to complain. I then said that we hadbetter make off at once, but my men very foolishly would not obey me, so theystaid there drinking much wine and killing great numbers of sheep and oxen onthe sea shore. Meanwhile the Cicons cried out for help to other Cicons wholived inland. These were more in number, and stronger, and they were moreskilled in the art of war, for they could fight, either from chariots or onfoot as the occasion served; in the morning, therefore, they came as thick asleaves and bloom in summer, and the hand of heaven was against us, so that wewere hard pressed. They set the battle in array near the ships, and the hostsaimed their bronze-shod spears at one another.[76] So long as the day waxed and it wasstill morning, we held our own against them, though they were more in numberthan we; but as the sun went down, towards the time when men loose their oxen,the Cicons got the better of us, and we lost half a dozen men from every shipwe had; so we got away with those that were left.“Thence we sailed onward with sorrow in our hearts, but glad to haveescaped death though we had lost our comrades, nor did we leave till we hadthrice invoked each one of the poor fellows who had perished by the hands ofthe Cicons. Then Jove raised the North wind against us till it blew ahurricane, so that land and sky were hidden in thick clouds, and night sprangforth out of the heavens. We let the ships run before the gale, but the forceof the wind tore our sails to tatters, so we took them down for fear ofshipwreck, and rowed our hardest towards the land. There we lay two days andtwo nights suffering much alike from toil and distress of mind, but on themorning of the third day we again raised our masts, set sail, and took ourplaces, letting the wind and steersmen direct our ship. I should have got homeat that time unharmed had not the North wind and the currents been against meas I was doubling Cape Malea, and set me off my course hard by the island ofCythera.“I was driven thence by foul winds for a space of nine days upon the sea,but on the tenth day we reached the land of the Lotus-eaters, who live on afood that comes from a kind of flower. Here we landed to take in fresh water,and our crews got their mid-day meal on the shore near the ships. When they hadeaten and drunk I sent two of my company to see what manner of men the peopleof the place might be, and they had a third man under them. They started atonce, and went about among the Lotus-eaters, who did them no hurt, but gavethem to eat of the lotus, which was so delicious that those who ate of it leftoff caring about home, and did not even want to go back and say what hadhappened to them, but were for staying and munching lotus[77] with the Lotus-eaters withoutthinking further of their return; nevertheless, though they wept bitterly Iforced them back to the ships and made them fast under the benches. Then I toldthe rest to go on board at once, lest any of them should taste of the lotus andleave off wanting to get home, so they took their places and smote the grey seawith their oars.“We sailed hence, always in much distress, till we came to the land ofthe lawless and inhuman Cyclopes. Now the Cyclopes neither plant nor plough,but trust in providence, and live on such wheat, barley, and grapes as growwild without any kind of tillage, and their wild grapes yield them wine as thesun and the rain may grow them. They have no laws nor assemblies of the people,but live in caves on the tops of high mountains; each is lord and master in hisfamily, and they take no account of their neighbours.“Now off their harbour there lies a wooded and fertile island not quiteclose to the land of the Cyclopes, but still not far. It is over-run with wildgoats, that breed there in great numbers and are never disturbed by foot ofman; for sportsmen—who as a rule will suffer so much hardship in forestor among mountain precipices—do not go there, nor yet again is it everploughed or fed down, but it lies a wilderness untilled and unsown from year toyear, and has no living thing upon it but only goats. For the Cyclopes have noships, nor yet shipwrights who could make ships for them; they cannot thereforego from city to city, or sail over the sea to one another’s country aspeople who have ships can do; if they had had these they would have colonisedthe island,[78] forit is a very good one, and would yield everything in due season. There aremeadows that in some places come right down to the sea shore, well watered andfull of luscious grass; grapes would do there excellently; there is level landfor ploughing, and it would always yield heavily at harvest time, for the soilis deep. There is a good harbour where no cables are wanted, nor yet anchors,nor need a ship be moored, but all one has to do is to beach one’s vesseland stay there till the wind becomes fair for putting out to sea again. At thehead of the harbour there is a spring of clear water coming out of a cave, andthere are poplars growing all round it.“Here we entered, but so dark was the night that some god must havebrought us in, for there was nothing whatever to be seen. A thick mist hung allround our ships;[79] the moon was hidden behind a mass ofclouds so that no one could have seen the island if he had looked for it, norwere there any breakers to tell us we were close in shore before we foundourselves upon the land itself; when, however, we had beached the ships, wetook down the sails, went ashore and camped upon the beach till daybreak.“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, we admired theisland and wandered all over it, while the nymphs Jove’s daughters rousedthe wild goats that we might get some meat for our dinner. On this we fetchedour spears and bows and arrows from the ships, and dividing ourselves intothree bands began to shoot the goats. Heaven sent us excellent sport; I hadtwelve ships with me, and each ship got nine goats, while my own ship had ten;thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we ate and drank ourfill, and we had plenty of wine left, for each one of us had taken many jarsfull when we sacked the city of the Cicons, and this had not yet run out. Whilewe were feasting we kept turning our eyes towards the land of the Cyclopes,which was hard by, and saw the smoke of their stubble fires. We could almostfancy we heard their voices and the bleating of their sheep and goats, but whenthe sun went down and it came on dark, we camped down upon the beach, and nextmorning I called a council.“‘Stay here, my brave fellows,’ said I, ‘all the restof you, while I go with my ship and exploit these people myself: I want to seeif they are uncivilised savages, or a hospitable and humane race.’“I went on board, bidding my men to do so also and loose the hawsers; sothey took their places and smote the grey sea with their oars. When we got tothe land, which was not far, there, on the face of a cliff near the sea, we sawa great cave overhung with laurels. It was a station for a great many sheep andgoats, and outside there was a large yard, with a high wall round it made ofstones built into the ground and of trees both pine and oak. This was the abodeof a huge monster who was then away from home shepherding his flocks. He wouldhave nothing to do with other people, but led the life of an outlaw. He was ahorrid creature, not like a human being at all, but resembling rather some cragthat stands out boldly against the sky on the top of a high mountain.“I told my men to draw the ship ashore, and stay where they were, all butthe twelve best among them, who were to go along with myself. I also took agoatskin of sweet black wine which had been given me by Maron, son of Euanthes,who was priest of Apollo the patron god of Ismarus, and lived within the woodedprecincts of the temple. When we were sacking the city we respected him, andspared his life, as also his wife and child; so he made me some presents ofgreat value—seven talents of fine gold, and a bowl of silver, with twelvejars of sweet wine, unblended, and of the most exquisite flavour. Not a man normaid in the house knew about it, but only himself, his wife, and onehousekeeper: when he drank it he mixed twenty parts of water to one of wine,and yet the fragrance from the mixing-bowl was so exquisite that it wasimpossible to refrain from drinking. I filled a large skin with this wine, andtook a wallet full of provisions with me, for my mind misgave me that I mighthave to deal with some savage who would be of great strength, and would respectneither right nor law.“We soon reached his cave, but he was out shepherding, so we went insideand took stock of all that we could see. His cheese-racks were loaded withcheeses, and he had more lambs and kids than his pens could hold. They werekept in separate flocks; first there were the hoggets, then the oldest of theyounger lambs and lastly the very young ones[80] all kept apart from one another; asfor his dairy, all the vessels, bowls, and milk pails into which he milked,were swimming with whey. When they saw all this, my men begged me to let themfirst steal some cheeses, and make off with them to the ship; they would thenreturn, drive down the lambs and kids, put them on board and sail away withthem. It would have been indeed better if we had done so but I would not listento them, for I wanted to see the owner himself, in the hope that he might giveme a present. When, however, we saw him my poor men found him ill to deal with.“We lit a fire, offered some of the cheeses in sacrifice, ate others ofthem, and then sat waiting till the Cyclops should come in with his sheep. Whenhe came, he brought in with him a huge load of dry firewood to light the firefor his supper, and this he flung with such a noise on to the floor of his cavethat we hid ourselves for fear at the far end of the cavern. Meanwhile he droveall the ewes inside, as well as the she-goats that he was going to milk,leaving the males, both rams and he-goats, outside in the yards. Then he rolleda huge stone to the mouth of the cave—so huge that two and twenty strongfour-wheeled waggons would not be enough to draw it from its place against thedoorway. When he had so done he sat down and milked his ewes and goats, all indue course, and then let each of them have her own young. He curdled half themilk and set it aside in wicker strainers, but the other half he poured intobowls that he might drink it for his supper. When he had got through with allhis work, he lit the fire, and then caught sight of us, whereon he said:“‘Strangers, who are you? Where do sail from? Are you traders, ordo you sail the sea as rovers, with your hands against every man, and everyman’s hand against you?’“We were frightened out of our senses by his loud voice and monstrousform, but I managed to say, ‘We are Achaeans on our way home from Troy,but by the will of Jove, and stress of weather, we have been driven far out ofour course. We are the people of Agamemnon, son of Atreus, who has won infiniterenown throughout the whole world, by sacking so great a city and killing somany people. We therefore humbly pray you to show us some hospitality, andotherwise make us such presents as visitors may reasonably expect. May yourexcellency fear the wrath of heaven, for we are your suppliants, and Jove takesall respectable travellers under his protection, for he is the avenger of allsuppliants and foreigners in distress.’“To this he gave me but a pitiless answer, ‘Stranger,’ saidhe, ‘you are a fool, or else you know nothing of this country. Talk tome, indeed, about fearing the gods or shunning their anger? We Cyclopes do notcare about Jove or any of your blessed gods, for we are ever so much strongerthan they. I shall not spare either yourself or your companions out of anyregard for Jove, unless I am in the humour for doing so. And now tell me whereyou made your ship fast when you came on shore. Was it round the point, or isshe lying straight off the land?’“He said this to draw me out, but I was too cunning to be caught in thatway, so I answered with a lie; ‘Neptune,’ said I, ‘sent myship on to the rocks at the far end of your country, and wrecked it. We weredriven on to them from the open sea, but I and those who are with me escapedthe jaws of death.’“The cruel wretch vouchsafed me not one word of answer, but with a suddenclutch he gripped up two of my men at once and dashed them down upon the groundas though they had been puppies. Their brains were shed upon the ground, andthe earth was wet with their blood. Then he tore them limb from limb and suppedupon them. He gobbled them up like a lion in the wilderness, flesh, bones,marrow, and entrails, without leaving anything uneaten. As for us, we wept andlifted up our hands to heaven on seeing such a horrid sight, for we did notknow what else to do; but when the Cyclops had filled his huge paunch, and hadwashed down his meal of human flesh with a drink of neat milk, he stretchedhimself full length upon the ground among his sheep, and went to sleep. I wasat first inclined to seize my sword, draw it, and drive it into his vitals, butI reflected that if I did we should all certainly be lost, for we should neverbe able to shift the stone which the monster had put in front of the door. Sowe stayed sobbing and sighing where we were till morning came.“When the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn, appeared, he again lithis fire, milked his goats and ewes, all quite rightly, and then let each haveher own young one; as soon as he had got through with all his work, he clutchedup two more of my men, and began eating them for his morning’s meal.Presently, with the utmost ease, he rolled the stone away from the door anddrove out his sheep, but he at once put it back again—as easily as thoughhe were merely clapping the lid on to a quiver full of arrows. As soon as hehad done so he shouted, and cried ‘Shoo, shoo,’ after his sheep todrive them on to the mountain; so I was left to scheme some way of taking myrevenge and covering myself with glory.“In the end I deemed it would be the best plan to do as follows: TheCyclops had a great club which was lying near one of the sheep pens; it was ofgreen olive wood, and he had cut it intending to use it for a staff as soon asit should be dry. It was so huge that we could only compare it to the mast of atwenty-oared merchant vessel of large burden, and able to venture out into opensea. I went up to this club and cut off about six feet of it; I then gave thispiece to the men and told them to fine it evenly off at one end, which theyproceeded to do, and lastly I brought it to a point myself, charring the end inthe fire to make it harder. When I had done this I hid it under dung, which waslying about all over the cave, and told the men to cast lots which of themshould venture along with myself to lift it and bore it into themonster’s eye while he was asleep. The lot fell upon the very four whom Ishould have chosen, and I myself made five. In the evening the wretch came backfrom shepherding, and drove his flocks into the cave—this time drivingthem all inside, and not leaving any in the yards; I suppose some fancy musthave taken him, or a god must have prompted him to do so. As soon as he had putthe stone back to its place against the door, he sat down, milked his ewes andhis goats all quite rightly, and then let each have her own young one; when hehad got through with all this work, he gripped up two more of my men, and madehis supper off them. So I went up to him with an ivy-wood bowl of black wine inmy hands:“‘Look here, Cyclops,’ said I, you have been eating a greatdeal of man’s flesh, so take this and drink some wine, that you may seewhat kind of liquor we had on board my ship. I was bringing it to you as adrink-offering, in the hope that you would take compassion upon me and furtherme on my way home, whereas all you do is to go on ramping and raving mostintolerably. You ought to be ashamed of yourself; how can you expect people tocome see you any more if you treat them in this way?’“He then took the cup and drank. He was so delighted with the taste ofthe wine that he begged me for another bowl full. ‘Be so kind,’ hesaid, ‘as to give me some more, and tell me your name at once. I want tomake you a present that you will be glad to have. We have wine even in thiscountry, for our soil grows grapes and the sun ripens them, but this drinkslike Nectar and Ambrosia all in one.’“I then gave him some more; three times did I fill the bowl for him, andthree times did he drain it without thought or heed; then, when I saw that thewine had got into his head, I said to him as plausibly as I could:‘Cyclops, you ask my name and I will tell it you; give me, therefore, thepresent you promised me; my name is Noman; this is what my father and motherand my friends have always called me.’“But the cruel wretch said, ‘Then I will eat all Noman’scomrades before Noman himself, and will keep Noman for the last. This is thepresent that I will make him.’“As he spoke he reeled, and fell sprawling face upwards on the ground.His great neck hung heavily backwards and a deep sleep took hold upon him.Presently he turned sick, and threw up both wine and the gobbets of human fleshon which he had been gorging, for he was very drunk. Then I thrust the beam ofwood far into the embers to heat it, and encouraged my men lest any of themshould turn faint-hearted. When the wood, green though it was, was about toblaze, I drew it out of the fire glowing with heat, and my men gathered roundme, for heaven had filled their hearts with courage. We drove the sharp end ofthe beam into the monster’s eye, and bearing upon it with all my weight Ikept turning it round and round as though I were boring a hole in aship’s plank with an auger, which two men with a wheel and strap can keepon turning as long as they choose. Even thus did we bore the red hot beam intohis eye, till the boiling blood bubbled all over it as we worked it round andround, so that the steam from the burning eyeball scalded his eyelids andeyebrows, and the roots of the eye sputtered in the fire. As a blacksmithplunges an axe or hatchet into cold water to temper it—for it is thisthat gives strength to the iron—and it makes a great hiss as he does so,even thus did the Cyclops’ eye hiss round the beam of olive wood, and hishideous yells made the cave ring again. We ran away in a fright, but he pluckedthe beam all besmirched with gore from his eye, and hurled it from him in afrenzy of rage and pain, shouting as he did so to the other Cyclopes who livedon the bleak headlands near him; so they gathered from all quarters round hiscave when they heard him crying, and asked what was the matter with him.“‘What ails you, Polyphemus,’ said they, ‘that you makesuch a noise, breaking the stillness of the night, and preventing us from beingable to sleep? Surely no man is carrying off your sheep? Surely no man istrying to kill you either by fraud or by force?’“But Polyphemus shouted to them from inside the cave, ‘Noman iskilling me by fraud; no man is killing me by force.’“‘Then,’ said they, ‘if no man is attacking you, youmust be ill; when Jove makes people ill, there is no help for it, and you hadbetter pray to your father Neptune.’“Then they went away, and I laughed inwardly at the success of my cleverstratagem, but the Cyclops, groaning and in an agony of pain, felt about withhis hands till he found the stone and took it from the door; then he sat in thedoorway and stretched his hands in front of it to catch anyone going out withthe sheep, for he thought I might be foolish enough to attempt this.“As for myself I kept on puzzling to think how I could best save my ownlife and those of my companions; I schemed and schemed, as one who knows thathis life depends upon it, for the danger was very great. In the end I deemedthat this plan would be the best; the male sheep were well grown, and carried aheavy black fleece, so I bound them noiselessly in threes together, with someof the withies on which the wicked monster used to sleep. There was to be a manunder the middle sheep, and the two on either side were to cover him, so thatthere were three sheep to each man. As for myself there was a ram finer thanany of the others, so I caught hold of him by the back, esconced myself in thethick wool under his belly, and hung on patiently to his fleece, face upwards,keeping a firm hold on it all the time.“Thus, then, did we wait in great fear of mind till morning came, butwhen the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the male sheep hurriedout to feed, while the ewes remained bleating about the pens waiting to bemilked, for their udders were full to bursting; but their master in spite ofall his pain felt the backs of all the sheep as they stood upright, withoutbeing sharp enough to find out that the men were underneath their bellies. Asthe ram was going out, last of all, heavy with its fleece and with the weightof my crafty self, Polyphemus laid hold of it and said:“‘My good ram, what is it that makes you the last to leave my cavethis morning? You are not wont to let the ewes go before you, but lead the mobwith a run whether to flowery mead or bubbling fountain, and are the first tocome home again at night; but now you lag last of all. Is it because you knowyour master has lost his eye, and are sorry because that wicked Noman and hishorrid crew has got him down in his drink and blinded him? But I will have hislife yet. If you could understand and talk, you would tell me where the wretchis hiding, and I would dash his brains upon the ground till they flew all overthe cave. I should thus have some satisfaction for the harm this no-good Nomanhas done me.’“As he spoke he drove the ram outside, but when we were a little way outfrom the cave and yards, I first got from under the ram’s belly, and thenfreed my comrades; as for the sheep, which were very fat, by constantly headingthem in the right direction we managed to drive them down to the ship. The crewrejoiced greatly at seeing those of us who had escaped death, but wept for theothers whom the Cyclops had killed. However, I made signs to them by noddingand frowning that they were to hush their crying, and told them to get all thesheep on board at once and put out to sea; so they went aboard, took theirplaces, and smote the grey sea with their oars. Then, when I had got as far outas my voice would reach, I began to jeer at the Cyclops.“‘Cyclops,’ said I, ‘you should have taken bettermeasure of your man before eating up his comrades in your cave. You wretch, eatup your visitors in your own house? You might have known that your sin wouldfind you out, and now Jove and the other gods have punished you.’“He got more and more furious as he heard me, so he tore the top from offa high mountain, and flung it just in front of my ship so that it was within alittle of hitting the end of the rudder.[81] The sea quaked as the rock fell intoit, and the wash of the wave it raised carried us back towards the mainland,and forced us towards the shore. But I snatched up a long pole and kept theship off, making signs to my men by nodding my head, that they must row fortheir lives, whereon they laid out with a will. When we had got twice as far aswe were before, I was for jeering at the Cyclops again, but the men begged andprayed of me to hold my tongue.“‘Do not,’ they exclaimed, ‘be mad enough to provokethis savage creature further; he has thrown one rock at us already which droveus back again to the mainland, and we made sure it had been the death of us; ifhe had then heard any further sound of voices he would have pounded our headsand our ship’s timbers into a jelly with the rugged rocks he would haveheaved at us, for he can throw them a long way.’“But I would not listen to them, and shouted out to him in my rage,‘Cyclops, if any one asks you who it was that put your eye out andspoiled your beauty, say it was the valiant warrior Ulysses, son of Laertes,who lives in Ithaca.’“On this he groaned, and cried out, ‘Alas, alas, then the oldprophecy about me is coming true. There was a prophet here, at one time, a manboth brave and of great stature, Telemus son of Eurymus, who was an excellentseer, and did all the prophesying for the Cyclopes till he grew old; he told methat all this would happen to me some day, and said I should lose my sight bythe hand of Ulysses. I have been all along expecting some one of imposingpresence and superhuman strength, whereas he turns out to be a littleinsignificant weakling, who has managed to blind my eye by taking advantage ofme in my drink; come here, then, Ulysses, that I may make you presents to showmy hospitality, and urge Neptune to help you forward on your journey—forNeptune and I are father and son. He, if he so will, shall heal me, which noone else neither god nor man can do.’“Then I said, ‘I wish I could be as sure of killing you outrightand sending you down to the house of Hades, as I am that it will take more thanNeptune to cure that eye of yours.’“On this he lifted up his hands to the firmament of heaven and prayed,saying, ‘Hear me, great Neptune; if I am indeed your own true begottenson, grant that Ulysses may never reach his home alive; or if he must get backto his friends at last, let him do so late and in sore plight after losing allhis men [let him reach his home in another man’s ship and find trouble inhis house.’[82]“Thus did he pray, and Neptune heard his prayer. Then he picked up a rockmuch larger than the first, swung it aloft and hurled it with prodigious force.It fell just short of the ship, but was within a little of hitting the end ofthe rudder. The sea quaked as the rock fell into it, and the wash of the waveit raised drove us onwards on our way towards the shore of the island.“When at last we got to the island where we had left the rest of ourships, we found our comrades lamenting us, and anxiously awaiting our return.We ran our vessel upon the sands and got out of her on to the sea shore; wealso landed the Cyclops’ sheep, and divided them equitably amongst us sothat none might have reason to complain. As for the ram, my companions agreedthat I should have it as an extra share; so I sacrificed it on the sea shore,and burned its thigh bones to Jove, who is the lord of all. But he heeded notmy sacrifice, and only thought how he might destroy both my ships and mycomrades.“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we feastedour fill on meat and drink, but when the sun went down and it came on dark, wecamped upon the beach. When the child of morning rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, Ibade my men on board and loose the hawsers. Then they took their places andsmote the grey sea with their oars; so we sailed on with sorrow in our hearts,but glad to have escaped death though we had lost our comrades.BOOK XAEOLUS, THE LAESTRYGONES, CIRCE.“Thence we went on to the Aeolian island where lives Aeolus son ofHippotas, dear to the immortal gods. It is an island that floats (as it were)upon the sea,[83]iron bound with a wall that girds it. Now, Aeolus has six daughters and sixlusty sons, so he made the sons marry the daughters, and they all live withtheir dear father and mother, feasting and enjoying every conceivable kind ofluxury. All day long the atmosphere of the house is loaded with the savour ofroasting meats till it groans again, yard and all; but by night they sleep ontheir well made bedsteads, each with his own wife between the blankets. Thesewere the people among whom we had now come.“Aeolus entertained me for a whole month asking me questions all the timeabout Troy, the Argive fleet, and the return of the Achaeans. I told himexactly how everything had happened, and when I said I must go, and asked himto further me on my way, he made no sort of difficulty, but set about doing soat once. Moreover, he flayed me a prime ox-hide to hold the ways of the roaringwinds, which he shut up in the hide as in a sack—for Jove had made himcaptain over the winds, and he could stir or still each one of them accordingto his own pleasure. He put the sack in the ship and bound the mouth so tightlywith a silver thread that not even a breath of a side-wind could blow from anyquarter. The West wind which was fair for us did he alone let blow as it chose;but it all came to nothing, for we were lost through our own folly.“Nine days and nine nights did we sail, and on the tenth day our nativeland showed on the horizon. We got so close in that we could see the stubblefires burning, and I, being then dead beat, fell into a light sleep, for I hadnever let the rudder out of my own hands, that we might get home the faster. Onthis the men fell to talking among themselves, and said I was bringing backgold and silver in the sack that Aeolus had given me. ‘Bless myheart,’ would one turn to his neighbour, saying, ‘how this man getshonoured and makes friends to whatever city or country he may go. See what fineprizes he is taking home from Troy, while we, who have travelled just as far ashe has, come back with hands as empty as we set out with—and now Aeolushas given him ever so much more. Quick—let us see what it all is, and howmuch gold and silver there is in the sack he gave him.’“Thus they talked and evil counsels prevailed. They loosed the sack,whereupon the wind flew howling forth and raised a storm that carried usweeping out to sea and away from our own country. Then I awoke, and knew notwhether to throw myself into the sea or to live on and make the best of it; butI bore it, covered myself up, and lay down in the ship, while the men lamentedbitterly as the fierce winds bore our fleet back to the Aeolian island.“When we reached it we went ashore to take in water, and dined hard bythe ships. Immediately after dinner I took a herald and one of my men and wentstraight to the house of Aeolus, where I found him feasting with his wife andfamily; so we sat down as suppliants on the threshold. They were astounded whenthey saw us and said, ‘Ulysses, what brings you here? What god has beenill-treating you? We took great pains to further you on your way home toIthaca, or wherever it was that you wanted to go to.’“Thus did they speak, but I answered sorrowfully, ‘My men haveundone me; they, and cruel sleep, have ruined me. My friends, mend me thismischief, for you can if you will.’“I spoke as movingly as I could, but they said nothing, till their fatheranswered, ‘Vilest of mankind, get you gone at once out of the island; himwhom heaven hates will I in no wise help. Be off, for you come here as oneabhorred of heaven.’ And with these words he sent me sorrowing from hisdoor.“Thence we sailed sadly on till the men were worn out with long andfruitless rowing, for there was no longer any wind to help them. Six days,night and day did we toil, and on the seventh day we reached the rockystronghold of Lamus—Telepylus, the city of the Laestrygonians, where theshepherd who is driving in his sheep and goats [to be milked] salutes him whois driving out his flock [to feed] and this last answers the salute. In thatcountry a man who could do without sleep might earn double wages, one as aherdsman of cattle, and another as a shepherd, for they work much the same bynight as they do by day.[84]“When we reached the harbour we found it land-locked under steep cliffs,with a narrow entrance between two headlands. My captains took all their shipsinside, and made them fast close to one another, for there was never so much asa breath of wind inside, but it was always dead calm. I kept my own shipoutside, and moored it to a rock at the very end of the point; then I climbed ahigh rock to reconnoitre, but could see no sign neither of man nor cattle, onlysome smoke rising from the ground. So I sent two of my company with anattendant to find out what sort of people the inhabitants were.“The men when they got on shore followed a level road by which the peopledraw their firewood from the mountains into the town, till presently they met ayoung woman who had come outside to fetch water, and who was daughter to aLaestrygonian named Antiphates. She was going to the fountain Artacia fromwhich the people bring in their water, and when my men had come close up toher, they asked her who the king of that country might be, and over what kindof people he ruled; so she directed them to her father’s house, but whenthey got there they found his wife to be a giantess as huge as a mountain, andthey were horrified at the sight of her.“She at once called her husband Antiphates from the place of assembly,and forthwith he set about killing my men. He snatched up one of them, andbegan to make his dinner off him then and there, whereon the other two ran backto the ships as fast as ever they could. But Antiphates raised a hue-and-cryafter them, and thousands of sturdy Laestrygonians sprang up from everyquarter—ogres, not men. They threw vast rocks at us from the cliffs asthough they had been mere stones, and I heard the horrid sound of the shipscrunching up against one another, and the death cries of my men, as theLaestrygonians speared them like fishes and took them home to eat them. Whilethey were thus killing my men within the harbour I drew my sword, cut the cableof my own ship, and told my men to row with all their might if they too wouldnot fare like the rest; so they laid out for their lives, and we were thankfulenough when we got into open water out of reach of the rocks they hurled at us.As for the others there was not one of them left.“Thence we sailed sadly on, glad to have escaped death, though we hadlost our comrades, and came to the Aeaean island, where Circe lives—agreat and cunning goddess who is own sister to the magician Aeetes—forthey are both children of the sun by Perse, who is daughter to Oceanus. Webrought our ship into a safe harbour without a word, for some god guided usthither, and having landed we lay there for two days and two nights, worn outin body and mind. When the morning of the third day came I took my spear and mysword, and went away from the ship to reconnoitre, and see if I could discoversigns of human handiwork, or hear the sound of voices. Climbing to the top of ahigh look-out I espied the smoke of Circe’s house rising upwards amid adense forest of trees, and when I saw this I doubted whether, having seen thesmoke, I would not go on at once and find out more, but in the end I deemed itbest to go back to the ship, give the men their dinners, and send some of theminstead of going myself.“When I had nearly got back to the ship some god took pity upon mysolitude, and sent a fine antlered stag right into the middle of my path. Hewas coming down his pasture in the forest to drink of the river, for the heatof the sun drove him, and as he passed I struck him in the middle of the back;the bronze point of the spear went clean through him, and he lay groaning inthe dust until the life went out of him. Then I set my foot upon him, drew myspear from the wound, and laid it down; I also gathered rough grass and rushesand twisted them into a fathom or so of good stout rope, with which I bound thefour feet of the noble creature together; having so done I hung him round myneck and walked back to the ship leaning upon my spear, for the stag was muchtoo big for me to be able to carry him on my shoulder, steadying him with onehand. As I threw him down in front of the ship, I called the men and spokecheeringly man by man to each of them. ‘Look here my friends,’ saidI, ‘we are not going to die so much before our time after all, and at anyrate we will not starve so long as we have got something to eat and drink onboard.’ On this they uncovered their heads upon the sea shore and admiredthe stag, for he was indeed a splendid fellow. Then, when they had feastedtheir eyes upon him sufficiently, they washed their hands and began to cook himfor dinner.“Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun we stayedthere eating and drinking our fill, but when the sun went down and it came ondark, we camped upon the sea shore. When the child of morning, rosy-fingeredDawn, appeared, I called a council and said, ‘My friends, we are in verygreat difficulties; listen therefore to me. We have no idea where the suneither sets or rises,[85] so that we do not even know East fromWest. I see no way out of it; nevertheless, we must try and find one. We arecertainly on an island, for I went as high as I could this morning, and saw thesea reaching all round it to the horizon; it lies low, but towards the middle Isaw smoke rising from out of a thick forest of trees.’“Their hearts sank as they heard me, for they remembered how they hadbeen treated by the Laestrygonian Antiphates, and by the savage ogrePolyphemus. They wept bitterly in their dismay, but there was nothing to be gotby crying, so I divided them into two companies and set a captain over each; Igave one company to Eurylochus, while I took command of the other myself. Thenwe cast lots in a helmet, and the lot fell upon Eurylochus; so he set out withhis twenty-two men, and they wept, as also did we who were left behind.“When they reached Circe’s house they found it built of cut stones,on a site that could be seen from far, in the middle of the forest. There werewild mountain wolves and lions prowling all round it—poor bewitchedcreatures whom she had tamed by her enchantments and drugged into subjection.They did not attack my men, but wagged their great tails, fawned upon them, andrubbed their noses lovingly against them.[86] As hounds crowd round their masterwhen they see him coming from dinner—for they know he will bring themsomething—even so did these wolves and lions with their great claws fawnupon my men, but the men were terribly frightened at seeing such strangecreatures. Presently they reached the gates of the goddess’s house, andas they stood there they could hear Circe within, singing most beautifully asshe worked at her loom, making a web so fine, so soft, and of such dazzlingcolours as no one but a goddess could weave. On this Polites, whom I valued andtrusted more than any other of my men, said, ‘There is some one insideworking at a loom and singing most beautifully; the whole place resounds withit, let us call her and see whether she is woman or goddess.’“They called her and she came down, unfastened the door, and bade thementer. They, thinking no evil, followed her, all except Eurylochus, whosuspected mischief and staid outside. When she had got them into her house, sheset them upon benches and seats and mixed them a mess with cheese, honey, meal,and Pramnian wine, but she drugged it with wicked poisons to make them forgettheir homes, and when they had drunk she turned them into pigs by a stroke ofher wand, and shut them up in her pig-styes. They were like pigs—head,hair, and all, and they grunted just as pigs do; but their senses were the sameas before, and they remembered everything.“Thus then were they shut up squealing, and Circe threw them some acornsand beech masts such as pigs eat, but Eurylochus hurried back to tell me aboutthe sad fate of our comrades. He was so overcome with dismay that though hetried to speak he could find no words to do so; his eyes filled with tears andhe could only sob and sigh, till at last we forced his story out of him, and hetold us what had happened to the others.“‘We went,’ said he, ‘as you told us, through theforest, and in the middle of it there was a fine house built with cut stones ina place that could be seen from far. There we found a woman, or else she was agoddess, working at her loom and singing sweetly; so the men shouted to her andcalled her, whereon she at once came down, opened the door, and invited us in.The others did not suspect any mischief so they followed her into the house,but I staid where I was, for I thought there might be some treachery. From thatmoment I saw them no more, for not one of them ever came out, though I sat along time watching for them.’“Then I took my sword of bronze and slung it over my shoulders; I alsotook my bow, and told Eurylochus to come back with me and shew me the way. Buthe laid hold of me with both his hands and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Sir,do not force me to go with you, but let me stay here, for I know you will notbring one of them back with you, nor even return alive yourself; let us rathersee if we cannot escape at any rate with the few that are left us, for we maystill save our lives.’“‘Stay where you are, then,’ answered I, ‘eating anddrinking at the ship, but I must go, for I am most urgently bound to doso.’“With this I left the ship and went up inland. When I got through thecharmed grove, and was near the great house of the enchantress Circe, I metMercury with his golden wand, disguised as a young man in the hey-day of hisyouth and beauty with the down just coming upon his face. He came up to me andtook my hand within his own, saying, ‘My poor unhappy man, whither areyou going over this mountain top, alone and without knowing the way? Your menare shut up in Circe’s pigstyes, like so many wild boars in their lairs.You surely do not fancy that you can set them free? I can tell you that youwill never get back and will have to stay there with the rest of them. Butnever mind, I will protect you and get you out of your difficulty. Take thisherb, which is one of great virtue, and keep it about you when you go toCirce’s house, it will be a talisman to you against every kind ofmischief.“‘And I will tell you of all the wicked witchcraft that Circe willtry to practice upon you. She will mix a mess for you to drink, and she willdrug the meal with which she makes it, but she will not be able to charm you,for the virtue of the herb that I shall give you will prevent her spells fromworking. I will tell you all about it. When Circe strikes you with her wand,draw your sword and spring upon her as though you were going to kill her. Shewill then be frightened, and will desire you to go to bed with her; on this youmust not point blank refuse her, for you want her to set your companions free,and to take good care also of yourself, but you must make her swear solemnly byall the blessed gods that she will plot no further mischief against you, orelse when she has got you naked she will unman you and make you fit fornothing.’“As he spoke he pulled the herb out of the ground and shewed me what itwas like. The root was black, while the flower was as white as milk; the godscall it Moly, and mortal men cannot uproot it, but the gods can do whateverthey like.“Then Mercury went back to high Olympus passing over the wooded island;but I fared onward to the house of Circe, and my heart was clouded with care asI walked along. When I got to the gates I stood there and called the goddess,and as soon as she heard me she came down, opened the door, and asked me tocome in; so I followed her—much troubled in my mind. She set me on arichly decorated seat inlaid with silver, there was a footstool also under myfeet, and she mixed a mess in a golden goblet for me to drink; but she druggedit, for she meant me mischief. When she had given it me, and I had drunk itwithout its charming me, she struck me with her wand. ‘There now,’she cried, ‘be off to the pigstye, and make your lair with the rest ofthem.’“But I rushed at her with my sword drawn as though I would kill her,whereon she fell with a loud scream, clasped my knees, and spoke piteously,saying, ‘Who and whence are you? from what place and people have youcome? How can it be that my drugs have no power to charm you? Never yet was anyman able to stand so much as a taste of the herb I gave you; you must bespell-proof; surely you can be none other than the bold hero Ulysses, whoMercury always said would come here some day with his ship while on his wayhome from Troy; so be it then; sheathe your sword and let us go to bed, that wemay make friends and learn to trust each other.’“And I answered, ‘Circe, how can you expect me to be friendly withyou when you have just been turning all my men into pigs? And now that you havegot me here myself, you mean me mischief when you ask me to go to bed with you,and will unman me and make me fit for nothing. I shall certainly not consent togo to bed with you unless you will first take your solemn oath to plot nofurther harm against me.’“So she swore at once as I had told her, and when she had completed heroath then I went to bed with her.“Meanwhile her four servants, who are her housemaids, set about theirwork. They are the children of the groves and fountains, and of the holy watersthat run down into the sea. One of them spread a fair purple cloth over a seat,and laid a carpet underneath it. Another brought tables of silver up to theseats, and set them with baskets of gold. A third mixed some sweet wine withwater in a silver bowl and put golden cups upon the tables, while the fourthbrought in water and set it to boil in a large cauldron over a good fire whichshe had lighted. When the water in the cauldron was boiling,[87] she poured coldinto it till it was just as I liked it, and then she set me in a bath and beganwashing me from the cauldron about the head and shoulders, to take the tire andstiffness out of my limbs. As soon as she had done washing me and anointing mewith oil, she arrayed me in a good cloak and shirt and led me to a richlydecorated seat inlaid with silver; there was a footstool also under my feet. Amaid servant then brought me water in a beautiful golden ewer and poured itinto a silver basin for me to wash my hands, and she drew a clean table besideme; an upper servant brought me bread and offered me many things of what therewas in the house, and then Circe bade me eat, but I would not, and sat withoutheeding what was before me, still moody and suspicious.“When Circe saw me sitting there without eating, and in great grief, shecame to me and said, ‘Ulysses, why do you sit like that as though youwere dumb, gnawing at your own heart, and refusing both meat and drink? Is itthat you are still suspicious? You ought not to be, for I have already swornsolemnly that I will not hurt you.’“And I said, ‘Circe, no man with any sense of what is right canthink of either eating or drinking in your house until you have set his friendsfree and let him see them. If you want me to eat and drink, you must free mymen and bring them to me that I may see them with my own eyes.’“When I had said this she went straight through the court with her wandin her hand and opened the pigstye doors. My men came out like so many primehogs and stood looking at her, but she went about among them and anointed eachwith a second drug, whereon the bristles that the bad drug had given them felloff, and they became men again, younger than they were before, and much tallerand better looking. They knew me at once, seized me each of them by the hand,and wept for joy till the whole house was filled with the sound of theirhalloa-ballooing, and Circe herself was so sorry for them that she came up tome and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, go back at once to the seawhere you have left your ship, and first draw it on to the land. Then, hide allyour ship’s gear and property in some cave, and come back here with yourmen.’“I agreed to this, so I went back to the sea shore, and found the men atthe ship weeping and wailing most piteously. When they saw me the sillyblubbering fellows began frisking round me as calves break out and gambol roundtheir mothers, when they see them coming home to be milked after they have beenfeeding all day, and the homestead resounds with their lowing. They seemed asglad to see me as though they had got back to their own rugged Ithaca, wherethey had been born and bred. ‘Sir,’ said the affectionatecreatures, ‘we are as glad to see you back as though we had got safe hometo Ithaca; but tell us all about the fate of our comrades.’“I spoke comfortingly to them and said, ‘We must draw our ship onto the land, and hide the ship’s gear with all our property in some cave;then come with me all of you as fast as you can to Circe’s house, whereyou will find your comrades eating and drinking in the midst of greatabundance.’“On this the men would have come with me at once, but Eurylochus tried tohold them back and said, ‘Alas, poor wretches that we are, what willbecome of us? Rush not on your ruin by going to the house of Circe, who willturn us all into pigs or wolves or lions, and we shall have to keep guard overher house. Remember how the Cyclops treated us when our comrades went insidehis cave, and Ulysses with them. It was all through his sheer folly that thosemen lost their lives.’“When I heard him I was in two minds whether or no to draw the keen bladethat hung by my sturdy thigh and cut his head off in spite of his being a nearrelation of my own; but the men interceded for him and said, ‘Sir, if itmay so be, let this fellow stay here and mind the ship, but take the rest of uswith you to Circe’s house.’“On this we all went inland, and Eurylochus was not left behind afterall, but came on too, for he was frightened by the severe reprimand that I hadgiven him.“Meanwhile Circe had been seeing that the men who had been left behindwere washed and anointed with olive oil; she had also given them woollen cloaksand shirts, and when we came we found them all comfortably at dinner in herhouse. As soon as the men saw each other face to face and knew one another,they wept for joy and cried aloud till the whole palace rang again. ThereonCirce came up to me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, tell yourmen to leave off crying; I know how much you have all of you suffered at sea,and how ill you have fared among cruel savages on the mainland, but that isover now, so stay here, and eat and drink till you are once more as strong andhearty as you were when you left Ithaca; for at present you are weakened bothin body and mind; you keep all the time thinking of the hardships you havesuffered during your travels, so that you have no more cheerfulness left inyou.’“Thus did she speak and we assented. We stayed with Circe for a wholetwelvemonth feasting upon an untold quantity both of meat and wine. But whenthe year had passed in the waning of moons and the long days had come round, mymen called me apart and said, ‘Sir, it is time you began to think aboutgoing home, if so be you are to be spared to see your house and native countryat all.’“Thus did they speak and I assented. Thereon through the livelong day tothe going down of the sun we feasted our fill on meat and wine, but when thesun went down and it came on dark the men laid themselves down to sleep in thecovered cloisters. I, however, after I had got into bed with Circe, besoughther by her knees, and the goddess listened to what I had got to say.‘Circe,’ said I, ‘please to keep the promise you made meabout furthering me on my homeward voyage. I want to get back and so do my men,they are always pestering me with their complaints as soon as ever your back isturned.’“And the goddess answered, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, youshall none of you stay here any longer if you do not want to, but there isanother journey which you have got to take before you can sail homewards. Youmust go to the house of Hades and of dread Proserpine to consult the ghost ofthe blind Theban prophet Teiresias, whose reason is still unshaken. To himalone has Proserpine left his understanding even in death, but the other ghostsflit about aimlessly.’“I was dismayed when I heard this. I sat up in bed and wept, and wouldgladly have lived no longer to see the light of the sun, but presently when Iwas tired of weeping and tossing myself about, I said, ‘And who shallguide me upon this voyage—for the house of Hades is a port that no shipcan reach.’“‘You will want no guide,’ she answered; ‘raise yourmast, set your white sails, sit quite still, and the North Wind will blow youthere of itself. When your ship has traversed the waters of Oceanus, you willreach the fertile shore of Proserpine’s country with its groves of tallpoplars and willows that shed their fruit untimely; here beach your ship uponthe shore of Oceanus, and go straight on to the dark abode of Hades. You willfind it near the place where the rivers Pyriphlegethon and Cocytus (which is abranch of the river Styx) flow into Acheron, and you will see a rock near it,just where the two roaring rivers run into one another.“‘When you have reached this spot, as I now tell you, dig a trencha cubit or so in length, breadth, and depth, and pour into it as adrink-offering to all the dead, first, honey mixed with milk, then wine, and inthe third place water—sprinkling white barley meal over the whole.Moreover you must offer many prayers to the poor feeble ghosts, and promisethem that when you get back to Ithaca you will sacrifice a barren heifer tothem, the best you have, and will load the pyre with good things. Moreparticularly you must promise that Teiresias shall have a black sheep all tohimself, the finest in all your flocks.“‘When you shall have thus besought the ghosts with your prayers,offer them a ram and a black ewe, bending their heads towards Erebus; butyourself turn away from them as though you would make towards the river. Onthis, many dead men’s ghosts will come to you, and you must tell your mento skin the two sheep that you have just killed, and offer them as a burntsacrifice with prayers to Hades and to Proserpine. Then draw your sword and sitthere, so as to prevent any other poor ghost from coming near the spilt bloodbefore Teiresias shall have answered your questions. The seer will presentlycome to you, and will tell you about your voyage—what stages you are tomake, and how you are to sail the sea so as to reach your home.’“It was day-break by the time she had done speaking, so she dressed me inmy shirt and cloak. As for herself she threw a beautiful light gossamer fabricover her shoulders, fastening it with a golden girdle round her waist, and shecovered her head with a mantle. Then I went about among the men everywhere allover the house, and spoke kindly to each of them man by man: ‘You mustnot lie sleeping here any longer,’ said I to them, ‘we must begoing, for Circe has told me all about it.’ And on this they did as Ibade them.“Even so, however, I did not get them away without misadventure. We hadwith us a certain youth named Elpenor, not very remarkable for sense orcourage, who had got drunk and was lying on the house-top away from the rest ofthe men, to sleep off his liquor in the cool. When he heard the noise of themen bustling about, he jumped up on a sudden and forgot all about coming downby the main staircase, so he tumbled right off the roof and broke his neck, andhis soul went down to the house of Hades.“When I had got the men together I said to them, ‘You think you areabout to start home again, but Circe has explained to me that instead of this,we have got to go to the house of Hades and Proserpine to consult the ghost ofthe Theban prophet Teiresias.’“The men were broken-hearted as they heard me, and threw themselves onthe ground groaning and tearing their hair, but they did not mend matters bycrying. When we reached the sea shore, weeping and lamenting our fate, Circebrought the ram and the ewe, and we made them fast hard by the ship. She passedthrough the midst of us without our knowing it, for who can see the comings andgoings of a god, if the god does not wish to be seen?BOOK XITHE VISIT TO THE DEAD.[88]“Then, when we had got down to the sea shore we drew our ship into thewater and got her mast and sails into her; we also put the sheep on board andtook our places, weeping and in great distress of mind. Circe, that great andcunning goddess, sent us a fair wind that blew dead aft and staid steadily withus keeping our sails all the time well filled; so we did whatever wanted doingto the ship’s gear and let her go as the wind and helmsman headed her.All day long her sails were full as she held her course over the sea, but whenthe sun went down and darkness was over all the earth, we got into the deepwaters of the river Oceanus, where lie the land and city of the Cimmerians wholive enshrouded in mist and darkness which the rays of the sun never pierceneither at his rising nor as he goes down again out of the heavens, but thepoor wretches live in one long melancholy night. When we got there we beachedthe ship, took the sheep out of her, and went along by the waters of Oceanustill we came to the place of which Circe had told us.“Here Perimedes and Eurylochus held the victims, while I drew my swordand dug the trench a cubit each way. I made a drink-offering to all the dead,first with honey and milk, then with wine, and thirdly with water, and Isprinkled white barley meal over the whole, praying earnestly to the poorfeckless ghosts, and promising them that when I got back to Ithaca I wouldsacrifice a barren heifer for them, the best I had, and would load the pyrewith good things. I also particularly promised that Teiresias should have ablack sheep to himself, the best in all my flocks. When I had prayedsufficiently to the dead, I cut the throats of the two sheep and let the bloodrun into the trench, whereon the ghosts came trooping up fromErebus—brides,[89] young bachelors, old men worn outwith toil, maids who had been crossed in love, and brave men who had beenkilled in battle, with their armour still smirched with blood; they came fromevery quarter and flitted round the trench with a strange kind of screamingsound that made me turn pale with fear. When I saw them coming I told the mento be quick and flay the carcasses of the two dead sheep and make burntofferings of them, and at the same time to repeat prayers to Hades and toProserpine; but I sat where I was with my sword drawn and would not let thepoor feckless ghosts come near the blood till Teiresias should have answered myquestions.“The first ghost that came was that of my comrade Elpenor, for he had notyet been laid beneath the earth. We had left his body unwaked and unburied inCirce’s house, for we had had too much else to do. I was very sorry forhim, and cried when I saw him: ‘Elpenor,’ said I, ‘how didyou come down here into this gloom and darkness? You have got here on footquicker than I have with my ship.’“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck,and my own unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top ofCirce’s house, and never thought of coming down again by the greatstaircase but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came downto the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have leftbehind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father who broughtyou up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the one hope of yourhouse, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when you leave this limbo youwill again hold your ship for the Aeaean island. Do not go thence leaving meunwaked and unburied behind you, or I may bring heaven’s anger upon you;but burn me with whatever armour I have, build a barrow for me on the seashore, that may tell people in days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was,and plant over my grave the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive andwith my messmates.’ And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all thatyou have asked of me.’“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the oneside of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost of mycomrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the ghost of mydead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her alive when I setout for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her, but even so, for all mysorrow I would not let her come near the blood till I had asked my questions ofTeiresias.“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre inhis hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why, poorman, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the dead in this sadplace? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your sword that I may drink ofthe blood and answer your questions truly.’“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of theblood he began with his prophecy.“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home,but heaven will make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape theeye of Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for havingblinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you canrestrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the Thrinacianisland, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging to the sun, who seesand gives ear to everything. If you leave these flocks unharmed and think ofnothing but of getting home, you may yet after much hardship reach Ithaca; butif you harm them, then I forewarn you of the destruction both of your ship andof your men. Even though you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plightafter losing all your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will findtrouble in your house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who aredevouring your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presentsto your wife.“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors;and after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you musttake a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a country wherethe people have never heard of the sea and do not even mix salt with theirfood, nor do they know anything about ships, and oars that are as the wings ofa ship. I will give you this certain token which cannot escape your notice. Awayfarer will meet you and will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you havegot upon your shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground andsacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.[90] Then go home and offer hecatombs toall the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death shall cometo you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very gently when you are fullof years and peace of mind, and your people shall bless you. All that I havesaid will come true].’[91]“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven,but tell me and tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghostclose by us; she is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I amher own son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I canmake her know me.’“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that youlet taste of the blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if youdo not let them have any blood they will go away again.’“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for hisprophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until my mothercame up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and spoke fondly to me,saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this abode of darkness whileyou are still alive? It is a hard thing for the living to see these places, forbetween us and them there are great and terrible waters, and there is Oceanus,which no man can cross on foot, but he must have a good ship to take him. Areyou all this time trying to find your way home from Troy, and have you neveryet got back to Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here toconsult the ghost of the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been nearthe Achaean land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing butone long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out withAgamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans. But tellme, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a long illness, ordid heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to eternity? Tell me also aboutmy father, and the son whom I left behind me, is my property still in theirhands, or has some one else got hold of it, who thinks that I shall not returnto claim it? Tell me again what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is;does she live with my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made thebest match she could and married again?’“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, butshe is in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both nightand day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and Telemachusstill holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain largely, as of coursehe must, considering his position as a magistrate,[92] and how every one invites him; yourfather remains at his old place in the country and never goes near the town. Hehas no comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor infront of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in summer, whenthe warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the vineyard on a bed of vineleaves thrown any how upon the ground. He grieves continually about your neverhaving come home, and suffers more and more as he grows older. As for my ownend it was in this wise: heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in myown house, nor was I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wearpeople out and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and theforce of my affection for you—this it was that was the death ofme.’[93]“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each timeshe flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and being touched tothe quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay still when I wouldembrace you? If we could throw our arms around one another we might find sadcomfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in the house of Hades; doesProserpine want to lay a still further load of grief upon me by mocking me witha phantom only?’“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of allmankind, it is not Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are likethis when they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bonestogether; these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life hasleft the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now, however,go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all these things thatyou may tell them to your wife hereafter.’“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of thewives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds aboutthe blood, and I considered how I might question them severally. In the end Ideemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that hung by my sturdythigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at once. So they came up oneafter the other, and each one as I questioned her told me her race and lineage.“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife ofCretheus the son of Aeolus.[94] She fell in love with the riverEnipeus who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when shewas taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her lover, laywith her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave arched itself like amountain over them to hide both woman and god, whereon he loosed her virgingirdle and laid her in a deep slumber. When the god had accomplished the deedof love, he took her hand in his own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all goodwill; the embraces of the gods are not fruitless, and you will have fine twinsabout this time twelve months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now gohome, but hold your tongue and do not tell any one.’“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias andNeleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a greatbreeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in Pylos. The rest ofher children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson, Pheres, and Amythaon, who was amighty warrior and charioteer.“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of havingslept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two sons Amphion andZethus. These founded Thebes with its seven gates, and built a wall all roundit; for strong though they were they could not hold Thebes till they had walledit.“Then I saw Alcmena, the wife of Amphitryon, who also bore to Joveindomitable Hercules; and Megara who was daughter to great King Creon, andmarried the redoubtable son of Amphitryon.“I also saw fair Epicaste mother of king Oedipodes whose awful lot it wasto marry her own son without suspecting it. He married her after having killedhis father, but the gods proclaimed the whole story to the world; whereon heremained king of Thebes, in great grief for the spite the gods had borne him;but Epicaste went to the house of the mighty jailor Hades, having hangedherself for grief, and the avenging spirits haunted him as for an outragedmother—to his ruing bitterly thereafter.“Then I saw Chloris, whom Neleus married for her beauty, having givenpriceless presents for her. She was youngest daughter to Amphion son of Iasusand king of Minyan Orchomenus, and was Queen in Pylos. She bore Nestor,Chromius, and Periclymenus, and she also bore that marvellously lovely womanPero, who was wooed by all the country round; but Neleus would only give her tohim who should raid the cattle of Iphicles from the grazing grounds of Phylace,and this was a hard task. The only man who would undertake to raid them was acertain excellent seer,[95] but the will of heaven was againsthim, for the rangers of the cattle caught him and put him in prison;nevertheless when a full year had passed and the same season came round again,Iphicles set him at liberty, after he had expounded all the oracles of heaven.Thus, then, was the will of Jove accomplished.“And I saw Leda the wife of Tyndarus, who bore him two famous sons,Castor breaker of horses, and Pollux the mighty boxer. Both these heroes arelying under the earth, though they are still alive, for by a specialdispensation of Jove, they die and come to life again, each one of them everyother day throughout all time, and they have the rank of gods.“After her I saw Iphimedeia wife of Aloeus who boasted the embrace ofNeptune. She bore two sons Otus and Ephialtes, but both were short lived. Theywere the finest children that were ever born in this world, and the bestlooking, Orion only excepted; for at nine years old they were nine fathomshigh, and measured nine cubits round the chest. They threatened to make warwith the gods in Olympus, and tried to set Mount Ossa on the top of MountOlympus, and Mount Pelion on the top of Ossa, that they might scale heavenitself, and they would have done it too if they had been grown up, but Apollo,son of Leto, killed both of them, before they had got so much as a sign of hairupon their cheeks or chin.“Then I saw Phaedra, and Procris, and fair Ariadne daughter of themagician Minos, whom Theseus was carrying off from Crete to Athens, but he didnot enjoy her, for before he could do so Diana killed her in the island of Diaon account of what Bacchus had said against her.“I also saw Maera and Clymene and hateful Eriphyle, who sold her ownhusband for gold. But it would take me all night if I were to name every singleone of the wives and daughters of heroes whom I saw, and it is time for me togo to bed, either on board ship with my crew, or here. As for my escort, heavenand yourselves will see to it.”Here he ended, and the guests sat all of them enthralled and speechlessthroughout the covered cloister. Then Arete said to them:—“What do you think of this man, O Phaeacians? Is he not tall and goodlooking, and is he not clever? True, he is my own guest, but all of you sharein the distinction. Do not be in a hurry to send him away, nor niggardly in thepresents you make to one who is in such great need, for heaven has blessed allof you with great abundance.”Then spoke the aged hero Echeneus who was one of the oldest men among them,“My friends,” said he, “what our august queen has just saidto us is both reasonable and to the purpose, therefore be persuaded by it; butthe decision whether in word or deed rests ultimately with KingAlcinous.”“The thing shall be done,” exclaimed Alcinous, “as surely asI still live and reign over the Phaeacians. Our guest is indeed very anxious toget home, still we must persuade him to remain with us until to-morrow, bywhich time I shall be able to get together the whole sum that I mean to givehim. As regards his escort it will be a matter for you all, and mine above allothers as the chief person among you.”And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, if you were to bid me to stay herefor a whole twelve months, and then speed me on my way, loaded with your noblegifts, I should obey you gladly and it would redound greatly to my advantage,for I should return fuller-handed to my own people, and should thus be morerespected and beloved by all who see me when I get back to Ithaca.”“Ulysses,” replied Alcinous, “not one of us who sees you hasany idea that you are a charlatan or a swindler. I know there are many peoplegoing about who tell such plausible stories that it is very hard to see throughthem, but there is a style about your language which assures me of your gooddisposition. Moreover you have told the story of your own misfortunes, andthose of the Argives, as though you were a practiced bard; but tell me, andtell me true, whether you saw any of the mighty heroes who went to Troy at thesame time with yourself, and perished there. The evenings are still at theirlongest, and it is not yet bed time—go on, therefore, with your divinestory, for I could stay here listening till tomorrow morning, so long as youwill continue to tell us of your adventures.”“Alcinous,” answered Ulysses, “there is a time for makingspeeches, and a time for going to bed; nevertheless, since you so desire, Iwill not refrain from telling you the still sadder tale of those of my comradeswho did not fall fighting with the Trojans, but perished on their return,through the treachery of a wicked woman.“When Proserpine had dismissed the female ghosts in all directions, theghost of Agamemnon son of Atreus came sadly up to me, surrounded by those whohad perished with him in the house of Aegisthus. As soon as he had tasted theblood, he knew me, and weeping bitterly stretched out his arms towards me toembrace me; but he had no strength nor substance any more, and I too wept andpitied him as I beheld him. ‘How did you come by your death,’ saidI, ‘King Agamemnon? Did Neptune raise his winds and waves against youwhen you were at sea, or did your enemies make an end of you on the main landwhen you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing, or while they were fighting indefence of their wives and city?’“‘Ulysses,’ he answered, ‘noble son of Laertes, I wasnot lost at sea in any storm of Neptune’s raising, nor did my foesdespatch me upon the mainland, but Aegisthus and my wicked wife were the deathof me between them. He asked me to his house, feasted me, and then butchered memost miserably as though I were a fat beast in a slaughter house, while allaround me my comrades were slain like sheep or pigs for the wedding breakfast,or picnic, or gorgeous banquet of some great nobleman. You must have seennumbers of men killed either in a general engagement, or in single combat, butyou never saw anything so truly pitiable as the way in which we fell in thatcloister, with the mixing bowl and the loaded tables lying all about, and theground reeking with our blood. I heard Priam’s daughter Cassandra screamas Clytemnestra killed her close beside me. I lay dying upon the earth with thesword in my body, and raised my hands to kill the slut of a murderess, but sheslipped away from me; she would not even close my lips nor my eyes when I wasdying, for there is nothing in this world so cruel and so shameless as a womanwhen she has fallen into such guilt as hers was. Fancy murdering her ownhusband! I thought I was going to be welcomed home by my children and myservants, but her abominable crime has brought disgrace on herself and allwomen who shall come after—even on the good ones.’“And I said, ‘In truth Jove has hated the house of Atreus fromfirst to last in the matter of their women’s counsels. See how many of usfell for Helen’s sake, and now it seems that Clytemnestra hatchedmischief against you too during your absence.’“‘Be sure, therefore,’ continued Agamemnon, ‘and not betoo friendly even with your own wife. Do not tell her all that you knowperfectly well yourself. Tell her a part only, and keep your own counsel aboutthe rest. Not that your wife, Ulysses, is likely to murder you, for Penelope isa very admirable woman, and has an excellent nature. We left her a young bridewith an infant at her breast when we set out for Troy. This child no doubt isnow grown up happily to man’s estate,[96] and he and his father will have ajoyful meeting and embrace one another as it is right they should do, whereasmy wicked wife did not even allow me the happiness of looking upon my son, butkilled me ere I could do so. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to yourheart—do not tell people when you are bringing your ship to Ithaca, butsteal a march upon them, for after all this there is no trusting women. But nowtell me, and tell me true, can you give me any news of my son Orestes? Is he inOrchomenus, or at Pylos, or is he at Sparta with Menelaus—for I presumethat he is still living.’“And I said, ‘Agamemnon, why do you ask me? I do not know whetheryour son is alive or dead, and it is not right to talk when one does notknow.’“As we two sat weeping and talking thus sadly with one another the ghostof Achilles came up to us with Patroclus, Antilochus, and Ajax who was thefinest and goodliest man of all the Danaans after the son of Peleus. The fleetdescendant of Aeacus knew me and spoke piteously, saying, ‘Ulysses, nobleson of Laertes, what deed of daring will you undertake next, that you venturedown to the house of Hades among us silly dead, who are but the ghosts of themthat can labour no more?’“And I said, ‘Achilles, son of Peleus, foremost champion of theAchaeans, I came to consult Teiresias, and see if he could advise me about myreturn home to Ithaca, for I have never yet been able to get near the Achaeanland, nor to set foot in my own country, but have been in trouble all the time.As for you, Achilles, no one was ever yet so fortunate as you have been, norever will be, for you were adored by all us Argives as long as you were alive,and now that you are here you are a great prince among the dead. Do not,therefore, take it so much to heart even if you are dead.’“‘Say not a word,’ he answered, ‘in death’sfavour; I would rather be a paid servant in a poor man’s house and beabove ground than king of kings among the dead. But give me news about my son;is he gone to the wars and will he be a great soldier, or is this not so? Tellme also if you have heard anything about my father Peleus—does he stillrule among the Myrmidons, or do they show him no respect throughout Hellas andPhthia now that he is old and his limbs fail him? Could I but stand by hisside, in the light of day, with the same strength that I had when I killed thebravest of our foes upon the plain of Troy—could I but be as I then wasand go even for a short time to my father’s house, any one who tried todo him violence or supersede him would soon rue it.’“‘I have heard nothing,’ I answered, ‘of Peleus, but Ican tell you all about your son Neoptolemus, for I took him in my own ship fromScyros with the Achaeans. In our councils of war before Troy he was alwaysfirst to speak, and his judgement was unerring. Nestor and I were the only twowho could surpass him; and when it came to fighting on the plain of Troy, hewould never remain with the body of his men, but would dash on far in front,foremost of them all in valour. Many a man did he kill in battle—I cannotname every single one of those whom he slew while fighting on the side of theArgives, but will only say how he killed that valiant hero Eurypylus son ofTelephus, who was the handsomest man I ever saw except Memnon; many others alsoof the Ceteians fell around him by reason of a woman’s bribes. Moreover,when all the bravest of the Argives went inside the horse that Epeus had made,and it was left to me to settle when we should either open the door of ourambuscade, or close it, though all the other leaders and chief men among theDanaans were drying their eyes and quaking in every limb, I never once saw himturn pale nor wipe a tear from his cheek; he was all the time urging me tobreak out from the horse—grasping the handle of his sword and hisbronze-shod spear, and breathing fury against the foe. Yet when we had sackedthe city of Priam he got his handsome share of the prize money and went onboard (such is the fortune of war) without a wound upon him, neither from athrown spear nor in close combat, for the rage of Mars is a matter of greatchance.’“When I had told him this, the ghost of Achilles strode off across ameadow full of asphodel, exulting over what I had said concerning the prowessof his son.“The ghosts of other dead men stood near me and told me each his ownmelancholy tale; but that of Ajax son of Telamon alone held aloof—stillangry with me for having won the cause in our dispute about the armour ofAchilles. Thetis had offered it as a prize, but the Trojan prisoners andMinerva were the judges. Would that I had never gained the day in such acontest, for it cost the life of Ajax, who was foremost of all the Danaansafter the son of Peleus, alike in stature and prowess.“When I saw him I tried to pacify him and said, ‘Ajax, will you notforget and forgive even in death, but must the judgement about that hatefularmour still rankle with you? It cost us Argives dear enough to lose such atower of strength as you were to us. We mourned you as much as we mournedAchilles son of Peleus himself, nor can the blame be laid on anything but onthe spite which Jove bore against the Danaans, for it was this that made himcounsel your destruction—come hither, therefore, bring your proud spiritinto subjection, and hear what I can tell you.’“He would not answer, but turned away to Erebus and to the other ghosts;nevertheless, I should have made him talk to me in spite of his being so angry,or I should have gone on talking to him,[97] only that there were still othersamong the dead whom I desired to see.“Then I saw Minos son of Jove with his golden sceptre in his hand sittingin judgement on the dead, and the ghosts were gathered sitting and standinground him in the spacious house of Hades, to learn his sentences upon them.“After him I saw huge Orion in a meadow full of asphodel driving theghosts of the wild beasts that he had killed upon the mountains, and he had agreat bronze club in his hand, unbreakable for ever and ever.“And I saw Tityus son of Gaia stretched upon the plain and covering somenine acres of ground. Two vultures on either side of him were digging theirbeaks into his liver, and he kept on trying to beat them off with his hands,but could not; for he had violated Jove’s mistress Leto as she was goingthrough Panopeus on her way to Pytho.“I saw also the dreadful fate of Tantalus, who stood in a lake thatreached his chin; he was dying to quench his thirst, but could never reach thewater, for whenever the poor creature stooped to drink, it dried up andvanished, so that there was nothing but dry ground—parched by the spiteof heaven. There were tall trees, moreover, that shed their fruit over hishead—pears, pomegranates, apples, sweet figs and juicy olives, butwhenever the poor creature stretched out his hand to take some, the wind tossedthe branches back again to the clouds.“And I saw Sisyphus at his endless task raising his prodigious stone withboth his hands. With hands and feet he tried to roll it up to the top of thehill, but always, just before he could roll it over on to the other side, itsweight would be too much for him, and the pitiless stone[98] would come thundering down again onto the plain. Then he would begin trying to push it up hill again, and thesweat ran off him and the steam rose after him.“After him I saw mighty Hercules, but it was his phantom only, for he isfeasting ever with the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife, who isdaughter of Jove and Juno. The ghosts were screaming round him like scaredbirds flying all whithers. He looked black as night with his bare bow in hishands and his arrow on the string, glaring around as though ever on the pointof taking aim. About his breast there was a wondrous golden belt adorned in themost marvellous fashion with bears, wild boars, and lions with gleaming eyes;there was also war, battle, and death. The man who made that belt, do what hemight, would never be able to make another like it. Hercules knew me at oncewhen he saw me, and spoke piteously, saying, ‘My poor Ulysses, noble sonof Laertes, are you too leading the same sorry kind of life that I did when Iwas above ground? I was son of Jove, but I went through an infinity ofsuffering, for I became bondsman to one who was far beneath me—a lowfellow who set me all manner of labours. He once sent me here to fetch thehell-hound—for he did not think he could find anything harder for me thanthis, but I got the hound out of Hades and brought him to him, for Mercury andMinerva helped me.’“On this Hercules went down again into the house of Hades, but I stayedwhere I was in case some other of the mighty dead should come to me. And Ishould have seen still other of them that are gone before, whom I would fainhave seen—Theseus and Pirithous—glorious children of the gods, butso many thousands of ghosts came round me and uttered such appalling cries,that I was panic stricken lest Proserpine should send up from the house ofHades the head of that awful monster Gorgon. On this I hastened back to my shipand ordered my men to go on board at once and loose the hawsers; so theyembarked and took their places, whereon the ship went down the stream of theriver Oceanus. We had to row at first, but presently a fair wind sprang up.BOOK XIITHE SIRENS, SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, THE CATTLE OF THE SUN.“After we were clear of the river Oceanus, and had got out into the opensea, we went on till we reached the Aeaean island where there is dawn andsun-rise as in other places. We then drew our ship on to the sands and got outof her on to the shore, where we went to sleep and waited till day shouldbreak.“Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, I sentsome men to Circe’s house to fetch the body of Elpenor. We cut firewoodfrom a wood where the headland jutted out into the sea, and after we had weptover him and lamented him we performed his funeral rites. When his body andarmour had been burned to ashes, we raised a cairn, set a stone over it, and atthe top of the cairn we fixed the oar that he had been used to row with.“While we were doing all this, Circe, who knew that we had got back fromthe house of Hades, dressed herself and came to us as fast as she could; andher maid servants came with her bringing us bread, meat, and wine. Then shestood in the midst of us and said, ‘You have done a bold thing in goingdown alive to the house of Hades, and you will have died twice, to otherpeople’s once; now, then, stay here for the rest of the day, feast yourfill, and go on with your voyage at daybreak tomorrow morning. In the meantimeI will tell Ulysses about your course, and will explain everything to him so asto prevent your suffering from misadventure either by land or sea.’“We agreed to do as she had said, and feasted through the livelong day tothe going down of the sun, but when the sun had set and it came on dark, themen laid themselves down to sleep by the stern cables of the ship. Then Circetook me by the hand and bade me be seated away from the others, while shereclined by my side and asked me all about our adventures.“‘So far so good,’ said she, when I had ended my story,‘and now pay attention to what I am about to tell you—heavenitself, indeed, will recall it to your recollection. First you will come to theSirens who enchant all who come near them. If any one unwarily draws in tooclose and hears the singing of the Sirens, his wife and children will neverwelcome him home again, for they sit in a green field and warble him to deathwith the sweetness of their song. There is a great heap of dead men’sbones lying all around, with the flesh still rotting off them. Therefore passthese Sirens by, and stop your men’s ears with wax that none of them mayhear; but if you like you can listen yourself, for you may get the men to bindyou as you stand upright on a cross piece half way up the mast,[99] and they mustlash the rope’s ends to the mast itself, that you may have the pleasureof listening. If you beg and pray the men to unloose you, then they must bindyou faster.“‘When your crew have taken you past these Sirens, I cannot giveyou coherent directions[100] as to which of two courses you areto take; I will lay the two alternatives before you, and you must consider themfor yourself. On the one hand there are some overhanging rocks against whichthe deep blue waves of Amphitrite beat with terrific fury; the blessed godscall these rocks the Wanderers. Here not even a bird may pass, no, not even thetimid doves that bring ambrosia to Father Jove, but the sheer rock alwayscarries off one of them, and Father Jove has to send another to make up theirnumber; no ship that ever yet came to these rocks has got away again, but thewaves and whirlwinds of fire are freighted with wreckage and with the bodies ofdead men. The only vessel that ever sailed and got through, was the famous Argoon her way from the house of Aetes, and she too would have gone against thesegreat rocks, only that Juno piloted her past them for the love she bore toJason.“‘Of these two rocks the one reaches heaven and its peak is lost ina dark cloud. This never leaves it, so that the top is never clear not even insummer and early autumn. No man though he had twenty hands and twenty feetcould get a foothold on it and climb it, for it runs sheer up, as smooth asthough it had been polished. In the middle of it there is a large cavern,looking West and turned towards Erebus; you must take your ship this way, butthe cave is so high up that not even the stoutest archer could send an arrowinto it. Inside it Scylla sits and yelps with a voice that you might take to bethat of a young hound, but in truth she is a dreadful monster and noone—not even a god—could face her without being terror-struck. Shehas twelve mis-shapen feet, and six necks of the most prodigious length; and atthe end of each neck she has a frightful head with three rows of teeth in each,all set very close together, so that they would crunch any one to death in amoment, and she sits deep within her shady cell thrusting out her heads andpeering all round the rock, fishing for dolphins or dogfish or any largermonster that she can catch, of the thousands with which Amphitrite teems. Noship ever yet got past her without losing some men, for she shoots out all herheads at once, and carries off a man in each mouth.“‘You will find the other rock lie lower, but they are so closetogether that there is not more than a bow-shot between them. [A large fig treein full leaf[101]grows upon it], and under it lies the sucking whirlpool of Charybdis. Threetimes in the day does she vomit forth her waters, and three times she sucksthem down again; see that you be not there when she is sucking, for if you are,Neptune himself could not save you; you must hug the Scylla side and drive shipby as fast as you can, for you had better lose six men than your wholecrew.’“‘Is there no way,’ said I, ‘of escaping Charybdis, andat the same time keeping Scylla off when she is trying to harm my men?’“‘You dare devil,’ replied the goddess, ‘you are alwayswanting to fight somebody or something; you will not let yourself be beateneven by the immortals. For Scylla is not mortal; moreover she is savage,extreme, rude, cruel and invincible. There is no help for it; your best chancewill be to get by her as fast as ever you can, for if you dawdle about her rockwhile you are putting on your armour, she may catch you with a second cast ofher six heads, and snap up another half dozen of your men; so drive your shippast her at full speed, and roar out lustily to Crataiis who is Scylla’sdam, bad luck to her; she will then stop her from making a second raid uponyou.’“‘You will now come to the Thrinacian island, and here you will seemany herds of cattle and flocks of sheep belonging to the sun-god—sevenherds of cattle and seven flocks of sheep, with fifty head in each flock. Theydo not breed, nor do they become fewer in number, and they are tended by thegoddesses Phaethusa and Lampetie, who are children of the sun-god Hyperion byNeaera. Their mother when she had borne them and had done suckling them sentthem to the Thrinacian island, which was a long way off, to live there and lookafter their father’s flocks and herds. If you leave these flocksunharmed, and think of nothing but getting home, you may yet after muchhardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn you of thedestruction both of your ship and of your comrades; and even though you mayyourself escape, you will return late, in bad plight, after losing all yourmen.’“Here she ended, and dawn enthroned in gold began to show in heaven,whereon she returned inland. I then went on board and told my men to loose theship from her moorings; so they at once got into her, took their places, andbegan to smite the grey sea with their oars. Presently the great and cunninggoddess Circe befriended us with a fair wind that blew dead aft, and staidsteadily with us, keeping our sails well filled, so we did whatever wanteddoing to the ship’s gear, and let her go as wind and helmsman headed her.“Then, being much troubled in mind, I said to my men, ‘My friends,it is not right that one or two of us alone should know the prophecies thatCirce has made me, I will therefore tell you about them, so that whether welive or die we may do so with our eyes open. First she said we were to keepclear of the Sirens, who sit and sing most beautifully in a field of flowers;but she said I might hear them myself so long as no one else did. Therefore,take me and bind me to the crosspiece half way up the mast; bind me as I standupright, with a bond so fast that I cannot possibly break away, and lash therope’s ends to the mast itself. If I beg and pray you to set me free,then bind me more tightly still.’“I had hardly finished telling everything to the men before we reachedthe island of the two Sirens,[102] for the wind had been veryfavourable. Then all of a sudden it fell dead calm; there was not a breath ofwind nor a ripple upon the water, so the men furled the sails and stowed them;then taking to their oars they whitened the water with the foam they raised inrowing. Meanwhile I look a large wheel of wax and cut it up small with mysword. Then I kneaded the wax in my strong hands till it became soft, which itsoon did between the kneading and the rays of the sun-god son of Hyperion. ThenI stopped the ears of all my men, and they bound me hands and feet to the mastas I stood upright on the cross piece; but they went on rowing themselves. Whenwe had got within earshot of the land, and the ship was going at a good rate,the Sirens saw that we were getting in shore and began with their singing.“‘Come here,’ they sang, ‘renowned Ulysses, honour tothe Achaean name, and listen to our two voices. No one ever sailed past uswithout staying to hear the enchanting sweetness of our song—and he wholistens will go on his way not only charmed, but wiser, for we know all theills that the gods laid upon the Argives and Trojans before Troy, and can tellyou everything that is going to happen over the whole world.’“They sang these words most musically, and as I longed to hear themfurther I made signs by frowning to my men that they should set me free; butthey quickened their stroke, and Eurylochus and Perimedes bound me with stillstronger bonds till we had got out of hearing of the Sirens’ voices. Thenmy men took the wax from their ears and unbound me.“Immediately after we had got past the island I saw a great wave fromwhich spray was rising, and I heard a loud roaring sound. The men were sofrightened that they loosed hold of their oars, for the whole sea resoundedwith the rushing of the waters,[103] but the ship stayed where it was,for the men had left off rowing. I went round, therefore, and exhorted them manby man not to lose heart.“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘this is not the first time thatwe have been in danger, and we are in nothing like so bad a case as when theCyclops shut us up in his cave; nevertheless, my courage and wise counsel savedus then, and we shall live to look back on all this as well. Now, therefore,let us all do as I say, trust in Jove and row on with might and main. As foryou, coxswain, these are your orders; attend to them, for the ship is in yourhands; turn her head away from these steaming rapids and hug the rock, or shewill give you the slip and be over yonder before you know where you are, andyou will be the death of us.’“So they did as I told them; but I said nothing about the awful monsterScylla, for I knew the men would not go on rowing if I did, but would huddletogether in the hold. In one thing only did I disobey Circe’s strictinstructions—I put on my armour. Then seizing two strong spears I took mystand on the ship’s bows, for it was there that I expected first to seethe monster of the rock, who was to do my men so much harm; but I could notmake her out anywhere, though I strained my eyes with looking the gloomy rockall over and over.“Then we entered the Straits in great fear of mind, for on the one handwas Scylla, and on the other dread Charybdis kept sucking up the salt water. Asshe vomited it up, it was like the water in a cauldron when it is boiling overupon a great fire, and the spray reached the top of the rocks on either side.When she began to suck again, we could see the water all inside whirling roundand round, and it made a deafening sound as it broke against the rocks. Wecould see the bottom of the whirlpool all black with sand and mud, and the menwere at their wits ends for fear. While we were taken up with this, and wereexpecting each moment to be our last, Scylla pounced down suddenly upon us andsnatched up my six best men. I was looking at once after both ship and men, andin a moment I saw their hands and feet ever so high above me, struggling in theair as Scylla was carrying them off, and I heard them call out my name in onelast despairing cry. As a fisherman, seated, spear in hand, upon some juttingrock[104] throwsbait into the water to deceive the poor little fishes, and spears them with theox’s horn with which his spear is shod, throwing them gasping on to theland as he catches them one by one—even so did Scylla land these pantingcreatures on her rock and munch them up at the mouth of her den, while theyscreamed and stretched out their hands to me in their mortal agony. This wasthe most sickening sight that I saw throughout all my voyages.“When we had passed the [Wandering] rocks, with Scylla and terribleCharybdis, we reached the noble island of the sun-god, where were the goodlycattle and sheep belonging to the sun Hyperion. While still at sea in my ship Icould bear the cattle lowing as they came home to the yards, and the sheepbleating. Then I remembered what the blind Theban prophet Teiresias had toldme, and how carefully Aeaean Circe had warned me to shun the island of theblessed sun-god. So being much troubled I said to the men, ‘My men, Iknow you are hard pressed, but listen while I tell you the prophecy thatTeiresias made me, and how carefully Aeaean Circe warned me to shun the islandof the blessed sun-god, for it was here, she said, that our worst danger wouldlie. Head the ship, therefore, away from the island.’“The men were in despair at this, and Eurylochus at once gave me aninsolent answer. ‘Ulysses,’ said he, ‘you are cruel; you arevery strong yourself and never get worn out; you seem to be made of iron, andnow, though your men are exhausted with toil and want of sleep, you will notlet them land and cook themselves a good supper upon this island, but bid themput out to sea and go faring fruitlessly on through the watches of the flyingnight. It is by night that the winds blow hardest and do so much damage; howcan we escape should one of those sudden squalls spring up from South West orWest, which so often wreck a vessel when our lords the gods are unpropitious?Now, therefore, let us obey the behests of night and prepare our supper herehard by the ship; to-morrow morning we will go on board again and put out tosea.’“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. I saw that heavenmeant us a mischief and said, ‘You force me to yield, for you are manyagainst one, but at any rate each one of you must take his solemn oath that ifhe meet with a herd of cattle or a large flock of sheep, he will not be so madas to kill a single head of either, but will be satisfied with the food thatCirce has given us.’“They all swore as I bade them, and when they had completed their oath wemade the ship fast in a harbour that was near a stream of fresh water, and themen went ashore and cooked their suppers. As soon as they had had enough to eatand drink, they began talking about their poor comrades whom Scylla hadsnatched up and eaten; this set them weeping and they went on crying till theyfell off into a sound sleep.“In the third watch of the night when the stars had shifted their places,Jove raised a great gale of wind that flew a hurricane so that land and seawere covered with thick clouds, and night sprang forth out of the heavens. Whenthe child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, we brought the ship to landand drew her into a cave wherein the sea-nymphs hold their courts and dances,and I called the men together in council.“‘My friends,’ said I, ‘we have meat and drink in theship, let us mind, therefore, and not touch the cattle, or we shall suffer forit; for these cattle and sheep belong to the mighty sun, who sees and gives earto everything.’ And again they promised that they would obey.“For a whole month the wind blew steadily from the South, and there wasno other wind, but only South and East.[105] As long as corn and wine held outthe men did not touch the cattle when they were hungry; when, however, they hadeaten all there was in the ship, they were forced to go further afield, withhook and line, catching birds, and taking whatever they could lay their handson; for they were starving. One day, therefore, I went up inland that I mightpray heaven to show me some means of getting away. When I had gone far enoughto be clear of all my men, and had found a place that was well sheltered fromthe wind, I washed my hands and prayed to all the gods in Olympus till by andby they sent me off into a sweet sleep.“Meanwhile Eurylochus had been giving evil counsel to the men,‘Listen to me,’ said he, ‘my poor comrades. All deaths arebad enough but there is none so bad as famine. Why should not we drive in thebest of these cows and offer them in sacrifice to the immortal gods? If we everget back to Ithaca, we can build a fine temple to the sun-god and enrich itwith every kind of ornament; if, however, he is determined to sink our ship outof revenge for these homed cattle, and the other gods are of the same mind, Ifor one would rather drink salt water once for all and have done with it, thanbe starved to death by inches in such a desert island as this is.’“Thus spoke Eurylochus, and the men approved his words. Now the cattle,so fair and goodly, were feeding not far from the ship; the men, therefore,drove in the best of them, and they all stood round them saying their prayers,and using young oak-shoots instead of barley-meal, for there was no barleyleft. When they had done praying they killed the cows and dressed theircarcasses; they cut out the thigh bones, wrapped them round in two layers offat, and set some pieces of raw meat on top of them. They had no wine withwhich to make drink-offerings over the sacrifice while it was cooking, so theykept pouring on a little water from time to time while the inward meats werebeing grilled; then, when the thigh bones were burned and they had tasted theinward meats, they cut the rest up small and put the pieces upon the spits.“By this time my deep sleep had left me, and I turned back to the shipand to the sea shore. As I drew near I began to smell hot roast meat, so Igroaned out a prayer to the immortal gods. ‘Father Jove,’ Iexclaimed, ‘and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, youhave done me a cruel mischief by the sleep into which you have sent me; seewhat fine work these men of mine have been making in my absence.’“Meanwhile Lampetie went straight off to the sun and told him we had beenkilling his cows, whereon he flew into a great rage, and said to the immortals,‘Father Jove, and all you other gods who live in everlasting bliss, Imust have vengeance on the crew of Ulysses’ ship: they have had theinsolence to kill my cows, which were the one thing I loved to look upon,whether I was going up heaven or down again. If they do not square accountswith me about my cows, I will go down to Hades and shine there among thedead.’“‘Sun,’ said Jove, ‘go on shining upon us gods and uponmankind over the fruitful earth. I will shiver their ship into little pieceswith a bolt of white lightning as soon as they get out to sea.’“I was told all this by Calypso, who said she had heard it from the mouthof Mercury.“As soon as I got down to my ship and to the sea shore I rebuked each oneof the men separately, but we could see no way out of it, for the cows weredead already. And indeed the gods began at once to show signs and wonders amongus, for the hides of the cattle crawled about, and the joints upon the spitsbegan to low like cows, and the meat, whether cooked or raw, kept on making anoise just as cows do.“For six days my men kept driving in the best cows and feasting uponthem, but when Jove the son of Saturn had added a seventh day, the fury of thegale abated; we therefore went on board, raised our masts, spread sail, and putout to sea. As soon as we were well away from the island, and could see nothingbut sky and sea, the son of Saturn raised a black cloud over our ship, and thesea grew dark beneath it. We did not get on much further, for in another momentwe were caught by a terrific squall from the West that snapped the forestays ofthe mast so that it fell aft, while all the ship’s gear tumbled about atthe bottom of the vessel. The mast fell upon the head of the helmsman in theship’s stern, so that the bones of his head were crushed to pieces, andhe fell overboard as though he were diving, with no more life left in him.“Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts, and the ship went round andround, and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. Themen all fell into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the ship,looking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of allchance of getting home again.“I stuck to the ship till the sea knocked her sides from her keel (whichdrifted about by itself) and struck the mast out of her in the direction of thekeel; but there was a backstay of stout ox-thong still hanging about it, andwith this I lashed the mast and keel together, and getting astride of them wascarried wherever the winds chose to take me.“[The gale from the West had now spent its force, and the wind got intothe South again, which frightened me lest I should be taken back to theterrible whirlpool of Charybdis. This indeed was what actually happened, for Iwas borne along by the waves all night, and by sunrise had reached the rock ofScylla, and the whirlpool. She was then sucking down the salt sea water,[106] but I wascarried aloft toward the fig tree, which I caught hold of and clung on to likea bat. I could not plant my feet anywhere so as to stand securely, for theroots were a long way off and the boughs that overshadowed the whole pool weretoo high, too vast, and too far apart for me to reach them; so I hung patientlyon, waiting till the pool should discharge my mast and raft again—and avery long while it seemed. A jury-man is not more glad to get home to supper,after having been long detained in court by troublesome cases, than I was tosee my raft beginning to work its way out of the whirlpool again. At last I letgo with my hands and feet, and fell heavily into the sea, hard by my raft on towhich I then got, and began to row with my hands. As for Scylla, the father ofgods and men would not let her get further sight of me—otherwise I shouldhave certainly been lost.[107]“Hence I was carried along for nine days till on the tenth night the godsstranded me on the Ogygian island, where dwells the great and powerful goddessCalypso. She took me in and was kind to me, but I need say no more about this,for I told you and your noble wife all about it yesterday, and I hate sayingthe same thing over and over again.”BOOK XIIIULYSSES LEAVES SCHERIA AND RETURNS TO ITHACA.Thus did he speak, and they all held their peace throughout the coveredcloister, enthralled by the charm of his story, till presently Alcinous beganto speak.“Ulysses,” said he, “now that you have reached my house Idoubt not you will get home without further misadventure no matter how much youhave suffered in the past. To you others, however, who come here night afternight to drink my choicest wine and listen to my bard, I would insist asfollows. Our guest has already packed up the clothes, wrought gold,[108] and othervaluables which you have brought for his acceptance; let us now, therefore,present him further, each one of us, with a large tripod and a cauldron. Wewill recoup ourselves by the levy of a general rate; for private individualscannot be expected to bear the burden of such a handsome present.”Every one approved of this, and then they went home to bed each in his ownabode. When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared they hurrieddown to the ship and brought their cauldrons with them. Alcinous went on boardand saw everything so securely stowed under the ship’s benches thatnothing could break adrift and injure the rowers. Then they went to the houseof Alcinous to get dinner, and he sacrificed a bull for them in honour of Jovewho is the lord of all. They set the steaks to grill and made an excellentdinner, after which the inspired bard, Demodocus, who was a favourite withevery one, sang to them; but Ulysses kept on turning his eyes towards the sun,as though to hasten his setting, for he was longing to be on his way. As onewho has been all day ploughing a fallow field with a couple of oxen keepsthinking about his supper and is glad when night comes that he may go and getit, for it is all his legs can do to carry him, even so did Ulysses rejoicewhen the sun went down, and he at once said to the Phaeacians, addressinghimself more particularly to King Alcinous:“Sir, and all of you, farewell. Make your drink-offerings and send me onmy way rejoicing, for you have fulfilled my heart’s desire by giving mean escort, and making me presents, which heaven grant that I may turn to goodaccount; may I find my admirable wife living in peace among friends,[109] and may youwhom I leave behind me give satisfaction to your wives and children;[110] may heavenvouchsafe you every good grace, and may no evil thing come among yourpeople.”Thus did he speak. His hearers all of them approved his saying and agreed thathe should have his escort inasmuch as he had spoken reasonably. Alcinoustherefore said to his servant, “Pontonous, mix some wine and hand itround to everybody, that we may offer a prayer to father Jove, and speed ourguest upon his way.”Pontonous mixed the wine and handed it to every one in turn; the others eachfrom his own seat made a drink-offering to the blessed gods that live inheaven, but Ulysses rose and placed the double cup in the hands of queen Arete.“Farewell, queen,” said he, “henceforward and for ever, tillage and death, the common lot of mankind, lay their hands upon you. I now takemy leave; be happy in this house with your children, your people, and with kingAlcinous.”As he spoke he crossed the threshold, and Alcinous sent a man to conduct him tohis ship and to the sea shore. Arete also sent some maidservants withhim—one with a clean shirt and cloak, another to carry his strong box,and a third with corn and wine. When they got to the water side the crew tookthese things and put them on board, with all the meat and drink; but forUlysses they spread a rug and a linen sheet on deck that he might sleep soundlyin the stern of the ship. Then he too went on board and lay down without aword, but the crew took every man his place and loosed the hawser from thepierced stone to which it had been bound. Thereon, when they began rowing outto sea, Ulysses fell into a deep, sweet, and almost deathlike slumber.[111]The ship bounded forward on her way as a four in hand chariot flies over thecourse when the horses feel the whip. Her prow curvetted as it were the neck ofa stallion, and a great wave of dark blue water seethed in her wake. She heldsteadily on her course, and even a falcon, swiftest of all birds, could nothave kept pace with her. Thus, then, she cut her way through the water,carrying one who was as cunning as the gods, but who was now sleepingpeacefully, forgetful of all that he had suffered both on the field of battleand by the waves of the weary sea.When the bright star that heralds the approach of dawn began to show, the shipdrew near to land.[112] Now there is in Ithaca a haven ofthe old merman Phorcys, which lies between two points that break the line ofthe sea and shut the harbour in. These shelter it from the storms of wind andsea that rage outside, so that, when once within it, a ship may lie withoutbeing even moored. At the head of this harbour there is a large olive tree, andat no great distance a fine overarching cavern sacred to the nymphs who arecalled Naiads.[113] There are mixing bowls within itand wine-jars of stone, and the bees hive there. Moreover, there are greatlooms of stone on which the nymphs weave their robes of sea purple—verycurious to see—and at all times there is water within it. It has twoentrances, one facing North by which mortals can go down into the cave, whilethe other comes from the South and is more mysterious; mortals cannot possiblyget in by it, it is the way taken by the gods.Into this harbour, then, they took their ship, for they knew the place.[114] She had somuch way upon her that she ran half her own length on to the shore;[115] when, however,they had landed, the first thing they did was to lift Ulysses with his rug andlinen sheet out of the ship, and lay him down upon the sand still fast asleep.Then they took out the presents which Minerva had persuaded the Phaeacians togive him when he was setting out on his voyage homewards. They put these alltogether by the root of the olive tree, away from the road, for fear somepasser by[116]might come and steal them before Ulysses awoke; and then they made the best oftheir way home again.But Neptune did not forget the threats with which he had already threatenedUlysses, so he took counsel with Jove. “Father Jove,” said he,“I shall no longer be held in any sort of respect among you gods, ifmortals like the Phaeacians, who are my own flesh and blood, show such smallregard for me. I said I would let Ulysses get home when he had sufferedsufficiently. I did not say that he should never get home at all, for I knewyou had already nodded your head about it, and promised that he should do so;but now they have brought him in a ship fast asleep and have landed him inIthaca after loading him with more magnificent presents of bronze, gold, andraiment than he would ever have brought back from Troy, if he had had his shareof the spoil and got home without misadventure.”And Jove answered, “What, O Lord of the Earthquake, are you talkingabout? The gods are by no means wanting in respect for you. It would bemonstrous were they to insult one so old and honoured as you are. As regardsmortals, however, if any of them is indulging in insolence and treating youdisrespectfully, it will always rest with yourself to deal with him as you maythink proper, so do just as you please.”“I should have done so at once,” replied Neptune, “if I werenot anxious to avoid anything that might displease you; now, therefore, Ishould like to wreck the Phaeacian ship as it is returning from its escort.This will stop them from escorting people in future; and I should also like tobury their city under a huge mountain.”“My good friend,” answered Jove, “I should recommend you atthe very moment when the people from the city are watching the ship on her way,to turn it into a rock near the land and looking like a ship. This willastonish everybody, and you can then bury their city under the mountain.”When earth-encircling Neptune heard this he went to Scheria where thePhaeacians live, and stayed there till the ship, which was making rapid way,had got close in. Then he went up to it, turned it into stone, and drove itdown with the flat of his hand so as to root it in the ground. After this hewent away.The Phaeacians then began talking among themselves, and one would turn towardshis neighbour, saying, “Bless my heart, who is it that can have rootedthe ship in the sea just as she was getting into port? We could see the wholeof her only a moment ago.”This was how they talked, but they knew nothing about it; and Alcinous said,“I remember now the old prophecy of my father. He said that Neptune wouldbe angry with us for taking every one so safely over the sea, and would one daywreck a Phaeacian ship as it was returning from an escort, and bury our cityunder a high mountain. This was what my old father used to say, and now it isall coming true.[117] Now therefore let us all do as Isay; in the first place we must leave off giving people escorts when they comehere, and in the next let us sacrifice twelve picked bulls to Neptune that hemay have mercy upon us, and not bury our city under the high mountain.”When the people heard this they were afraid and got ready the bulls.Thus did the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians pray to king Neptune, standinground his altar; and at the same time[118] Ulysses woke up once more upon hisown soil. He had been so long away that he did not know it again; moreover,Jove’s daughter Minerva had made it a foggy day, so that people might notknow of his having come, and that she might tell him everything without eitherhis wife or his fellow citizens and friends recognising him[119] until he hadtaken his revenge upon the wicked suitors. Everything, therefore, seemed quitedifferent to him—the long straight tracks, the harbours, the precipices,and the goodly trees, appeared all changed as he started up and looked upon hisnative land. So he smote his thighs with the flat of his hands and cried alouddespairingly.“Alas,” he exclaimed, “among what manner of people am Ifallen? Are they savage and uncivilised or hospitable and humane? Where shall Iput all this treasure, and which way shall I go? I wish I had staid over therewith the Phaeacians; or I could have gone to some other great chief who wouldhave been good to me and given me an escort. As it is I do not know where toput my treasure, and I cannot leave it here for fear somebody else should gethold of it. In good truth the chiefs and rulers of the Phaeacians have not beendealing fairly by me, and have left me in the wrong country; they said theywould take me back to Ithaca and they have not done so: may Jove the protectorof suppliants chastise them, for he watches over everybody and punishes thosewho do wrong. Still, I suppose I must count my goods and see if the crew havegone off with any of them.”He counted his goodly coppers and cauldrons, his gold and all his clothes, butthere was nothing missing; still he kept grieving about not being in his owncountry, and wandered up and down by the shore of the sounding sea bewailinghis hard fate. Then Minerva came up to him disguised as a young shepherd ofdelicate and princely mien, with a good cloak folded double about hershoulders; she had sandals on her comely feet and held a javelin in her hand.Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and went straight up to her.“My friend,” said he, “you are the first person whom I havemet with in this country; I salute you, therefore, and beg you to be welldisposed towards me. Protect these my goods, and myself too, for I embrace yourknees and pray to you as though you were a god. Tell me, then, and tell metruly, what land and country is this? Who are its inhabitants? Am I on anisland, or is this the sea board of some continent?”Minerva answered, “Stranger, you must be very simple, or must have comefrom somewhere a long way off, not to know what country this is. It is a verycelebrated place, and everybody knows it East and West. It is rugged and not agood driving country, but it is by no means a bad island for what there is ofit. It grows any quantity of corn and also wine, for it is watered both by rainand dew; it breeds cattle also and goats; all kinds of timber grow here, andthere are watering places where the water never runs dry; so, sir, the name ofIthaca is known even as far as Troy, which I understand to be a long way offfrom this Achaean country.”Ulysses was glad at finding himself, as Minerva told him, in his own country,and he began to answer, but he did not speak the truth, and made up a lyingstory in the instinctive wiliness of his heart.“I heard of Ithaca,” said he, “when I was in Crete beyond theseas, and now it seems I have reached it with all these treasures. I have leftas much more behind me for my children, but am flying because I killedOrsilochus son of Idomeneus, the fleetest runner in Crete. I killed him becausehe wanted to rob me of the spoils I had got from Troy with so much trouble anddanger both on the field of battle and by the waves of the weary sea; he said Ihad not served his father loyally at Troy as vassal, but had set myself up asan independent ruler, so I lay in wait for him with one of my followers by theroad side, and speared him as he was coming into town from the country. It wasa very dark night and nobody saw us; it was not known, therefore, that I hadkilled him, but as soon as I had done so I went to a ship and besought theowners, who were Phoenicians, to take me on board and set me in Pylos or inElis where the Epeans rule, giving them as much spoil as satisfied them. Theymeant no guile, but the wind drove them off their course, and we sailed on tillwe came hither by night. It was all we could do to get inside the harbour, andnone of us said a word about supper though we wanted it badly, but we all wenton shore and lay down just as we were. I was very tired and fell asleepdirectly, so they took my goods out of the ship, and placed them beside mewhere I was lying upon the sand. Then they sailed away to Sidonia, and I wasleft here in great distress of mind.”Such was his story, but Minerva smiled and caressed him with her hand. Then shetook the form of a woman, fair, stately, and wise, “He must be indeed ashifty lying fellow,” said she, “who could surpass you in allmanner of craft even though you had a god for your antagonist. Dare devil thatyou are, full of guile, unwearying in deceit, can you not drop your tricks andyour instinctive falsehood, even now that you are in your own country again? Wewill say no more, however, about this, for we can both of us deceive uponoccasion—you are the most accomplished counsellor and orator among allmankind, while I for diplomacy and subtlety have no equal among the gods. Didyou not know Jove’s daughter Minerva—me, who have been ever withyou, who kept watch over you in all your troubles, and who made the Phaeacianstake so great a liking to you? And now, again, I am come here to talk thingsover with you, and help you to hide the treasure I made the Phaeacians giveyou; I want to tell you about the troubles that await you in your own house;you have got to face them, but tell no one, neither man nor woman, that youhave come home again. Bear everything, and put up with every man’sinsolence, without a word.”And Ulysses answered, “A man, goddess, may know a great deal, but you areso constantly changing your appearance that when he meets you it is a hardmatter for him to know whether it is you or not. This much, however, I knowexceedingly well; you were very kind to me as long as we Achaeans were fightingbefore Troy, but from the day on which we went on board ship after havingsacked the city of Priam, and heaven dispersed us—from that day, Minerva,I saw no more of you, and cannot ever remember your coming to my ship to helpme in a difficulty; I had to wander on sick and sorry till the gods deliveredme from evil and I reached the city of the Phaeacians, where you encouraged meand took me into the town.[120] And now, I beseech you in yourfather’s name, tell me the truth, for I do not believe I am really backin Ithaca. I am in some other country and you are mocking me and deceiving mein all you have been saying. Tell me then truly, have I really got back to myown country?”“You are always taking something of that sort in your head,”replied Minerva, “and that is why I cannot desert you in yourafflictions; you are so plausible, shrewd and shifty. Any one but yourself onreturning from so long a voyage would at once have gone home to see his wifeand children, but you do not seem to care about asking after them or hearingany news about them till you have exploited your wife, who remains at homevainly grieving for you, and having no peace night or day for the tears shesheds on your behalf. As for my not coming near you, I was never uneasy aboutyou, for I was certain you would get back safely though you would lose all yourmen, and I did not wish to quarrel with my uncle Neptune, who never forgave youfor having blinded his son.[121] I will now, however, point out toyou the lie of the land, and you will then perhaps believe me. This is thehaven of the old merman Phorcys, and here is the olive tree that grows at thehead of it; [near it is the cave sacred to the Naiads;[122] here too is the overarching cavernin which you have offered many an acceptable hecatomb to the nymphs, and thisis the wooded mountain Neritum.”As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then Ulyssesrejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed the bounteoussoil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs, saying, “Naiadnymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never again to see you, nowtherefore I greet you with all loving salutations, and I will bring youofferings as in the old days, if Jove’s redoubtable daughter will grantme life, and bring my son to manhood.”“Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoinedMinerva, “let us rather set about stowing your things at once in thecave, where they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage itall.”Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding places,while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and good clothingwhich the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed everything carefully away, andMinerva set a stone against the door of the cave. Then the two sat down by theroot of the great olive, and consulted how to compass the destruction of thewicked suitors.“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how youcan lay hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in yourhouse these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents to her,while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and sendingencouraging messages[123] to every one of them, but meaningthe very opposite of all she says.”And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should havecome to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you had notgiven me such timely information. Advise me how I shall best avenge myself.Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as on the day when weloosed Troy’s fair diadem from her brow. Help me now as you did then, andI will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess, will be with me.”“Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of youwhen once we set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouringyour substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and brains. Iwill begin by disguising you so that no human being shall know you; I willcover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your yellow hair; I willclothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see it with loathing; I willblear your fine eyes for you, and make you an unseemly object in the sight ofthe suitors, of your wife, and of the son whom you left behind you. Then go atonce to the swineherd who is in charge of your pigs; he has been always wellaffected towards you, and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will findhim feeding his pigs near the rock that is called Raven[124] by the fountain Arethusa, wherethey are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their manner. Stay withhim and find out how things are going, while I proceed to Sparta and see yourson, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon, where he has gone to try and find outwhether you are still alive.”[125]“But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knewall about it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds ofhardship while others are eating up his estate?”Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be wellspoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but is staying quitecomfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with abundance of every kind. Thesuitors have put out to sea and are lying in wait for him, for they mean tokill him before he can get home. I do not much think they will succeed, butrather that some of those who are now eating up your estate will first find agrave themselves.”As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with wrinkles,took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over his whole body; shebleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine ones; she changed his clothesand threw an old rag of a wrap about him, and a tunic, tattered, filthy, andbegrimed with smoke; she also gave him an undressed deer skin as an outergarment, and furnished him with a staff and a wallet all in holes, with atwisted thong for him to sling it over his shoulder.When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess wentstraight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.BOOK XIVULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the woodedcountry and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the place whereMinerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was the most thriftyservant he had. He found him sitting in front of his hut, which was by theyards that he had built on a site which could be seen from far. He had madethem spacious[126] and fair to see, with a free runfor the pigs all round them; he had built them during his master’sabsence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground, without sayinganything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them on top with thornbushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of oaken posts, split, andset pretty close together, while inside he had built twelve styes near oneanother for the sows to lie in. There were fifty pigs wallowing in each stye,all of them breeding sows; but the boars slept outside and were much fewer innumber, for the suitors kept on eating them, and the swineherd had to send themthe best he had continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, andthe herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept alwayswith them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of sandals[127] from a goodstout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding the pigs in one place oranother, and he had sent the fourth to town with a boar that he had been forcedto send the suitors that they might sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at him, butUlysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of the stick that hehad in his hand: still, he would have been torn by them in his own homesteadhad not the swineherd dropped his ox hide, rushed full speed through the gateof the yard and driven the dogs off by shouting and throwing stones at them.Then he said to Ulysses, “Old man, the dogs were likely to have madeshort work of you, and then you would have got me into trouble. The gods havegiven me quite enough worries without that, for I have lost the best ofmasters, and am in continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine forother people to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, isstarving in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fillof bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about yourmisfortunes.”On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down. Hestrewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of this hethrew the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he used tosleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome, and said“May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your heart’sdesire in return for the kind way in which you have received me.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a stillpoorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult him, forall strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what you can get and bethankful, for servants live in fear when they have young lords for theirmasters; and this is my misfortune now, for heaven has hindered the return ofhim who would have been always good to me and given me something of myown—a house, a piece of land, a good looking wife, and all else that aliberal master allows a servant who has worked hard for him, and whose labourthe gods have prospered as they have mine in the situation which I hold. If mymaster had grown old here he would have done great things by me, but he isgone, and I wish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for shehas been the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my masterto Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of kingAgamemnon.”As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where the youngsucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought back with him andsacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted them; when the meat wascooked he brought it all in and set it before Ulysses, hot and still on thespit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over with white barley meal. The swineherdthen mixed wine in a bowl of ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses toldhim to begin.“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’spork. The fat pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame orscruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and respect thosewho do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce freebooters who go raiding onother people’s land, and Jove gives them their spoil—even they,when they have filled their ships and got home again live conscience-stricken,and look fearfully for judgement; but some god seems to have told these peoplethat Ulysses is dead and gone; they will not, therefore, go back to their ownhomes and make their offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estateby force, without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, butthey sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his wine,for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca or on themainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men put together. Iwill tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of cattle upon the main land,and as many flocks of sheep, there are also twelve droves of pigs, while hisown men and hired strangers feed him twelve widely spreading herds of goats.Here in Ithaca he runs even large flocks of goats on the far end of the island,and they are in the charge of excellent goat herds. Each one of these sends thesuitors the best goat in the flock every day. As for myself, I am in charge ofthe pigs that you see here, and I have to keep picking out the best I have andsending it to them.”This was his story, but Ulysses went on eating and drinking ravenously withouta word, brooding his revenge. When he had eaten enough and was satisfied, theswineherd took the bowl from which he usually drank, filled it with wine, andgave it to Ulysses, who was pleased, and said as he took it in his hands,“My friend, who was this master of yours that bought you and paid foryou, so rich and so powerful as you tell me? You say he perished in the causeof King Agamemnon; tell me who he was, in case I may have met with such aperson. Jove and the other gods know, but I may be able to give you news ofhim, for I have travelled much.”Eumaeus answered, “Old man, no traveller who comes here with news willget Ulysses’ wife and son to believe his story. Nevertheless, tramps inwant of a lodging keep coming with their mouths full of lies, and not a word oftruth; every one who finds his way to Ithaca goes to my mistress and tells herfalsehoods, whereon she takes them in, makes much of them, and asks them allmanner of questions, crying all the time as women will when they have losttheir husbands. And you too, old man, for a shirt and a cloak would doubtlessmake up a very pretty story. But the wolves and birds of prey have long sincetorn Ulysses to pieces, or the fishes of the sea have eaten him, and his bonesare lying buried deep in sand upon some foreign shore; he is dead and gone, anda bad business it is for all his friends—for me especially; go where Imay I shall never find so good a master, not even if I were to go home to mymother and father where I was bred and born. I do not so much care, however,about my parents now, though I should dearly like to see them again in my owncountry; it is the loss of Ulysses that grieves me most; I cannot speak of himwithout reverence though he is here no longer, for he was very fond of me, andtook such care of me that wherever he may be I shall always honour hismemory.”“My friend,” replied Ulysses, “you are very positive, andvery hard of belief about your master’s coming home again, nevertheless Iwill not merely say, but will swear, that he is coming. Do not give me anythingfor my news till he has actually come, you may then give me a shirt and cloakof good wear if you will. I am in great want, but I will not take anything atall till then, for I hate a man, even as I hate hell fire, who lets his povertytempt him into lying. I swear by king Jove, by the rites of hospitality, and bythat hearth of Ulysses to which I have now come, that all will surely happen asI have said it will. Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the endof this moon and the beginning of the next he will be here to do vengeance onall those who are ill treating his wife and son.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Old man, you will neither getpaid for bringing good news, nor will Ulysses ever come home; drink your winein peace, and let us talk about something else. Do not keep on reminding me ofall this; it always pains me when any one speaks about my honoured master. Asfor your oath we will let it alone, but I only wish he may come, as doPenelope, his old father Laertes, and his son Telemachus. I am terribly unhappytoo about this same boy of his; he was running up fast into manhood, and badefare to be no worse man, face and figure, than his father, but some one, eithergod or man, has been unsettling his mind, so he has gone off to Pylos to tryand get news of his father, and the suitors are lying in wait for him as he iscoming home, in the hope of leaving the house of Arceisius without a name inIthaca. But let us say no more about him, and leave him to be taken, or else toescape if the son of Saturn holds his hand over him to protect him. And now,old man, tell me your own story; tell me also, for I want to know, who you areand where you come from. Tell me of your town and parents, what manner of shipyou came in, how crew brought you to Ithaca, and from what country theyprofessed to come—for you cannot have come by land.”And Ulysses answered, “I will tell you all about it. If there were meatand wine enough, and we could stay here in the hut with nothing to do but toeat and drink while the others go to their work, I could easily talk on for awhole twelve months without ever finishing the story of the sorrows with whichit has pleased heaven to visit me.“I am by birth a Cretan; my father was a well to do man, who had manysons born in marriage, whereas I was the son of a slave whom he had purchasedfor a concubine; nevertheless, my father Castor son of Hylax (whose lineage Iclaim, and who was held in the highest honour among the Cretans for his wealth,prosperity, and the valour of his sons) put me on the same level with mybrothers who had been born in wedlock. When, however, death took him to thehouse of Hades, his sons divided his estate and cast lots for their shares, butto me they gave a holding and little else; nevertheless, my valour enabled meto marry into a rich family, for I was not given to bragging, or shirking onthe field of battle. It is all over now; still, if you look at the straw youcan see what the ear was, for I have had trouble enough and to spare. Mars andMinerva made me doughty in war; when I had picked my men to surprise the enemywith an ambuscade I never gave death so much as a thought, but was the first toleap forward and spear all whom I could overtake. Such was I in battle, but Idid not care about farm work, nor the frugal home life of those who would bringup children. My delight was in ships, fighting, javelins, andarrows—things that most men shudder to think of; but one man likes onething and another another, and this was what I was most naturally inclined to.Before the Achaeans went to Troy, nine times was I in command of men and shipson foreign service, and I amassed much wealth. I had my pick of the spoil inthe first instance, and much more was allotted to me later on.“My house grew apace and I became a great man among the Cretans, but whenJove counselled that terrible expedition, in which so many perished, the peoplerequired me and Idomeneus to lead their ships to Troy, and there was no way outof it, for they insisted on our doing so. There we fought for nine whole years,but in the tenth we sacked the city of Priam and sailed home again as heavendispersed us. Then it was that Jove devised evil against me. I spent but onemonth happily with my children, wife, and property, and then I conceived theidea of making a descent on Egypt, so I fitted out a fine fleet and manned it.I had nine ships, and the people flocked to fill them. For six days I and mymen made feast, and I found them many victims both for sacrifice to the godsand for themselves, but on the seventh day we went on board and set sail fromCrete with a fair North wind behind us though we were going down a river.Nothing went ill with any of our ships, and we had no sickness on board, butsat where we were and let the ships go as the wind and steersmen took them. Onthe fifth day we reached the river Aegyptus; there I stationed my ships in theriver, bidding my men stay by them and keep guard over them while I sent outscouts to reconnoitre from every point of vantage.“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravagedthe land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and childrencaptive. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard the warcry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled with horsemenand foot soldiers and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panic among mymen, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they found themselvessurrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest alive to doforced labour for them. Jove, however, put it in my mind to do thus—and Iwish I had died then and there in Egypt instead, for there was much sorrow instore for me—I took off my helmet and shield and dropped my spear from myhand; then I went straight up to the king’s chariot, clasped his kneesand kissed them, whereon he spared my life, bade me get into his chariot, andtook me weeping to his own home. Many made at me with their ashen spears andtried to kill me in their fury, but the king protected me, for he feared thewrath of Jove the protector of strangers, who punishes those who do evil.“I stayed there for seven years and got together much money among theEgyptians, for they all gave me something; but when it was now going on foreight years there came a certain Phoenician, a cunning rascal, who had alreadycommitted all sorts of villainy, and this man talked me over into going withhim to Phoenicia, where his house and his possessions lay. I stayed there for awhole twelve months, but at the end of that time when months and days had goneby till the same season had come round again, he set me on board a ship boundfor Libya, on a pretence that I was to take a cargo along with him to thatplace, but really that he might sell me as a slave and take the money Ifetched. I suspected his intention, but went on board with him, for I could nothelp it.“The ship ran before a fresh North wind till we had reached the sea thatlies between Crete and Libya; there, however, Jove counselled theirdestruction, for as soon as we were well out from Crete and could see nothingbut sea and sky, he raised a black cloud over our ship and the sea grew darkbeneath it. Then Jove let fly with his thunderbolts and the ship went round andround and was filled with fire and brimstone as the lightning struck it. Themen fell all into the sea; they were carried about in the water round the shiplooking like so many sea-gulls, but the god presently deprived them of allchance of getting home again. I was all dismayed. Jove, however, sent theship’s mast within my reach, which saved my life, for I clung to it, anddrifted before the fury of the gale. Nine days did I drift but in the darknessof the tenth night a great wave bore me on to the Thesprotian coast. TherePheidon king of the Thesprotians entertained me hospitably without charging meanything at all—for his son found me when I was nearly dead with cold andfatigue, whereon he raised me by the hand, took me to his father’s houseand gave me clothes to wear.“There it was that I heard news of Ulysses, for the king told me he hadentertained him, and shown him much hospitality while he was on his homewardjourney. He showed me also the treasure of gold, and wrought iron that Ulysseshad got together. There was enough to keep his family for ten generations, somuch had he left in the house of king Pheidon. But the king said Ulysses hadgone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from the god’s highoak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return to Ithacaopenly, or in secret. Moreover the king swore in my presence, makingdrink-offerings in his own house as he did so, that the ship was by the waterside, and the crew found, that should take him to his own country. He sent meoff however before Ulysses returned, for there happened to be a Thesprotianship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, and he told those incharge of her to be sure and take me safely to King Acastus.“These men hatched a plot against me that would have reduced me to thevery extreme of misery, for when the ship had got some way out from land theyresolved on selling me as a slave. They stripped me of the shirt and cloak thatI was wearing, and gave me instead the tattered old clouts in which you now seeme; then, towards nightfall, they reached the tilled lands of Ithaca, and therethey bound me with a strong rope fast in the ship, while they went on shore toget supper by the sea side. But the gods soon undid my bonds for me, and havingdrawn my rags over my head I slid down the rudder into the sea, where I struckout and swam till I was well clear of them, and came ashore near a thick woodin which I lay concealed. They were very angry at my having escaped and wentsearching about for me, till at last they thought it was no further use andwent back to their ship. The gods, having hidden me thus easily, then took meto a good man’s door—for it seems that I am not to die yetawhile.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Poor unhappy stranger, I havefound the story of your misfortunes extremely interesting, but that part aboutUlysses is not right; and you will never get me to believe it. Why should a manlike you go about telling lies in this way? I know all about the return of mymaster. The gods one and all of them detest him, or they would have taken himbefore Troy, or let him die with friends around him when the days of hisfighting were done; for then the Achaeans would have built a mound over hisashes and his son would have been heir to his renown, but now the storm windshave spirited him away we know not whither.“As for me I live out of the way here with the pigs, and never go to thetown unless when Penelope sends for me on the arrival of some news aboutUlysses. Then they all sit round and ask questions, both those who grieve overthe king’s absence, and those who rejoice at it because they can eat uphis property without paying for it. For my own part I have never cared aboutasking anyone else since the time when I was taken in by an Aetolian, who hadkilled a man and come a long way till at last he reached my station, and I wasvery kind to him. He said he had seen Ulysses with Idomeneus among the Cretans,refitting his ships which had been damaged in a gale. He said Ulysses wouldreturn in the following summer or autumn with his men, and that he would bringback much wealth. And now you, you unfortunate old man, since fate has broughtyou to my door, do not try to flatter me in this way with vain hopes. It is notfor any such reason that I shall treat you kindly, but only out of respect forJove the god of hospitality, as fearing him and pitying you.”Ulysses answered, “I see that you are of an unbelieving mind; I havegiven you my oath, and yet you will not credit me; let us then make a bargain,and call all the gods in heaven to witness it. If your master comes home, giveme a cloak and shirt of good wear, and send me to Dulichium where I want to go;but if he does not come as I say he will, set your men on to me, and tell themto throw me from yonder precipice, as a warning to tramps not to go about thecountry telling lies.”“And a pretty figure I should cut then,” replied Eumaeus,“both now and hereafter, if I were to kill you after receiving you intomy hut and showing you hospitality. I should have to say my prayers in goodearnest if I did; but it is just supper time and I hope my men will come indirectly, that we may cook something savoury for supper.”Thus did they converse, and presently the swineherds came up with the pigs,which were then shut up for the night in their styes, and a tremendoussquealing they made as they were being driven into them. But Eumaeus called tohis men and said, “Bring in the best pig you have, that I may sacrificehim for this stranger, and we will take toll of him ourselves. We have hadtrouble enough this long time feeding pigs, while others reap the fruit of ourlabour.”On this he began chopping firewood, while the others brought in a fine fat fiveyear old boar pig, and set it at the altar. Eumaeus did not forget the gods,for he was a man of good principles, so the first thing he did was to cutbristles from the pig’s face and throw them into the fire, praying to allthe gods as he did so that Ulysses might return home again. Then he clubbed thepig with a billet of oak which he had kept back when he was chopping thefirewood, and stunned it, while the others slaughtered and singed it. Then theycut it up, and Eumaeus began by putting raw pieces from each joint on to someof the fat; these he sprinkled with barley meal, and laid upon the embers; theycut the rest of the meat up small, put the pieces upon the spits and roastedthem till they were done; when they had taken them off the spits they threwthem on to the dresser in a heap. The swineherd, who was a most equitable man,then stood up to give every one his share. He made seven portions; one of thesehe set apart for Mercury the son of Maia and the nymphs, praying to them as hedid so; the others he dealt out to the men man by man. He gave Ulysses someslices cut lengthways down the loin as a mark of especial honour, and Ulysseswas much pleased. “I hope, Eumaeus,” said he, “that Jove willbe as well disposed towards you as I am, for the respect you are showing to anoutcast like myself.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Eat, my good fellow, andenjoy your supper, such as it is. God grants this, and withholds that, just ashe thinks right, for he can do whatever he chooses.”As he spoke he cut off the first piece and offered it as a burnt sacrifice tothe immortal gods; then he made them a drink-offering, put the cup in the handsof Ulysses, and sat down to his own portion. Mesaulius brought them theirbread; the swineherd had brought this man on his own account from among theTaphians during his master’s absence, and had paid for him with his ownmoney without saying anything either to his mistress or Laertes. They then laidtheir hands upon the good things that were before them, and when they had hadenough to eat and drink, Mesaulius took away what was left of the bread, andthey all went to bed after having made a hearty supper.Now the night came on stormy and very dark, for there was no moon. It pouredwithout ceasing, and the wind blew strong from the West, which is a wetquarter, so Ulysses thought he would see whether Eumaeus, in the excellent carehe took of him, would take off his own cloak and give it him, or make one ofhis men give him one. “Listen to me,” said he, “Eumaeus andthe rest of you; when I have said a prayer I will tell you something. It is thewine that makes me talk in this way; wine will make even a wise man fall tosinging; it will make him chuckle and dance and say many a word that he hadbetter leave unspoken; still, as I have begun, I will go on. Would that I werestill young and strong as when we got up an ambuscade before Troy. Menelaus andUlysses were the leaders, but I was in command also, for the other two wouldhave it so. When we had come up to the wall of the city we crouched downbeneath our armour and lay there under cover of the reeds and thick brushwoodthat grew about the swamp. It came on to freeze with a North wind blowing; thesnow fell small and fine like hoar frost, and our shields were coated thickwith rime. The others had all got cloaks and shirts, and slept comfortablyenough with their shields about their shoulders, but I had carelessly left mycloak behind me, not thinking that I should be too cold, and had gone off innothing but my shirt and shield. When the night was two-thirds through and thestars had shifted their places, I nudged Ulysses who was close to me with myelbow, and he at once gave me his ear.“‘Ulysses,’ said I, ‘this cold will be the death of me,for I have no cloak; some god fooled me into setting off with nothing on but myshirt, and I do not know what to do.’“Ulysses, who was as crafty as he was valiant, hit upon the followingplan:“‘Keep still,’ said he in a low voice, ‘or the otherswill hear you.’ Then he raised his head on his elbow.“‘My friends,’ said he, ‘I have had a dream from heavenin my sleep. We are a long way from the ships; I wish some one would go downand tell Agamemnon to send us up more men at once.’“On this Thoas son of Andraemon threw off his cloak and set out runningto the ships, whereon I took the cloak and lay in it comfortably enough tillmorning. Would that I were still young and strong as I was in those days, forthen some one of you swineherds would give me a cloak both out of good will andfor the respect due to a brave soldier; but now people look down upon mebecause my clothes are shabby.”And Eumaeus answered, “Old man, you have told us an excellent story, andhave said nothing so far but what is quite satisfactory; for the present,therefore, you shall want neither clothing nor anything else that a stranger indistress may reasonably expect, but to-morrow morning you have to shake yourown old rags about your body again, for we have not many spare cloaks norshirts up here, but every man has only one. When Ulysses’ son comes homeagain he will give you both cloak and shirt, and send you wherever you may wantto go.”With this he got up and made a bed for Ulysses by throwing some goatskins andsheepskins on the ground in front of the fire. Here Ulysses lay down, andEumaeus covered him over with a great heavy cloak that he kept for a change incase of extraordinarily bad weather.Thus did Ulysses sleep, and the young men slept beside him. But the swineherddid not like sleeping away from his pigs, so he got ready to go outside, andUlysses was glad to see that he looked after his property during hismaster’s absence. First he slung his sword over his brawny shoulders andput on a thick cloak to keep out the wind. He also took the skin of a large andwell fed goat, and a javelin in case of attack from men or dogs. Thus equippedhe went to his rest where the pigs were camping under an overhanging rock thatgave them shelter from the North wind.BOOK XVMINERVA SUMMONS TELEMACHUS FROM LACEDAEMON—HE MEETS WITH THEOCLYMENUS ATPYLOS AND BRINGS HIM TO ITHACA—ON LANDING HE GOES TO THE HUT OF EUMAEUS.But Minerva went to the fair city of Lacedaemon to tell Ulysses’ son thathe was to return at once. She found him and Pisistratus sleeping in theforecourt of Menelaus’s house; Pisistratus was fast asleep, butTelemachus could get no rest all night for thinking of his unhappy father, soMinerva went close up to him and said:“Telemachus, you should not remain so far away from home any longer, norleave your property with such dangerous people in your house; they will eat upeverything you have among them, and you will have been on a fool’serrand. Ask Menelaus to send you home at once if you wish to find yourexcellent mother still there when you get back. Her father and brothers arealready urging her to marry Eurymachus, who has given her more than any of theothers, and has been greatly increasing his wedding presents. I hope nothingvaluable may have been taken from the house in spite of you, but you know whatwomen are—they always want to do the best they can for the man whomarries them, and never give another thought to the children of their firsthusband, nor to their father either when he is dead and done with. Go home,therefore, and put everything in charge of the most respectable woman servantthat you have, until it shall please heaven to send you a wife of your own. Letme tell you also of another matter which you had better attend to. The chiefmen among the suitors are lying in wait for you in the Strait[128] between Ithacaand Samos, and they mean to kill you before you can reach home. I do not muchthink they will succeed; it is more likely that some of those who are noweating up your property will find a grave themselves. Sail night and day, andkeep your ship well away from the islands; the god who watches over you andprotects you will send you a fair wind. As soon as you get to Ithaca send yourship and men on to the town, but yourself go straight to the swineherd who hascharge of your pigs; he is well disposed towards you, stay with him, therefore,for the night, and then send him to Penelope to tell her that you have got backsafe from Pylos.”Then she went back to Olympus; but Telemachus stirred Pisistratus with his heelto rouse him, and said, “Wake up Pisistratus, and yoke the horses to thechariot, for we must set off home.”[129]But Pisistratus said, “No matter what hurry we are in we cannot drive inthe dark. It will be morning soon; wait till Menelaus has brought his presentsand put them in the chariot for us; and let him say good bye to us in the usualway. So long as he lives a guest should never forget a host who has shown himkindness.”As he spoke day began to break, and Menelaus, who had already risen, leavingHelen in bed, came towards them. When Telemachus saw him he put on his shirt asfast as he could, threw a great cloak over his shoulders, and went out to meethim. “Menelaus,” said he, “let me go back now to my owncountry, for I want to get home.”And Menelaus answered, “Telemachus, if you insist on going I will notdetain you. I do not like to see a host either too fond of his guest or toorude to him. Moderation is best in all things, and not letting a man go when hewants to do so is as bad as telling him to go if he would like to stay. Oneshould treat a guest well as long as he is in the house and speed him when hewants to leave it. Wait, then, till I can get your beautiful presents into yourchariot, and till you have yourself seen them. I will tell the women to preparea sufficient dinner for you of what there may be in the house; it will be atonce more proper and cheaper for you to get your dinner before setting out onsuch a long journey. If, moreover, you have a fancy for making a tour in Hellasor in the Peloponnese, I will yoke my horses, and will conduct you myselfthrough all our principal cities. No one will send us away empty handed; everyone will give us something—a bronze tripod, a couple of mules, or a goldcup.”“Menelaus,” replied Telemachus, “I want to go home at once,for when I came away I left my property without protection, and fear that whilelooking for my father I shall come to ruin myself, or find that somethingvaluable has been stolen during my absence.”When Menelaus heard this he immediately told his wife and servants to prepare asufficient dinner from what there might be in the house. At this momentEteoneus joined him, for he lived close by and had just got up; so Menelaustold him to light the fire and cook some meat, which he at once did. ThenMenelaus went down into his fragrant store room,[130] not alone, but Helen went too, withMegapenthes. When he reached the place where the treasures of his house werekept, he selected a double cup, and told his son Megapenthes to bring also asilver mixing bowl. Meanwhile Helen went to the chest where she kept the lovelydresses which she had made with her own hands, and took out one that waslargest and most beautifully enriched with embroidery; it glittered like astar, and lay at the very bottom of the chest. [131] Then they all came back through thehouse again till they got to Telemachus, and Menelaus said, “Telemachus,may Jove, the mighty husband of Juno, bring you safely home according to yourdesire. I will now present you with the finest and most precious piece of platein all my house. It is a mixing bowl of pure silver, except the rim, which isinlaid with gold, and it is the work of Vulcan. Phaedimus king of the Sidoniansmade me a present of it in the course of a visit that I paid him while I was onmy return home. I should like to give it to you.”With these words he placed the double cup in the hands of Telemachus, whileMegapenthes brought the beautiful mixing bowl and set it before him. Hard bystood lovely Helen with the robe ready in her hand.“I too, my son,” said she, “have something for you as akeepsake from the hand of Helen; it is for your bride to wear upon her weddingday. Till then, get your dear mother to keep it for you; thus may you go backrejoicing to your own country and to your home.”So saying she gave the robe over to him and he received it gladly. ThenPisistratus put the presents into the chariot, and admired them all as he didso. Presently Menelaus took Telemachus and Pisistratus into the house, and theyboth of them sat down to table. A maid servant brought them water in abeautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silver basin for them to wash theirhands, and she drew a clean table beside them; an upper servant brought thembread and offered them many good things of what there was in the house.Eteoneus carved the meat and gave them each their portions, while Megapenthespoured out the wine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that werebefore them, but as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus andPisistratus yoked the horses, and took their places in the chariot. They droveout through the inner gateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outercourt, and Menelaus came after them with a golden goblet of wine in his righthand that they might make a drink-offering before they set out. He stood infront of the horses and pledged them, saying, “Farewell to both of you;see that you tell Nestor how I have treated you, for he was as kind to me asany father could be while we Achaeans were fighting before Troy.”“We will be sure, sir,” answered Telemachus, “to tell himeverything as soon as we see him. I wish I were as certain of finding Ulyssesreturned when I get back to Ithaca, that I might tell him of the very greatkindness you have shown me and of the many beautiful presents I am taking withme.”As he was thus speaking a bird flew on his right hand—an eagle with agreat white goose in its talons which it had carried off from the farmyard—and all the men and women were running after it and shouting. Itcame quite close up to them and flew away on their right hands in front of thehorses. When they saw it they were glad, and their hearts took comfort withinthem, whereon Pisistratus said, “Tell me, Menelaus, has heaven sent thisomen for us or for you?”Menelaus was thinking what would be the most proper answer for him to make, butHelen was too quick for him and said, “I will read this matter as heavenhas put it in my heart, and as I doubt not that it will come to pass. The eaglecame from the mountain where it was bred and has its nest, and in like mannerUlysses, after having travelled far and suffered much, will return to take hisrevenge—if indeed he is not back already and hatching mischief for thesuitors.”“May Jove so grant it,” replied Telemachus, “if it shouldprove to be so, I will make vows to you as though you were a god, even when Iam at home.”As he spoke he lashed his horses and they started off at full speed through thetown towards the open country. They swayed the yoke upon their necks andtravelled the whole day long till the sun set and darkness was over all theland. Then they reached Pherae, where Diocles lived who was son of Ortilochus,the son of Alpheus. There they passed the night and were treated hospitably.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, they again yoked theirhorses and their places in the chariot. They drove out through the innergateway and under the echoing gatehouse of the outer court. Then Pisistratuslashed his horses on and they flew forward nothing loath; ere long they came toPylos, and then Telemachus said:“Pisistratus, I hope you will promise to do what I am going to ask you.You know our fathers were old friends before us; moreover, we are both of anage, and this journey has brought us together still more closely; do not,therefore, take me past my ship, but leave me there, for if I go to yourfather’s house he will try to keep me in the warmth of his good willtowards me, and I must go home at once.”Pisistratus thought how he should do as he was asked, and in the end he deemedit best to turn his horses towards the ship, and put Menelaus’s beautifulpresents of gold and raiment in the stern of the vessel. Then he said,“Go on board at once and tell your men to do so also before I can reachhome to tell my father. I know how obstinate he is, and am sure he will not letyou go; he will come down here to fetch you, and he will not go back withoutyou. But he will be very angry.”With this he drove his goodly steeds back to the city of the Pylians and soonreached his home, but Telemachus called the men together and gave his orders.“Now, my men,” said he, “get everything in order on board theship, and let us set out home.”Thus did he speak, and they went on board even as he had said. But asTelemachus was thus busied, praying also and sacrificing to Minerva in theship’s stern, there came to him a man from a distant country, a seer, whowas flying from Argos because he had killed a man. He was descended fromMelampus, who used to live in Pylos, the land of sheep; he was rich and owned agreat house, but he was driven into exile by the great and powerful kingNeleus. Neleus seized his goods and held them for a whole year, during which hewas a close prisoner in the house of king Phylacus, and in much distress ofmind both on account of the daughter of Neleus and because he was haunted by agreat sorrow that dread Erinys had laid upon him. In the end, however, heescaped with his life, drove the cattle from Phylace to Pylos, avenged thewrong that had been done him, and gave the daughter of Neleus to his brother.Then he left the country and went to Argos, where it was ordained that heshould reign over much people. There he married, established himself, and hadtwo famous sons Antiphates and Mantius. Antiphates became father of Oicleus,and Oicleus of Amphiaraus, who was dearly loved both by Jove and by Apollo, buthe did not live to old age, for he was killed in Thebes by reason of awoman’s gifts. His sons were Alcmaeon and Amphilochus. Mantius, the otherson of Melampus, was father to Polypheides and Cleitus. Aurora, throned ingold, carried off Cleitus for his beauty’s sake, that he might dwellamong the immortals, but Apollo made Polypheides the greatest seer in the wholeworld now that Amphiaraus was dead. He quarrelled with his father and went tolive in Hyperesia, where he remained and prophesied for all men.His son, Theoclymenus, it was who now came up to Telemachus as he was makingdrink-offerings and praying in his ship. “Friend,” said he,“now that I find you sacrificing in this place, I beseech you by yoursacrifices themselves, and by the god to whom you make them, I pray you also byyour own head and by those of your followers tell me the truth and nothing butthe truth. Who and whence are you? Tell me also of your town andparents.”Telemachus said, “I will answer you quite truly. I am from Ithaca, and myfather is Ulysses, as surely as that he ever lived. But he has come to somemiserable end. Therefore I have taken this ship and got my crew together to seeif I can hear any news of him, for he has been away a long time.”“I too,” answered Theoclymenus, “am an exile, for I havekilled a man of my own race. He has many brothers and kinsmen in Argos, andthey have great power among the Argives. I am flying to escape death at theirhands, and am thus doomed to be a wanderer on the face of the earth. I am yoursuppliant; take me, therefore, on board your ship that they may not kill me,for I know they are in pursuit.”“I will not refuse you,” replied Telemachus, “if you wish tojoin us. Come, therefore, and in Ithaca we will treat you hospitably accordingto what we have.”On this he received Theoclymenus’ spear and laid it down on the deck ofthe ship. He went on board and sat in the stern, bidding Theoclymenus sitbeside him; then the men let go the hawsers. Telemachus told them to catch holdof the ropes, and they made all haste to do so. They set the mast in its socketin the cross plank, raised it and made it fast with the forestays, and theyhoisted their white sails with sheets of twisted ox hide. Minerva sent them afair wind that blew fresh and strong to take the ship on her course as fast aspossible. Thus then they passed by Crouni and Chalcis.Presently the sun set and darkness was over all the land. The vessel made aquick passage to Pheae and thence on to Elis, where the Epeans rule. Telemachusthen headed her for the flying islands,[132] wondering within himself whether heshould escape death or should be taken prisoner.Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd were eating their supper in the hut, andthe men supped with them. As soon as they had had to eat and drink, Ulyssesbegan trying to prove the swineherd and see whether he would continue to treathim kindly, and ask him to stay on at the station or pack him off to the city;so he said:“Eumaeus, and all of you, to-morrow I want to go away and begin beggingabout the town, so as to be no more trouble to you or to your men. Give me youradvice therefore, and let me have a good guide to go with me and show me theway. I will go the round of the city begging as I needs must, to see if any onewill give me a drink and a piece of bread. I should like also to go to thehouse of Ulysses and bring news of her husband to Queen Penelope. I could thengo about among the suitors and see if out of all their abundance they will giveme a dinner. I should soon make them an excellent servant in all sorts of ways.Listen and believe when I tell you that by the blessing of Mercury who givesgrace and good name to the works of all men, there is no one living who wouldmake a more handy servant than I should—to put fresh wood on the fire,chop fuel, carve, cook, pour out wine, and do all those services that poor menhave to do for their betters.”The swineherd was very much disturbed when he heard this. “Heaven helpme,” he exclaimed, “what ever can have put such a notion as thatinto your head? If you go near the suitors you will be undone to a certainty,for their pride and insolence reach the very heavens. They would never think oftaking a man like you for a servant. Their servants are all young men, welldressed, wearing good cloaks and shirts, with well looking faces and their hairalways tidy, the tables are kept quite clean and are loaded with bread, meat,and wine. Stay where you are, then; you are not in anybody’s way; I donot mind your being here, no more do any of the others, and when Telemachuscomes home he will give you a shirt and cloak and will send you wherever youwant to go.”Ulysses answered, “I hope you may be as dear to the gods as you are tome, for having saved me from going about and getting into trouble; there isnothing worse than being always on the tramp; still, when men have once got lowdown in the world they will go through a great deal on behalf of theirmiserable bellies. Since, however, you press me to stay here and await thereturn of Telemachus, tell me about Ulysses’ mother, and his father whomhe left on the threshold of old age when he set out for Troy. Are they stillliving or are they already dead and in the house of Hades?”“I will tell you all about them,” replied Eumaeus, “Laertesis still living and prays heaven to let him depart peacefully in his own house,for he is terribly distressed about the absence of his son, and also about thedeath of his wife, which grieved him greatly and aged him more than anythingelse did. She came to an unhappy end[133] through sorrow for her son: may nofriend or neighbour who has dealt kindly by me come to such an end as she did.As long as she was still living, though she was always grieving, I used to likeseeing her and asking her how she did, for she brought me up along with herdaughter Ctimene, the youngest of her children; we were boy and girl together,and she made little difference between us. When, however, we both grew up, theysent Ctimene to Same and received a splendid dowry for her. As for me, mymistress gave me a good shirt and cloak with a pair of sandals for my feet, andsent me off into the country, but she was just as fond of me as ever. This isall over now. Still it has pleased heaven to prosper my work in the situationwhich I now hold. I have enough to eat and drink, and can find something forany respectable stranger who comes here; but there is no getting a kind word ordeed out of my mistress, for the house has fallen into the hands of wickedpeople. Servants want sometimes to see their mistress and have a talk with her;they like to have something to eat and drink at the house, and something too totake back with them into the country. This is what will keep servants in a goodhumour.”Ulysses answered, “Then you must have been a very little fellow, Eumaeus,when you were taken so far away from your home and parents. Tell me, and tellme true, was the city in which your father and mother lived sacked andpillaged, or did some enemies carry you off when you were alone tending sheepor cattle, ship you off here, and sell you for whatever your master gavethem?”“Stranger,” replied Eumaeus, “as regards your question: sitstill, make yourself comfortable, drink your wine, and listen to me. The nightsare now at their longest; there is plenty of time both for sleeping and sittingup talking together; you ought not to go to bed till bed time, too much sleepis as bad as too little; if any one of the others wishes to go to bed let himleave us and do so; he can then take my master’s pigs out when he hasdone breakfast in the morning. We too will sit here eating and drinking in thehut, and telling one another stories about our misfortunes; for when a man hassuffered much, and been buffeted about in the world, he takes pleasure inrecalling the memory of sorrows that have long gone by. As regards yourquestion, then, my tale is as follows:“You may have heard of an island called Syra that lies over aboveOrtygia,[134]where the land begins to turn round and look in another direction.[135] It is not verythickly peopled, but the soil is good, with much pasture fit for cattle andsheep, and it abounds with wine and wheat. Dearth never comes there, nor arethe people plagued by any sickness, but when they grow old Apollo comes withDiana and kills them with his painless shafts. It contains two communities, andthe whole country is divided between these two. My father Ctesius son ofOrmenus, a man comparable to the gods, reigned over both.“Now to this place there came some cunning traders from Phoenicia (forthe Phoenicians are great mariners) in a ship which they had freighted withgewgaws of all kinds. There happened to be a Phoenician woman in myfather’s house, very tall and comely, and an excellent servant; thesescoundrels got hold of her one day when she was washing near their ship,seduced her, and cajoled her in ways that no woman can resist, no matter howgood she may be by nature. The man who had seduced her asked her who she wasand where she came from, and on this she told him her father’s name.‘I come from Sidon,’ said she, ‘and am daughter to Arybas, aman rolling in wealth. One day as I was coming into the town from the country,some Taphian pirates seized me and took me here over the sea, where they soldme to the man who owns this house, and he gave them their price for me.’“The man who had seduced her then said, ‘Would you like to comealong with us to see the house of your parents and your parents themselves?They are both alive and are said to be well off.’“‘I will do so gladly,’ answered she, ‘if you men willfirst swear me a solemn oath that you will do me no harm by the way.’“They all swore as she told them, and when they had completed their oaththe woman said, ‘Hush; and if any of your men meets me in the street orat the well, do not let him speak to me, for fear some one should go and tellmy master, in which case he would suspect something. He would put me in prison,and would have all of you murdered; keep your own counsel therefore; buy yourmerchandise as fast as you can, and send me word when you have done loading. Iwill bring as much gold as I can lay my hands on, and there is something elsealso that I can do towards paying my fare. I am nurse to the son of the goodman of the house, a funny little fellow just able to run about. I will carryhim off in your ship, and you will get a great deal of money for him if youtake him and sell him in foreign parts.’“On this she went back to the house. The Phoenicians stayed a whole yeartill they had loaded their ship with much precious merchandise, and then, whenthey had got freight enough, they sent to tell the woman. Their messenger, avery cunning fellow, came to my father’s house bringing a necklace ofgold with amber beads strung among it; and while my mother and the servants hadit in their hands admiring it and bargaining about it, he made a sign quietlyto the woman and then went back to the ship, whereon she took me by the handand led me out of the house. In the fore part of the house she saw the tablesset with the cups of guests who had been feasting with my father, as being inattendance on him; these were now all gone to a meeting of the public assembly,so she snatched up three cups and carried them off in the bosom of her dress,while I followed her, for I knew no better. The sun was now set, and darknesswas over all the land, so we hurried on as fast as we could till we reached theharbour, where the Phoenician ship was lying. When they had got on board theysailed their ways over the sea, taking us with them, and Jove sent then a fairwind; six days did we sail both night and day, but on the seventh day Dianastruck the woman and she fell heavily down into the ship’s hold as thoughshe were a sea gull alighting on the water; so they threw her overboard to theseals and fishes, and I was left all sorrowful and alone. Presently the windsand waves took the ship to Ithaca, where Laertes gave sundry of his chattelsfor me, and thus it was that ever I came to set eyes upon this country.”Ulysses answered, “Eumaeus, I have heard the story of your misfortuneswith the most lively interest and pity, but Jove has given you good as well asevil, for in spite of everything you have a good master, who sees that youalways have enough to eat and drink; and you lead a good life, whereas I amstill going about begging my way from city to city.”Thus did they converse, and they had only a very little time left for sleep,for it was soon daybreak. In the mean time Telemachus and his crew were nearingland, so they loosed the sails, took down the mast, and rowed the ship into theharbour.[136]They cast out their mooring stones and made fast the hawsers; they then got outupon the sea shore, mixed their wine, and got dinner ready. As soon as they hadhad enough to eat and drink Telemachus said, “Take the ship on to thetown, but leave me here, for I want to look after the herdsmen on one of myfarms. In the evening, when I have seen all I want, I will come down to thecity, and to-morrow morning in return for your trouble I will give you all agood dinner with meat and wine.” [137]Then Theoclymenus said, “And what, my dear young friend, is to become ofme? To whose house, among all your chief men, am I to repair? or shall I gostraight to your own house and to your mother?”“At any other time,” replied Telemachus, “I should havebidden you go to my own house, for you would find no want of hospitality; atthe present moment, however, you would not be comfortable there, for I shall beaway, and my mother will not see you; she does not often show herself even tothe suitors, but sits at her loom weaving in an upper chamber, out of theirway; but I can tell you a man whose house you can go to—I mean Eurymachusthe son of Polybus, who is held in the highest estimation by every one inIthaca. He is much the best man and the most persistent wooer, of all those whoare paying court to my mother and trying to take Ulysses’ place. Jove,however, in heaven alone knows whether or no they will come to a bad end beforethe marriage takes place.”As he was speaking a bird flew by upon his right hand—a hawk,Apollo’s messenger. It held a dove in its talons, and the feathers, as ittore them off,[138] fell to the ground midway betweenTelemachus and the ship. On this Theoclymenus called him apart and caught himby the hand. “Telemachus,” said he, “that bird did not fly onyour right hand without having been sent there by some god. As soon as I saw itI knew it was an omen; it means that you will remain powerful and that therewill be no house in Ithaca more royal than your own.”“I wish it may prove so,” answered Telemachus. “If it does, Iwill show you so much good will and give you so many presents that all who meetyou will congratulate you.”Then he said to his friend Piraeus, “Piraeus, son of Clytius, you havethroughout shown yourself the most willing to serve me of all those who haveaccompanied me to Pylos; I wish you would take this stranger to your own houseand entertain him hospitably till I can come for him.”And Piraeus answered, “Telemachus, you may stay away as long as youplease, but I will look after him for you, and he shall find no lack ofhospitality.”As he spoke he went on board, and bade the others do so also and loose thehawsers, so they took their places in the ship. But Telemachus bound on hissandals, and took a long and doughty spear with a head of sharpened bronze fromthe deck of the ship. Then they loosed the hawsers, thrust the ship off fromland, and made on towards the city as they had been told to do, whileTelemachus strode on as fast as he could, till he reached the homestead wherehis countless herds of swine were feeding, and where dwelt the excellentswineherd, who was so devoted a servant to his master.BOOK XVIULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO TELEMACHUS.Meanwhile Ulysses and the swineherd had lit a fire in the hut and were weregetting breakfast ready at daybreak, for they had sent the men out with thepigs. When Telemachus came up, the dogs did not bark but fawned upon him, soUlysses, hearing the sound of feet and noticing that the dogs did not bark,said to Eumaeus:“Eumaeus, I hear footsteps; I suppose one of your men or some one of youracquaintance is coming here, for the dogs are fawning upon him and notbarking.”The words were hardly out of his mouth before his son stood at the door.Eumaeus sprang to his feet, and the bowls in which he was mixing wine fell fromhis hands, as he made towards his master. He kissed his head and both hisbeautiful eyes, and wept for joy. A father could not be more delighted at thereturn of an only son, the child of his old age, after ten years’ absencein a foreign country and after having gone through much hardship. He embracedhim, kissed him all over as though he had come back from the dead, and spokefondly to him saying:“So you are come, Telemachus, light of my eyes that you are. When I heardyou had gone to Pylos I made sure I was never going to see you any more. Comein, my dear child, and sit down, that I may have a good look at you now you arehome again; it is not very often you come into the country to see us herdsmen;you stick pretty close to the town generally. I suppose you think it better tokeep an eye on what the suitors are doing.”“So be it, old friend,” answered Telemachus, “but I am comenow because I want to see you, and to learn whether my mother is still at herold home or whether some one else has married her, so that the bed of Ulyssesis without bedding and covered with cobwebs.”“She is still at the house,” replied Eumaeus, “grieving andbreaking her heart, and doing nothing but weep, both night and daycontinually.”As he spoke he took Telemachus’ spear, whereon he crossed the stonethreshold and came inside. Ulysses rose from his seat to give him place as heentered, but Telemachus checked him; “Sit down, stranger,” said he,“I can easily find another seat, and there is one here who will lay itfor me.”Ulysses went back to his own place, and Eumaeus strewed some green brushwood onthe floor and threw a sheepskin on top of it for Telemachus to sit upon. Thenthe swineherd brought them platters of cold meat, the remains from what theyhad eaten the day before, and he filled the bread baskets with bread as fast ashe could. He mixed wine also in bowls of ivy-wood, and took his seat facingUlysses. Then they laid their hands on the good things that were before them,and as soon as they had had enough to eat and drink Telemachus said to Eumaeus,“Old friend, where does this stranger come from? How did his crew bringhim to Ithaca, and who were they?—for assuredly he did not come here byland.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “My son, I will tell you thereal truth. He says he is a Cretan, and that he has been a great traveller. Atthis moment he is running away from a Thesprotian ship, and has taken refuge atmy station, so I will put him into your hands. Do whatever you like with him,only remember that he is your suppliant.”“I am very much distressed,” said Telemachus, “by what youhave just told me. How can I take this stranger into my house? I am as yetyoung, and am not strong enough to hold my own if any man attacks me. My mothercannot make up her mind whether to stay where she is and look after the houseout of respect for public opinion and the memory of her husband, or whether thetime is now come for her to take the best man of those who are wooing her, andthe one who will make her the most advantageous offer; still, as the strangerhas come to your station I will find him a cloak and shirt of good wear, with asword and sandals, and will send him wherever he wants to go. Or if you likeyou can keep him here at the station, and I will send him clothes and food thathe may be no burden on you and on your men; but I will not have him go near thesuitors, for they are very insolent, and are sure to ill treat him in a waythat would greatly grieve me; no matter how valiant a man may be he can donothing against numbers, for they will be too strong for him.”Then Ulysses said, “Sir, it is right that I should say something myself.I am much shocked about what you have said about the insolent way in which thesuitors are behaving in despite of such a man as you are. Tell me, do yousubmit to such treatment tamely, or has some god set your people against you?May you not complain of your brothers—for it is to these that a man maylook for support, however great his quarrel may be? I wish I were as young asyou are and in my present mind; if I were son to Ulysses, or, indeed, Ulysseshimself, I would rather some one came and cut my head off, but I would go tothe house and be the bane of every one of these men.[139] If they were too many forme—I being single-handed—I would rather die fighting in my ownhouse than see such disgraceful sights day after day, strangers grosslymaltreated, and men dragging the women servants about the house in an unseemlyway, wine drawn recklessly, and bread wasted all to no purpose for an end thatshall never be accomplished.”And Telemachus answered, “I will tell you truly everything. There is noenmity between me and my people, nor can I complain of brothers, to whom a manmay look for support however great his quarrel may be. Jove has made us a raceof only sons. Laertes was the only son of Arceisius, and Ulysses only son ofLaertes. I am myself the only son of Ulysses who left me behind him when hewent away, so that I have never been of any use to him. Hence it comes that myhouse is in the hands of numberless marauders; for the chiefs from all theneighbouring islands, Dulichium, Same, Zacynthus, as also all the principal menof Ithaca itself, are eating up my house under the pretext of paying court tomy mother, who will neither say point blank that she will not marry, nor yetbring matters to an end, so they are making havoc of my estate, and before longwill do so with myself into the bargain. The issue, however, rests with heaven.But do you, old friend Eumaeus, go at once and tell Penelope that I am safe andhave returned from Pylos. Tell it to herself alone, and then come back herewithout letting any one else know, for there are many who are plotting mischiefagainst me.”“I understand and heed you,” replied Eumaeus; “you needinstruct me no further, only as I am going that way say whether I had notbetter let poor Laertes know that you are returned. He used to superintend thework on his farm in spite of his bitter sorrow about Ulysses, and he would eatand drink at will along with his servants; but they tell me that from the dayon which you set out for Pylos he has neither eaten nor drunk as he ought todo, nor does he look after his farm, but sits weeping and wasting the fleshfrom off his bones.”“More’s the pity,” answered Telemachus, “I am sorry forhim, but we must leave him to himself just now. If people could have everythingtheir own way, the first thing I should choose would be the return of myfather; but go, and give your message; then make haste back again, and do notturn out of your way to tell Laertes. Tell my mother to send one of her womensecretly with the news at once, and let him hear it from her.”Thus did he urge the swineherd; Eumaeus, therefore, took his sandals, boundthem to his feet, and started for the town. Minerva watched him well off thestation, and then came up to it in the form of a woman—fair, stately, andwise. She stood against the side of the entry, and revealed herself to Ulysses,but Telemachus could not see her, and knew not that she was there, for the godsdo not let themselves be seen by everybody. Ulysses saw her, and so did thedogs, for they did not bark, but went scared and whining off to the other sideof the yards. She nodded her head and motioned to Ulysses with her eyebrows;whereon he left the hut and stood before her outside the main wall of theyards. Then she said to him:“Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is now time for you to tell your son:do not keep him in the dark any longer, but lay your plans for the destructionof the suitors, and then make for the town. I will not be long in joining you,for I too am eager for the fray.”As she spoke she touched him with her golden wand. First she threw a fair cleanshirt and cloak about his shoulders; then she made him younger and of moreimposing presence; she gave him back his colour, filled out his cheeks, and lethis beard become dark again. Then she went away and Ulysses came back insidethe hut. His son was astounded when he saw him, and turned his eyes away forfear he might be looking upon a god.“Stranger,” said he, “how suddenly you have changed from whatyou were a moment or two ago. You are dressed differently and your colour isnot the same. Are you some one or other of the gods that live in heaven? If so,be propitious to me till I can make you due sacrifice and offerings of wroughtgold. Have mercy upon me.”And Ulysses said, “I am no god, why should you take me for one? I am yourfather, on whose account you grieve and suffer so much at the hands of lawlessmen.”As he spoke he kissed his son, and a tear fell from his cheek on to the ground,for he had restrained all tears till now. But Telemachus could not yet believethat it was his father, and said:“You are not my father, but some god is flattering me with vain hopesthat I may grieve the more hereafter; no mortal man could of himself contriveto do as you have been doing, and make yourself old and young at amoment’s notice, unless a god were with him. A second ago you were oldand all in rags, and now you are like some god come down from heaven.”Ulysses answered, “Telemachus, you ought not to be so immeasurablyastonished at my being really here. There is no other Ulysses who will comehereafter. Such as I am, it is I, who after long wandering and much hardshiphave got home in the twentieth year to my own country. What you wonder at isthe work of the redoubtable goddess Minerva, who does with me whatever shewill, for she can do what she pleases. At one moment she makes me like abeggar, and the next I am a young man with good clothes on my back; it is aneasy matter for the gods who live in heaven to make any man look either rich orpoor.”As he spoke he sat down, and Telemachus threw his arms about his father andwept. They were both so much moved that they cried aloud like eagles orvultures with crooked talons that have been robbed of their half fledged youngby peasants. Thus piteously did they weep, and the sun would have gone downupon their mourning if Telemachus had not suddenly said, “In what ship,my dear father, did your crew bring you to Ithaca? Of what nation did theydeclare themselves to be—for you cannot have come by land?”“I will tell you the truth, my son,” replied Ulysses. “It wasthe Phaeacians who brought me here. They are great sailors, and are in thehabit of giving escorts to any one who reaches their coasts. They took me overthe sea while I was fast asleep, and landed me in Ithaca, after giving me manypresents in bronze, gold, and raiment. These things by heaven’s mercy arelying concealed in a cave, and I am now come here on the suggestion of Minervathat we may consult about killing our enemies. First, therefore, give me a listof the suitors, with their number, that I may learn who, and how many, theyare. I can then turn the matter over in my mind, and see whether we two canfight the whole body of them ourselves, or whether we must find others to helpus.”To this Telemachus answered, “Father, I have always heard of your renownboth in the field and in council, but the task you talk of is a very great one:I am awed at the mere thought of it; two men cannot stand against many andbrave ones. There are not ten suitors only, nor twice ten, but ten many timesover; you shall learn their number at once. There are fifty-two chosen youthsfrom Dulichium, and they have six servants; from Same there are twenty-four;twenty young Achaeans from Zacynthus, and twelve from Ithaca itself, all ofthem well born. They have with them a servant Medon, a bard, and two men whocan carve at table. If we face such numbers as this, you may have bitter causeto rue your coming, and your revenge. See whether you cannot think of some onewho would be willing to come and help us.”“Listen to me,” replied Ulysses, “and think whether Minervaand her father Jove may seem sufficient, or whether I am to try and find someone else as well.”“Those whom you have named,” answered Telemachus, “are acouple of good allies, for though they dwell high up among the clouds they havepower over both gods and men.”“These two,” continued Ulysses, “will not keep long out ofthe fray, when the suitors and we join fight in my house. Now, therefore,return home early to-morrow morning, and go about among the suitors as before.Later on the swineherd will bring me to the city disguised as a miserable oldbeggar. If you see them ill treating me, steel your heart against mysufferings; even though they drag me feet foremost out of the house, or throwthings at me, look on and do nothing beyond gently trying to make them behavemore reasonably; but they will not listen to you, for the day of theirreckoning is at hand. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart; whenMinerva shall put it in my mind, I will nod my head to you, and on seeing me dothis you must collect all the armour that is in the house and hide it in thestrong store room. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you areremoving it; say that you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke,inasmuch as it is no longer what it was when Ulysses went away, but has becomesoiled and begrimed with soot. Add to this more particularly that you areafraid Jove may set them on to quarrel over their wine, and that they may doeach other some harm which may disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sightof arms sometimes tempts people to use them. But leave a sword and a spearapiece for yourself and me, and a couple of oxhide shields so that we cansnatch them up at any moment; Jove and Minerva will then soon quiet thesepeople. There is also another matter; if you are indeed my son and my bloodruns in your veins, let no one know that Ulysses is within thehouse—neither Laertes, nor yet the swineherd, nor any of the servants,nor even Penelope herself. Let you and me exploit the women alone, and let usalso make trial of some other of the men servants, to see who is on our sideand whose hand is against us.”“Father,” replied Telemachus, “you will come to know me byand by, and when you do you will find that I can keep your counsel. I do notthink, however, the plan you propose will turn out well for either of us. Thinkit over. It will take us a long time to go the round of the farms and exploitthe men, and all the time the suitors will be wasting your estate with impunityand without compunction. Prove the women by all means, to see who are disloyaland who guiltless, but I am not in favour of going round and trying the men. Wecan attend to that later on, if you really have some sign from Jove that hewill support you.”Thus did they converse, and meanwhile the ship which had brought Telemachus andhis crew from Pylos had reached the town of Ithaca. When they had come insidethe harbour they drew the ship on to the land; their servants came and tooktheir armour from them, and they left all the presents at the house of Clytius.Then they sent a servant to tell Penelope that Telemachus had gone into thecountry, but had sent the ship to the town to prevent her from being alarmedand made unhappy. This servant and Eumaeus happened to meet when they were bothon the same errand of going to tell Penelope. When they reached the House, theservant stood up and said to the queen in the presence of the waiting women,“Your son, Madam, is now returned from Pylos”; but Eumaeus wentclose up to Penelope, and said privately all that her son had bidden him tellher. When he had given his message he left the house with its outbuildings andwent back to his pigs again.The suitors were surprised and angry at what had happened, so they went outsidethe great wall that ran round the outer court, and held a council near the mainentrance. Eurymachus, son of Polybus, was the first to speak.“My friends,” said he, “this voyage of Telemachus’s isa very serious matter; we had made sure that it would come to nothing. Now,however, let us draw a ship into the water, and get a crew together to sendafter the others and tell them to come back as fast as they can.”He had hardly done speaking when Amphinomus turned in his place and saw theship inside the harbour, with the crew lowering her sails, and putting by theiroars; so he laughed, and said to the others, “We need not send them anymessage, for they are here. Some god must have told them, or else they saw theship go by, and could not overtake her.”On this they rose and went to the water side. The crew then drew the ship onshore; their servants took their armour from them, and they went up in a bodyto the place of assembly, but they would not let any one old or young sit alongwith them, and Antinous, son of Eupeithes, spoke first.“Good heavens,” said he, “see how the gods have saved thisman from destruction. We kept a succession of scouts upon the headlands all daylong, and when the sun was down we never went on shore to sleep, but waited inthe ship all night till morning in the hope of capturing and killing him; butsome god has conveyed him home in spite of us. Let us consider how we can makean end of him. He must not escape us; our affair is never likely to come offwhile he is alive, for he is very shrewd, and public feeling is by no means allon our side. We must make haste before he can call the Achaeans in assembly; hewill lose no time in doing so, for he will be furious with us, and will tellall the world how we plotted to kill him, but failed to take him. The peoplewill not like this when they come to know of it; we must see that they do us nohurt, nor drive us from our own country into exile. Let us try and lay hold ofhim either on his farm away from the town, or on the road hither. Then we candivide up his property amongst us, and let his mother and the man who marriesher have the house. If this does not please you, and you wish Telemachus tolive on and hold his father’s property, then we must not gather here andeat up his goods in this way, but must make our offers to Penelope each fromhis own house, and she can marry the man who will give the most for her, andwhose lot it is to win her.”They all held their peace until Amphinomus rose to speak. He was the son ofNisus, who was son to king Aretias, and he was foremost among all the suitorsfrom the wheat-growing and well grassed island of Dulichium; his conversation,moreover, was more agreeable to Penelope than that of any of the other suitors,for he was a man of good natural disposition. “My friends,” saidhe, speaking to them plainly and in all honestly, “I am not in favour ofkilling Telemachus. It is a heinous thing to kill one who is of noble blood.Let us first take counsel of the gods, and if the oracles of Jove advise it, Iwill both help to kill him myself, and will urge everyone else to do so; but ifthey dissuade us, I would have you hold your hands.”Thus did he speak, and his words pleased them well, so they rose forthwith andwent to the house of Ulysses, where they took their accustomed seats.Then Penelope resolved that she would show herself to the suitors. She knew ofthe plot against Telemachus, for the servant Medon had overheard their counselsand had told her; she went down therefore to the court attended by her maidens,and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of the bearing-postssupporting the roof of the cloister holding a veil before her face, and rebukedAntinous saying:“Antinous, insolent and wicked schemer, they say you are the best speakerand counsellor of any man your own age in Ithaca, but you are nothing of thekind. Madman, why should you try to compass the death of Telemachus, and takeno heed of suppliants, whose witness is Jove himself? It is not right for youto plot thus against one another. Do you not remember how your father fled tothis house in fear of the people, who were enraged against him for having gonewith some Taphian pirates and plundered the Thesprotians who were at peace withus? They wanted to tear him in pieces and eat up everything he had, but Ulyssesstayed their hands although they were infuriated, and now you devour hisproperty without paying for it, and break my heart by wooing his wife andtrying to kill his son. Leave off doing so, and stop the others also.”To this Eurymachus son of Polybus answered, “Take heart, Queen Penelopedaughter of Icarius, and do not trouble yourself about these matters. The manis not yet born, nor never will be, who shall lay hands upon your sonTelemachus, while I yet live to look upon the face of the earth. Isay—and it shall surely be—that my spear shall be reddened with hisblood; for many a time has Ulysses taken me on his knees, held wine up to mylips to drink, and put pieces of meat into my hands. Therefore Telemachus ismuch the dearest friend I have, and has nothing to fear from the hands of ussuitors. Of course, if death comes to him from the gods, he cannot escapeit.” He said this to quiet her, but in reality he was plotting againstTelemachus.Then Penelope went upstairs again and mourned her husband till Minerva shedsleep over her eyes. In the evening Eumaeus got back to Ulysses and his son,who had just sacrificed a young pig of a year old and were helping one anotherto get supper ready; Minerva therefore came up to Ulysses, turned him into anold man with a stroke of her wand, and clad him in his old clothes again, forfear that the swineherd might recognise him and not keep the secret, but go andtell Penelope.Telemachus was the first to speak. “So you have got back, Eumaeus,”said he. “What is the news of the town? Have the suitors returned, or arethey still waiting over yonder, to take me on my way home?”“I did not think of asking about that,” replied Eumaeus,“when I was in the town. I thought I would give my message and come backas soon as I could. I met a man sent by those who had gone with you to Pylos,and he was the first to tell the news to your mother, but I can say what I sawwith my own eyes; I had just got on to the crest of the hill of Mercury abovethe town when I saw a ship coming into harbour with a number of men in her.They had many shields and spears, and I thought it was the suitors, but Icannot be sure.”On hearing this Telemachus smiled to his father, but so that Eumaeus could notsee him.Then, when they had finished their work and the meal was ready, they ate it,and every man had his full share so that all were satisfied. As soon as theyhad had enough to eat and drink, they laid down to rest and enjoyed the boon ofsleep.BOOK XVIITELEMACHUS AND HIS MOTHER MEET—ULYSSES AND EUMAEUS COME DOWN TO THE TOWN,AND ULYSSES IS INSULTED BY MELANTHIUS—HE IS RECOGNISED BY THE DOGARGOS—HE IS INSULTED AND PRESENTLY STRUCK BY ANTINOUS WITH ASTOOL—PENELOPE DESIRES THAT HE SHALL BE SENT TO HER.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, Telemachus bound onhis sandals and took a strong spear that suited his hands, for he wanted to gointo the city. “Old friend,” said he to the swineherd, “Iwill now go to the town and show myself to my mother, for she will never leaveoff grieving till she has seen me. As for this unfortunate stranger, take himto the town and let him beg there of any one who will give him a drink and apiece of bread. I have trouble enough of my own, and cannot be burdened withother people. If this makes him angry so much the worse for him, but I like tosay what I mean.”Then Ulysses said, “Sir, I do not want to stay here; a beggar can alwaysdo better in town than country, for any one who likes can give him something. Iam too old to care about remaining here at the beck and call of a master.Therefore let this man do as you have just told him, and take me to the town assoon as I have had a warm by the fire, and the day has got a little heat in it.My clothes are wretchedly thin, and this frosty morning I shall be perishedwith cold, for you say the city is some way off.”On this Telemachus strode off through the yards, brooding his revenge upon thesuitors. When he reached home he stood his spear against a bearing-post of thecloister, crossed the stone floor of the cloister itself, and went inside.Nurse Euryclea saw him long before any one else did. She was putting thefleeces on to the seats, and she burst out crying as she ran up to him; all theother maids came up too, and covered his head and shoulders with their kisses.Penelope came out of her room looking like Diana or Venus, and wept as sheflung her arms about her son. She kissed his forehead and both his beautifuleyes, “Light of my eyes,” she cried as she spoke fondly to him,“so you are come home again; I made sure I was never going to see you anymore. To think of your having gone off to Pylos without saying anything aboutit or obtaining my consent. But come, tell me what you saw.”“Do not scold me, mother,” answered Telemachus, “nor vex me,seeing what a narrow escape I have had, but wash your face, change your dress,go upstairs with your maids, and promise full and sufficient hecatombs to allthe gods if Jove will only grant us our revenge upon the suitors. I must now goto the place of assembly to invite a stranger who has come back with me fromPylos. I sent him on with my crew, and told Piraeus to take him home and lookafter him till I could come for him myself.”She heeded her son’s words, washed her face, changed her dress, and vowedfull and sufficient hecatombs to all the gods if they would only vouchsafe herrevenge upon the suitors.Telemachus went through, and out of, the cloisters spear in hand—notalone, for his two fleet dogs went with him. Minerva endowed him with apresence of such divine comeliness that all marvelled at him as he went by, andthe suitors gathered round him with fair words in their mouths and malice intheir hearts; but he avoided them, and went to sit with Mentor, Antiphus, andHalitherses, old friends of his father’s house, and they made him tellthem all that had happened to him. Then Piraeus came up with Theoclymenus, whomhe had escorted through the town to the place of assembly, whereon Telemachusat once joined them. Piraeus was first to speak: “Telemachus,” saidhe, “I wish you would send some of your women to my house to take awaythe presents Menelaus gave you.”“We do not know, Piraeus,” answered Telemachus, “what mayhappen. If the suitors kill me in my own house and divide my property amongthem, I would rather you had the presents than that any of those people shouldget hold of them. If on the other hand I managed to kill them, I shall be muchobliged if you will kindly bring me my presents.”With these words he took Theoclymenus to his own house. When they got therethey laid their cloaks on the benches and seats, went into the baths, andwashed themselves. When the maids had washed and anointed them, and had giventhem cloaks and shirts, they took their seats at table. A maid servant thenbrought them water in a beautiful golden ewer, and poured it into a silverbasin for them to wash their hands; and she drew a clean table beside them. Anupper servant brought them bread and offered them many good things of whatthere was in the house. Opposite them sat Penelope, reclining on a couch by oneof the bearing-posts of the cloister, and spinning. Then they laid their handson the good things that were before them, and as soon as they had had enough toeat and drink Penelope said:“Telemachus, I shall go upstairs and lie down on that sad couch, which Ihave not ceased to water with my tears, from the day Ulysses set out for Troywith the sons of Atreus. You failed, however, to make it clear to me before thesuitors came back to the house, whether or no you had been able to hearanything about the return of your father.”“I will tell you then truth,” replied her son. “We went toPylos and saw Nestor, who took me to his house and treated me as hospitably asthough I were a son of his own who had just returned after a long absence; soalso did his sons; but he said he had not heard a word from any human beingabout Ulysses, whether he was alive or dead. He sent me, therefore, with achariot and horses to Menelaus. There I saw Helen, for whose sake so many, bothArgives and Trojans, were in heaven’s wisdom doomed to suffer. Menelausasked me what it was that had brought me to Lacedaemon, and I told him thewhole truth, whereon he said, ‘So, then, these cowards would usurp abrave man’s bed? A hind might as well lay her new-born young in the lairof a lion, and then go off to feed in the forest or in some grassy dell. Thelion, when he comes back to his lair, will make short work with the pair ofthem, and so will Ulysses with these suitors. By father Jove, Minerva, andApollo, if Ulysses is still the man that he was when he wrestled withPhilomeleides in Lesbos, and threw him so heavily that all the Greeks cheeredhim—if he is still such, and were to come near these suitors, they wouldhave a short shrift and a sorry wedding. As regards your question, however, Iwill not prevaricate nor deceive you, but what the old man of the sea told me,so much will I tell you in full. He said he could see Ulysses on an islandsorrowing bitterly in the house of the nymph Calypso, who was keeping himprisoner, and he could not reach his home, for he had no ships nor sailors totake him over the sea.’ This was what Menelaus told me, and when I hadheard his story I came away; the gods then gave me a fair wind and soon broughtme safe home again.”With these words he moved the heart of Penelope. Then Theoclymenus said to her:“Madam, wife of Ulysses, Telemachus does not understand these things;listen therefore to me, for I can divine them surely, and will hide nothingfrom you. May Jove the king of heaven be my witness, and the rites ofhospitality, with that hearth of Ulysses to which I now come, that Ulysseshimself is even now in Ithaca, and, either going about the country or stayingin one place, is enquiring into all these evil deeds and preparing a day ofreckoning for the suitors. I saw an omen when I was on the ship which meantthis, and I told Telemachus about it.”“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words cometrue, you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see youshall congratulate you.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were throwing discs, or aimingwith spears at a mark on the levelled ground in front of the house, andbehaving with all their old insolence. But when it was now time for dinner, andthe flock of sheep and goats had come into the town from all the country round,[140] with theirshepherds as usual, then Medon, who was their favourite servant, and who waitedupon them at table, said, “Now then, my young masters, you have hadenough sport, so come inside that we may get dinner ready. Dinner is not a badthing, at dinner time.”They left their sports as he told them, and when they were within the house,they laid their cloaks on the benches and seats inside, and then sacrificedsome sheep, goats, pigs, and a heifer, all of them fat and well grown.[141] Thus they madeready for their meal. In the meantime Ulysses and the swineherd were aboutstarting for the town, and the swineherd said, “Stranger, I suppose youstill want to go to town to-day, as my master said you were to do; for my ownpart I should have liked you to stay here as a station hand, but I must do asmy master tells me, or he will scold me later on, and a scolding fromone’s master is a very serious thing. Let us then be off, for it is nowbroad day; it will be night again directly and then you will find itcolder.”[142]“I know, and understand you,” replied Ulysses; “you need sayno more. Let us be going, but if you have a stick ready cut, let me have it towalk with, for you say the road is a very rough one.”As he spoke he threw his shabby old tattered wallet over his shoulders, by thecord from which it hung, and Eumaeus gave him a stick to his liking. The twothen started, leaving the station in charge of the dogs and herdsmen whoremained behind; the swineherd led the way and his master followed after,looking like some broken down old tramp as he leaned upon his staff, and hisclothes were all in rags. When they had got over the rough steep ground andwere nearing the city, they reached the fountain from which the citizens drewtheir water. This had been made by Ithacus, Neritus, and Polyctor. There was agrove of water-loving poplars planted in a circle all round it, and the clearcold water came down to it from a rock high up,[143] while above the fountain there wasan altar to the nymphs, at which all wayfarers used to sacrifice. HereMelanthius son of Dolius overtook them as he was driving down some goats, thebest in his flock, for the suitors’ dinner, and there were two shepherdswith him. When he saw Eumaeus and Ulysses he reviled them with outrageous andunseemly language, which made Ulysses very angry.“There you go,” cried he, “and a precious pair you are. Seehow heaven brings birds of the same feather to one another. Where, pray, masterswineherd, are you taking this poor miserable object? It would make any onesick to see such a creature at table. A fellow like this never won a prize foranything in his life, but will go about rubbing his shoulders against everyman’s door post, and begging, not for swords and cauldrons[144] like a man,but only for a few scraps not worth begging for. If you would give him to mefor a hand on my station, he might do to clean out the folds, or bring a bit ofsweet feed to the kids, and he could fatten his thighs as much as he pleased onwhey; but he has taken to bad ways and will not go about any kind of work; hewill do nothing but beg victuals all the town over, to feed his insatiablebelly. I say, therefore—and it shall surely be—if he goes nearUlysses’ house he will get his head broken by the stools they will flingat him, till they turn him out.”On this, as he passed, he gave Ulysses a kick on the hip out of purewantonness, but Ulysses stood firm, and did not budge from the path. For amoment he doubted whether or no to fly at Melanthius and kill him with hisstaff, or fling him to the ground and beat his brains out; he resolved,however, to endure it and keep himself in check, but the swineherd lookedstraight at Melanthius and rebuked him, lifting up his hands and praying toheaven as he did so.“Fountain nymphs,” he cried, “children of Jove, if everUlysses burned you thigh bones covered with fat whether of lambs or kids, grantmy prayer that heaven may send him home. He would soon put an end to theswaggering threats with which such men as you go about insultingpeople—gadding all over the town while your flocks are going to ruinthrough bad shepherding.”Then Melanthius the goatherd answered, “You ill conditioned cur, what areyou talking about? Some day or other I will put you on board ship and take youto a foreign country, where I can sell you and pocket the money you will fetch.I wish I were as sure that Apollo would strike Telemachus dead this very day,or that the suitors would kill him, as I am that Ulysses will never come homeagain.”With this he left them to come on at their leisure, while he went quicklyforward and soon reached the house of his master. When he got there he went inand took his seat among the suitors opposite Eurymachus, who liked him betterthan any of the others. The servants brought him a portion of meat, and anupper woman servant set bread before him that he might eat. Presently Ulyssesand the swineherd came up to the house and stood by it, amid a sound of music,for Phemius was just beginning to sing to the suitors. Then Ulysses took holdof the swineherd’s hand, and said:“Eumaeus, this house of Ulysses is a very fine place. No matter how faryou go, you will find few like it. One building keeps following on afteranother. The outer court has a wall with battlements all round it; the doorsare double folding, and of good workmanship; it would be a hard matter to takeit by force of arms. I perceive, too, that there are many people banquetingwithin it, for there is a smell of roast meat, and I hear a sound of music,which the gods have made to go along with feasting.”Then Eumaeus said, “You have perceived aright, as indeed you generallydo; but let us think what will be our best course. Will you go inside first andjoin the suitors, leaving me here behind you, or will you wait here and let mego in first? But do not wait long, or some one may see you loitering aboutoutside, and throw something at you. Consider this matter I pray you.”And Ulysses answered, “I understand and heed. Go in first and leave mehere where I am. I am quite used to being beaten and having things thrown atme. I have been so much buffeted about in war and by sea that I amcase-hardened, and this too may go with the rest. But a man cannot hide awaythe cravings of a hungry belly; this is an enemy which gives much trouble toall men; it is because of this that ships are fitted out to sail the seas, andto make war upon other people.”As they were thus talking, a dog that had been lying asleep raised his head andpricked up his ears. This was Argos, whom Ulysses had bred before setting outfor Troy, but he had never had any work out of him. In the old days he used tobe taken out by the young men when they went hunting wild goats, or deer, orhares, but now that his master was gone he was lying neglected on the heaps ofmule and cow dung that lay in front of the stable doors till the men shouldcome and draw it away to manure the great close; and he was full of fleas. Assoon as he saw Ulysses standing there, he dropped his ears and wagged his tail,but he could not get close up to his master. When Ulysses saw the dog on theother side of the yard, he dashed a tear from his eyes without Eumaeus seeingit, and said:“Eumaeus, what a noble hound that is over yonder on the manure heap: hisbuild is splendid; is he as fine a fellow as he looks, or is he only one ofthose dogs that come begging about a table, and are kept merely forshow?”“This hound,” answered Eumaeus, “belonged to him who has diedin a far country. If he were what he was when Ulysses left for Troy, he wouldsoon show you what he could do. There was not a wild beast in the forest thatcould get away from him when he was once on its tracks. But now he has fallenon evil times, for his master is dead and gone, and the women take no care ofhim. Servants never do their work when their master’s hand is no longerover them, for Jove takes half the goodness out of a man when he makes a slaveof him.”As he spoke he went inside the buildings to the cloister where the suitorswere, but Argos died as soon as he had recognised his master.Telemachus saw Eumaeus long before any one else did, and beckoned him to comeand sit beside him; so he looked about and saw a seat lying near where thecarver sat serving out their portions to the suitors; he picked it up, broughtit to Telemachus’s table, and sat down opposite him. Then the servantbrought him his portion, and gave him bread from the bread-basket.Immediately afterwards Ulysses came inside, looking like a poor miserable oldbeggar, leaning on his staff and with his clothes all in rags. He sat down uponthe threshold of ash-wood just inside the doors leading from the outer to theinner court, and against a bearing-post of cypress-wood which the carpenter hadskilfully planed, and had made to join truly with rule and line. Telemachustook a whole loaf from the bread-basket, with as much meat as he could hold inhis two hands, and said to Eumaeus, “Take this to the stranger, and tellhim to go the round of the suitors, and beg from them; a beggar must not beshamefaced.”So Eumaeus went up to him and said, “Stranger, Telemachus sends you this,and says you are to go the round of the suitors begging, for beggars must notbe shamefaced.”Ulysses answered, “May King Jove grant all happiness to Telemachus, andfulfil the desire of his heart.”Then with both hands he took what Telemachus had sent him, and laid it on thedirty old wallet at his feet. He went on eating it while the bard was singing,and had just finished his dinner as he left off. The suitors applauded thebard, whereon Minerva went up to Ulysses and prompted him to beg pieces ofbread from each one of the suitors, that he might see what kind of people theywere, and tell the good from the bad; but come what might she was not going tosave a single one of them. Ulysses, therefore, went on his round, going fromleft to right, and stretched out his hands to beg as though he were a realbeggar. Some of them pitied him, and were curious about him, asking one anotherwho he was and where he came from; whereon the goatherd Melanthius said,“Suitors of my noble mistress, I can tell you something about him, for Ihave seen him before. The swineherd brought him here, but I know nothing aboutthe man himself, nor where he comes from.”On this Antinous began to abuse the swineherd. “You preciousidiot,” he cried, “what have you brought this man to town for? Havewe not tramps and beggars enough already to pester us as we sit at meat? Do youthink it a small thing that such people gather here to waste yourmaster’s property—and must you needs bring this man as well?”And Eumaeus answered, “Antinous, your birth is good but your words evil.It was no doing of mine that he came here. Who is likely to invite a strangerfrom a foreign country, unless it be one of those who can do public service asa seer, a healer of hurts, a carpenter, or a bard who can charm us with hissinging? Such men are welcome all the world over, but no one is likely to ask abeggar who will only worry him. You are always harder on Ulysses’servants than any of the other suitors are, and above all on me, but I do notcare so long as Telemachus and Penelope are alive and here.”But Telemachus said, “Hush, do not answer him; Antinous has the bitteresttongue of all the suitors, and he makes the others worse.”Then turning to Antinous he said, “Antinous, you take as much care of myinterests as though I were your son. Why should you want to see this strangerturned out of the house? Heaven forbid; take something and give it himyourself; I do not grudge it; I bid you take it. Never mind my mother, nor anyof the other servants in the house; but I know you will not do what I say, foryou are more fond of eating things yourself than of giving them to otherpeople.”“What do you mean, Telemachus,” replied Antinous, “by thisswaggering talk? If all the suitors were to give him as much as I will, hewould not come here again for another three months.”As he spoke he drew the stool on which he rested his dainty feet from under thetable, and made as though he would throw it at Ulysses, but the other suitorsall gave him something, and filled his wallet with bread and meat; he wasabout, therefore, to go back to the threshold and eat what the suitors hadgiven him, but he first went up to Antinous and said:“Sir, give me something; you are not, surely, the poorest man here; youseem to be a chief, foremost among them all; therefore you should be the bettergiver, and I will tell far and wide of your bounty. I too was a rich man once,and had a fine house of my own; in those days I gave to many a tramp such as Inow am, no matter who he might be nor what he wanted. I had any number ofservants, and all the other things which people have who live well and areaccounted wealthy, but it pleased Jove to take all away from me. He sent mewith a band of roving robbers to Egypt; it was a long voyage and I was undoneby it. I stationed my ships in the river Aegyptus, and bade my men stay by themand keep guard over them, while I sent out scouts to reconnoitre from everypoint of vantage.“But the men disobeyed my orders, took to their own devices, and ravagedthe land of the Egyptians, killing the men, and taking their wives and childrencaptives. The alarm was soon carried to the city, and when they heard thewar-cry, the people came out at daybreak till the plain was filled withsoldiers horse and foot, and with the gleam of armour. Then Jove spread panicamong my men, and they would no longer face the enemy, for they foundthemselves surrounded. The Egyptians killed many of us, and took the rest aliveto do forced labour for them; as for myself, they gave me to a friend who metthem, to take to Cyprus, Dmetor by name, son of Iasus, who was a great man inCyprus. Thence I am come hither in a state of great misery.”Then Antinous said, “What god can have sent such a pestilence to plagueus during our dinner? Get out, into the open part of the court,[145] or I will giveyou Egypt and Cyprus over again for your insolence and importunity; you havebegged of all the others, and they have given you lavishly, for they haveabundance round them, and it is easy to be free with other people’sproperty when there is plenty of it.”On this Ulysses began to move off, and said, “Your looks, my fine sir,are better than your breeding; if you were in your own house you would notspare a poor man so much as a pinch of salt, for though you are in anotherman’s, and surrounded with abundance, you cannot find it in you to givehim even a piece of bread.”This made Antinous very angry, and he scowled at him saying, “You shallpay for this before you get clear of the court.” With these words hethrew a footstool at him, and hit him on the right shoulder blade near the topof his back. Ulysses stood firm as a rock and the blow did not even staggerhim, but he shook his head in silence as he brooded on his revenge. Then hewent back to the threshold and sat down there, laying his well filled wallet athis feet.“Listen to me,” he cried, “you suitors of Queen Penelope,that I may speak even as I am minded. A man knows neither ache nor pain if hegets hit while fighting for his money, or for his sheep or his cattle; and evenso Antinous has hit me while in the service of my miserable belly, which isalways getting people into trouble. Still, if the poor have gods and avengingdeities at all, I pray them that Antinous may come to a bad end before hismarriage.”“Sit where you are, and eat your victuals in silence, or be offelsewhere,” shouted Antinous. “If you say more I will have youdragged hand and foot through the courts, and the servants shall flay youalive.”The other suitors were much displeased at this, and one of the young men said,“Antinous, you did ill in striking that poor wretch of a tramp: it willbe worse for you if he should turn out to be some god—and we know thegods go about disguised in all sorts of ways as people from foreign countries,and travel about the world to see who do amiss and who righteously.”[146]Thus said the suitors, but Antinous paid them no heed. Meanwhile Telemachus wasfurious about the blow that had been given to his father, and though no tearfell from him, he shook his head in silence and brooded on his revenge.Now when Penelope heard that the beggar had been struck in thebanqueting-cloister, she said before her maids, “Would that Apollo wouldso strike you, Antinous,” and her waiting woman Eurynome answered,“If our prayers were answered not one of the suitors would ever again seethe sun rise.” Then Penelope said, “Nurse,[147] I hate every single one of them,for they mean nothing but mischief, but I hate Antinous like the darkness ofdeath itself. A poor unfortunate tramp has come begging about the house forsheer want. Every one else has given him something to put in his wallet, butAntinous has hit him on the right shoulder-blade with a footstool.”Thus did she talk with her maids as she sat in her own room, and in themeantime Ulysses was getting his dinner. Then she called for the swineherd andsaid, “Eumaeus, go and tell the stranger to come here, I want to see himand ask him some questions. He seems to have travelled much, and he may haveseen or heard something of my unhappy husband.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “If these Achaeans, Madam,would only keep quiet, you would be charmed with the history of his adventures.I had him three days and three nights with me in my hut, which was the firstplace he reached after running away from his ship, and he has not yet completedthe story of his misfortunes. If he had been the most heaven-taught minstrel inthe whole world, on whose lips all hearers hang entranced, I could not havebeen more charmed as I sat in my hut and listened to him. He says there is anold friendship between his house and that of Ulysses, and that he comes fromCrete where the descendants of Minos live, after having been driven hither andthither by every kind of misfortune; he also declares that he has heard ofUlysses as being alive and near at hand among the Thesprotians, and that he isbringing great wealth home with him.”“Call him here, then,” said Penelope, “that I too may hearhis story. As for the suitors, let them take their pleasure indoors or out asthey will, for they have nothing to fret about. Their corn and wine remainunwasted in their houses with none but servants to consume them, while theykeep hanging about our house day after day sacrificing our oxen, sheep, and fatgoats for their banquets, and never giving so much as a thought to the quantityof wine they drink. No estate can stand such recklessness, for we have now noUlysses to protect us. If he were to come again, he and his son would soon havetheir revenge.”As she spoke Telemachus sneezed so loudly that the whole house resounded withit. Penelope laughed when she heard this, and said to Eumaeus, “Go andcall the stranger; did you not hear how my son sneezed just as I was speaking?This can only mean that all the suitors are going to be killed, and that notone of them shall escape. Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart:if I am satisfied that the stranger is speaking the truth I shall give him ashirt and cloak of good wear.”When Eumaeus heard this he went straight to Ulysses and said, “Fatherstranger, my mistress Penelope, mother of Telemachus, has sent for you; she isin great grief, but she wishes to hear anything you can tell her about herhusband, and if she is satisfied that you are speaking the truth, she will giveyou a shirt and cloak, which are the very things that you are most in want of.As for bread, you can get enough of that to fill your belly, by begging aboutthe town, and letting those give that will.”“I will tell Penelope,” answered Ulysses, “nothing but whatis strictly true. I know all about her husband, and have been partner with himin affliction, but I am afraid of passing through this crowd of cruel suitors,for their pride and insolence reach heaven. Just now, moreover, as I was goingabout the house without doing any harm, a man gave me a blow that hurt me verymuch, but neither Telemachus nor any one else defended me. Tell Penelope,therefore, to be patient and wait till sundown. Let her give me a seat close upto the fire, for my clothes are worn very thin—you know they are, for youhave seen them ever since I first asked you to help me—she can then askme about the return of her husband.”The swineherd went back when he heard this, and Penelope said as she saw himcross the threshold, “Why do you not bring him here, Eumaeus? Is heafraid that some one will ill-treat him, or is he shy of coming inside thehouse at all? Beggars should not be shamefaced.”To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “The stranger is quitereasonable. He is avoiding the suitors, and is only doing what any one elsewould do. He asks you to wait till sundown, and it will be much better, madam,that you should have him all to yourself, when you can hear him and talk to himas you will.”“The man is no fool,” answered Penelope, “it would verylikely be as he says, for there are no such abominable people in the wholeworld as these men are.”When she had done speaking Eumaeus went back to the suitors, for he hadexplained everything. Then he went up to Telemachus and said in his ear so thatnone could overhear him, “My dear sir, I will now go back to the pigs, tosee after your property and my own business. You will look to what is going onhere, but above all be careful to keep out of danger, for there are many whobear you ill will. May Jove bring them to a bad end before they do us amischief.”“Very well,” replied Telemachus, “go home when you have hadyour dinner, and in the morning come here with the victims we are to sacrificefor the day. Leave the rest to heaven and me.”On this Eumaeus took his seat again, and when he had finished his dinner heleft the courts and the cloister with the men at table, and went back to hispigs. As for the suitors, they presently began to amuse themselves with singingand dancing, for it was now getting on towards evening.BOOK XVIIITHE FIGHT WITH IRUS—ULYSSES WARNS AMPHINOMUS—PENELOPE GETS PRESENTSFROM THE SUITORS—THE BRAZIERS—ULYSSES REBUKES EURYMACHUS.Now there came a certain common tramp who used to go begging all over the cityof Ithaca, and was notorious as an incorrigible glutton and drunkard. This manhad no strength nor stay in him, but he was a great hulking fellow to look at;his real name, the one his mother gave him, was Arnaeus, but the young men ofthe place called him Irus,[148] because he used to run errands forany one who would send him. As soon as he came he began to insult Ulysses, andto try and drive him out of his own house.“Be off, old man,” he cried, “from the doorway, or you shallbe dragged out neck and heels. Do you not see that they are all giving me thewink, and wanting me to turn you out by force, only I do not like to do so? Getup then, and go of yourself, or we shall come to blows.”Ulysses frowned on him and said, “My friend, I do you no manner of harm;people give you a great deal, but I am not jealous. There is room enough inthis doorway for the pair of us, and you need not grudge me things that are notyours to give. You seem to be just such another tramp as myself, but perhapsthe gods will give us better luck by and by. Do not, however, talk too muchabout fighting or you will incense me, and old though I am, I shall cover yourmouth and chest with blood. I shall have more peace tomorrow if I do, for youwill not come to the house of Ulysses any more.”Irus was very angry and answered, “You filthy glutton, you run ontrippingly like an old fish-fag. I have a good mind to lay both hands aboutyou, and knock your teeth out of your head like so many boar’s tusks. Getready, therefore, and let these people here stand by and look on. You willnever be able to fight one who is so much younger than yourself.”Thus roundly did they rate one another on the smooth pavement in front of thedoorway,[149] andwhen Antinous saw what was going on he laughed heartily and said to the others,“This is the finest sport that you ever saw; heaven never yet sentanything like it into this house. The stranger and Irus have quarreled and aregoing to fight, let us set them on to do so at once.”The suitors all came up laughing, and gathered round the two ragged tramps.“Listen to me,” said Antinous, “there are some goats’paunches down at the fire, which we have filled with blood and fat, and setaside for supper; he who is victorious and proves himself to be the better manshall have his pick of the lot; he shall be free of our table and we will notallow any other beggar about the house at all.”The others all agreed, but Ulysses, to throw them off the scent, said,“Sirs, an old man like myself, worn out with suffering, cannot hold hisown against a young one; but my irrepressible belly urges me on, though I knowit can only end in my getting a drubbing. You must swear, however that none ofyou will give me a foul blow to favour Irus and secure him the victory.”They swore as he told them, and when they had completed their oath Telemachusput in a word and said, “Stranger, if you have a mind to settle with thisfellow, you need not be afraid of any one here. Whoever strikes you will haveto fight more than one. I am host, and the other chiefs, Antinous andEurymachus, both of them men of understanding, are of the same mind as Iam.”Every one assented, and Ulysses girded his old rags about his loins, thusbaring his stalwart thighs, his broad chest and shoulders, and his mighty arms;but Minerva came up to him and made his limbs even stronger still. The suitorswere beyond measure astonished, and one would turn towards his neighboursaying, “The stranger has brought such a thigh out of his old rags thatthere will soon be nothing left of Irus.”Irus began to be very uneasy as he heard them, but the servants girded him byforce, and brought him [into the open part of the court] in such a fright thathis limbs were all of a tremble. Antinous scolded him and said, “Youswaggering bully, you ought never to have been born at all if you are afraid ofsuch an old broken down creature as this tramp is. I say, therefore—andit shall surely be—if he beats you and proves himself the better man, Ishall pack you off on board ship to the mainland and send you to king Echetus,who kills every one that comes near him. He will cut off your nose and ears,and draw out your entrails for the dogs to eat.”This frightened Irus still more, but they brought him into the middle of thecourt, and the two men raised their hands to fight. Then Ulysses consideredwhether he should let drive so hard at him as to make an end of him then andthere, or whether he should give him a lighter blow that should only knock himdown; in the end he deemed it best to give the lighter blow for fear theAchaeans should begin to suspect who he was. Then they began to fight, and Irushit Ulysses on the right shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neckunder the ear that broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushingout of his mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kickingon the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died oflaughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him into theouter court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him up against the walland put his staff in his hands. “Sit here,” said he, “andkeep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you try to makeyourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still worse.”Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his shoulderwith the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon the threshold;but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and saluting him,“May Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant youwhatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this insatiabletramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to king Echetus, whokills every one that comes near him.”Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’spaunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves out ofthe bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did so in a goldengoblet of wine. “Good luck to you,” he said, “fatherstranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have bettertimes by and by.”To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of goodunderstanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I haveheard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man both braveand wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to be a considerableperson; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am saying. Man is thevainest of all creatures that have their being upon earth. As long as heavenvouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks that he shall come to no harmhereafter, and even when the blessed gods bring sorrow upon him, he bears it ashe needs must, and makes the best of it; for God almighty gives men their dailyminds day by day. I know all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did muchwrong in the stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father andmy brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all thingsalways, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without vainglory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see how they arewasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of one who is certain toreturn some day, and that, too, not long hence. Nay, he will be here soon; mayheaven send you home quietly first that you may not meet with him in the day ofhis coming, for once he is here the suitors and he will not partbloodlessly.”With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put thegold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away serious and bowinghis head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did not escape destruction, forMinerva had doomed him to fall by the hand of Telemachus. So he took his seatagain at the place from which he had come.Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the suitors,that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win still furtherhonour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking laugh and said,“Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to show myself to thesuitors although I detest them. I should like also to give my son a hint thathe had better not have anything more to do with them. They speak fairly enoughbut they mean mischief.”“My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have saidis true, go and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint yourface. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is not rightthat you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom you always prayedthat you might live to see with a beard, is already grown up.”“I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well,but do not try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbedme of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell Autonoeand Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I am in thecloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be proper for me todo so.”On this the old woman[150] went out of the room to bid themaids go to their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of anothermatter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on hercouch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed grace andbeauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She washed her facewith the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she goes dancing with theGraces; she made her taller and of a more commanding figure, while as for hercomplexion it was whiter than sawn ivory. When Minerva had done all this shewent away, whereon the maids came in from the women’s room and wokePenelope with the sound of their talking.“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she,as she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. I wishDiana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might nolonger waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who possessed everykind of good quality and was the most distinguished man among theAchaeans.”With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but attended bytwo of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she stood by one of thebearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil before herface, and with a staid maid servant on either side of her. As they beheld herthe suitors were so overpowered and became so desperately enamoured of her,that each one prayed he might win her for his own bed fellow.“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you areno longer so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you wereyounger you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grownup, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a well to dofather as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by no means what itshould be. What is all this disturbance that has been going on, and how cameyou to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully ill-treated? What would havehappened if he had suffered serious injury while a suppliant in our house?Surely this would have been very discreditable to you.”“I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” repliedTelemachus, “I understand all about it and know when things are not asthey should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot, however,behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then another of thesewicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind, and I have no one to standby me. After all, however, this fight between Irus and the stranger did notturn out as the suitors meant it to do, for the stranger got the best of it. Iwish Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one ofthese wooers of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish theymight all be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. Seehow he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing that hecannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever that may be, for hehas no strength left in him.”Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, “QueenPenelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos could seeyou at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your house by tomorrowmorning, for you are the most admirable woman in the whole world both asregards personal beauty and strength of understanding.”To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my beautywhether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dearhusband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs, I shouldboth be more respected and show a better presence to the world. As it is, I amoppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit to heapupon me. My husband foresaw it all, and when he was leaving home he took myright wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’ he said, ‘we shall notall of us come safe home from Troy, for the Trojans fight well both with bowand spear. They are excellent also at fighting from chariots, and nothingdecides the issue of a fight sooner than this. I know not, therefore, whetherheaven will send me back to you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy.In the meantime do you look after things here. Take care of my father andmother as at present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see ourson growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your presenthome.’ This is what he said and now it is all coming true. A night willcome when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest, for Jovehas taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief, moreover, cuts meto the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me after the custom of mycountry. When men are courting a woman who they think will be a good wife tothem and who is of noble birth, and when they are each trying to win her forhimself, they usually bring oxen and sheep to feast the friends of the lady,and they make her magnificent presents, instead of eating up otherpeople’s property without paying for it.”This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying to getpresents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words which he knewshe did not mean.Then Antinous said, “Queen Penelope, daughter of Icarius, take as manypresents as you please from any one who will give them to you; it is not wellto refuse a present; but we will not go about our business nor stir from wherewe are, till you have married the best man among us whoever he may be.”The others applauded what Antinous had said, and each one sent his servant tobring his present. Antinous’s man returned with a large and lovely dressmost exquisitely embroidered. It had twelve beautifully made brooch pins ofpure gold with which to fasten it. Eurymachus immediately brought her amagnificent chain of gold and amber beads that gleamed like sunlight.Eurydamas’s two men returned with some earrings fashioned into threebrilliant pendants which glistened most beautifully; while king Pisander son ofPolyctor gave her a necklace of the rarest workmanship, and every one elsebrought her a beautiful present of some kind.Then the queen went back to her room upstairs, and her maids brought thepresents after her. Meanwhile the suitors took to singing and dancing, andstayed till evening came. They danced and sang till it grew dark; they thenbrought in three braziers[151] to give light, and piled them upwith chopped firewood very old and dry, and they lit torches from them, whichthe maids held up turn and turn about. Then Ulysses said:“Maids, servants of Ulysses who has so long been absent, go to the queeninside the house; sit with her and amuse her, or spin, and pick wool. I willhold the light for all these people. They may stay till morning, but shall notbeat me, for I can stand a great deal.”The maids looked at one another and laughed, while pretty Melantho began togibe at him contemptuously. She was daughter to Dolius, but had been brought upby Penelope, who used to give her toys to play with, and looked after her whenshe was a child; but in spite of all this she showed no consideration for thesorrows of her mistress, and used to misconduct herself with Eurymachus, withwhom she was in love.“Poor wretch,” said she, “are you gone clean out of yourmind? Go and sleep in some smithy, or place of public gossips, instead ofchattering here. Are you not ashamed of opening your mouth before yourbetters—so many of them too? Has the wine been getting into your head, ordo you always babble in this way? You seem to have lost your wits because youbeat the tramp Irus; take care that a better man than he does not come andcudgel you about the head till he pack you bleeding out of the house.”“Vixen,” replied Ulysses, scowling at her, “I will go andtell Telemachus what you have been saying, and he will have you torn limb fromlimb.”With these words he scared the women, and they went off into the body of thehouse. They trembled all over, for they thought he would do as he said. ButUlysses took his stand near the burning braziers, holding up torches andlooking at the people—brooding the while on things that should surelycome to pass.But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment cease their insolence, forshe wanted Ulysses to become even more bitter against them; she therefore setEurymachus son of Polybus on to gibe at him, which made the others laugh.“Listen to me,” said he, “you suitors of Queen Penelope, thatI may speak even as I am minded. It is not for nothing that this man has cometo the house of Ulysses; I believe the light has not been coming from thetorches, but from his own head—for his hair is all gone, every bit ofit.”Then turning to Ulysses he said, “Stranger, will you work as a servant,if I send you to the wolds and see that you are well paid? Can you build astone fence, or plant trees? I will have you fed all the year round, and willfind you in shoes and clothing. Will you go, then? Not you; for you have gotinto bad ways, and do not want to work; you had rather fill your belly by goinground the country begging.”“Eurymachus,” answered Ulysses, “if you and I were to workone against the other in early summer when the days are at theirlongest—give me a good scythe, and take another yourself, and let us seewhich will last the longer or mow the stronger, from dawn till dark when themowing grass is about. Or if you will plough against me, let us each take ayoke of tawny oxen, well-mated and of great strength and endurance: turn meinto a four acre field, and see whether you or I can drive the straighterfurrow. If, again, war were to break out this day, give me a shield, a coupleof spears and a helmet fitting well upon my temples—you would find meforemost in the fray, and would cease your gibes about my belly. You areinsolent and cruel, and think yourself a great man because you live in a littleworld, and that a bad one. If Ulysses comes to his own again, the doors of hishouse are wide, but you will find them narrow when you try to fly throughthem.”Eurymachus was furious at all this. He scowled at him and cried, “Youwretch, I will soon pay you out for daring to say such things to me, and inpublic too. Has the wine been getting into your head or do you always babble inthis way? You seem to have lost your wits because you beat the trampIrus.” With this he caught hold of a footstool, but Ulysses soughtprotection at the knees of Amphinomus of Dulichium, for he was afraid. Thestool hit the cupbearer on his right hand and knocked him down: the man fellwith a cry flat on his back, and his wine-jug fell ringing to the ground. Thesuitors in the covered cloister were now in an uproar, and one would turntowards his neighbour, saying, “I wish the stranger had gone somewhereelse, bad luck to him, for all the trouble he gives us. We cannot permit suchdisturbance about a beggar; if such ill counsels are to prevail we shall haveno more pleasure at our banquet.”On this Telemachus came forward and said, “Sirs, are you mad? Can you notcarry your meat and your liquor decently? Some evil spirit has possessed you. Ido not wish to drive any of you away, but you have had your suppers, and thesooner you all go home to bed the better.”The suitors bit their lips and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; butAmphinomus the son of Nisus, who was son to Aretias, said, “Do not let ustake offence; it is reasonable, so let us make no answer. Neither let us doviolence to the stranger nor to any of Ulysses’ servants. Let thecupbearer go round with the drink-offerings, that we may make them and go hometo our rest. As for the stranger, let us leave Telemachus to deal with him, forit is to his house that he has come.”Thus did he speak, and his saying pleased them well, so Mulius of Dulichium,servant to Amphinomus, mixed them a bowl of wine and water and handed it roundto each of them man by man, whereon they made their drink-offerings to theblessed gods: Then, when they had made their drink-offerings and had drunk eachone as he was minded, they took their several ways each of them to his ownabode.BOOK XIXTELEMACHUS AND ULYSSES REMOVE THE ARMOUR—ULYSSES INTERVIEWSPENELOPE—EURYCLEA WASHES HIS FEET AND RECOGNISES THE SCAR ON HISLEG—PENELOPE TELLS HER DREAM TO ULYSSES.Ulysses was left in the cloister, pondering on the means whereby withMinerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors. Presently he said toTelemachus, “Telemachus, we must get the armour together and take it downinside. Make some excuse when the suitors ask you why you have removed it. Saythat you have taken it to be out of the way of the smoke, inasmuch as it is nolonger what it was when Ulysses went away, but has become soiled and begrimedwith soot. Add to this more particularly that you are afraid Jove may set themon to quarrel over their wine, and that they may do each other some harm whichmay disgrace both banquet and wooing, for the sight of arms sometimes temptspeople to use them.”Telemachus approved of what his father had said, so he called nurse Eurycleaand said, “Nurse, shut the women up in their room, while I take thearmour that my father left behind him down into the store room. No one looksafter it now my father is gone, and it has got all smirched with soot during myown boyhood. I want to take it down where the smoke cannot reach it.”“I wish, child,” answered Euryclea, “that you would take themanagement of the house into your own hands altogether, and look after all theproperty yourself. But who is to go with you and light you to the store-room?The maids would have done so, but you would not let them.”“The stranger,” said Telemachus, “shall show me a light; whenpeople eat my bread they must earn it, no matter where they come from.”Euryclea did as she was told, and bolted the women inside their room. ThenUlysses and his son made all haste to take the helmets, shields, and spearsinside; and Minerva went before them with a gold lamp in her hand that shed asoft and brilliant radiance, whereon Telemachus said, “Father, my eyesbehold a great marvel: the walls, with the rafters, crossbeams, and thesupports on which they rest are all aglow as with a flaming fire. Surely thereis some god here who has come down from heaven.”“Hush,” answered Ulysses, “hold your peace and ask noquestions, for this is the manner of the gods. Get you to your bed, and leaveme here to talk with your mother and the maids. Your mother in her grief willask me all sorts of questions.”On this Telemachus went by torch-light to the other side of the inner court, tothe room in which he always slept. There he lay in his bed till morning, whileUlysses was left in the cloister pondering on the means whereby withMinerva’s help he might be able to kill the suitors.Then Penelope came down from her room looking like Venus or Diana, and they sether a seat inlaid with scrolls of silver and ivory near the fire in heraccustomed place. It had been made by Icmalius and had a footstool all in onepiece with the seat itself; and it was covered with a thick fleece: on this shenow sat, and the maids came from the women’s room to join her. They setabout removing the tables at which the wicked suitors had been dining, and tookaway the bread that was left, with the cups from which they had drunk. Theyemptied the embers out of the braziers, and heaped much wood upon them to giveboth light and heat; but Melantho began to rail at Ulysses a second time andsaid, “Stranger, do you mean to plague us by hanging about the house allnight and spying upon the women? Be off, you wretch, outside, and eat yoursupper there, or you shall be driven out with a firebrand.”Ulysses scowled at her and answered, “My good woman, why should you be soangry with me? Is it because I am not clean, and my clothes are all in rags,and because I am obliged to go begging about after the manner of tramps andbeggars generally? I too was a rich man once, and had a fine house of my own;in those days I gave to many a tramp such as I now am, no matter who he mightbe nor what he wanted. I had any number of servants, and all the other thingswhich people have who live well and are accounted wealthy, but it pleased Joveto take all away from me; therefore, woman, beware lest you too come to losethat pride and place in which you now wanton above your fellows; have a carelest you get out of favour with your mistress, and lest Ulysses should comehome, for there is still a chance that he may do so. Moreover, though he bedead as you think he is, yet by Apollo’s will he has left a son behindhim, Telemachus, who will note anything done amiss by the maids in the house,for he is now no longer in his boyhood.”Penelope heard what he was saying and scolded the maid, “Impudentbaggage,” said she, “I see how abominably you are behaving, and youshall smart for it. You knew perfectly well, for I told you myself, that I wasgoing to see the stranger and ask him about my husband, for whose sake I am insuch continual sorrow.”Then she said to her head waiting woman Eurynome, “Bring a seat with afleece upon it, for the stranger to sit upon while he tells his story, andlistens to what I have to say. I wish to ask him some questions.”Eurynome brought the seat at once and set a fleece upon it, and as soon asUlysses had sat down Penelope began by saying, “Stranger, I shall firstask you who and whence are you? Tell me of your town and parents.”“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “who on the face of the wholeearth can dare to chide with you? Your fame reaches the firmament of heavenitself; you are like some blameless king, who upholds righteousness, as themonarch over a great and valiant nation: the earth yields its wheat and barley,the trees are loaded with fruit, the ewes bring forth lambs, and the seaabounds with fish by reason of his virtues, and his people do good deeds underhim. Nevertheless, as I sit here in your house, ask me some other question anddo not seek to know my race and family, or you will recall memories that willyet more increase my sorrow. I am full of heaviness, but I ought not to sitweeping and wailing in another person’s house, nor is it well to be thusgrieving continually. I shall have one of the servants or even yourselfcomplaining of me, and saying that my eyes swim with tears because I am heavywith wine.”Then Penelope answered, “Stranger, heaven robbed me of all beauty,whether of face or figure, when the Argives set sail for Troy and my dearhusband with them. If he were to return and look after my affairs I should beboth more respected and should show a better presence to the world. As it is, Iam oppressed with care, and with the afflictions which heaven has seen fit toheap upon me. The chiefs from all our islands—Dulichium, Same, andZacynthus, as also from Ithaca itself, are wooing me against my will and arewasting my estate. I can therefore show no attention to strangers, norsuppliants, nor to people who say that they are skilled artisans, but am allthe time broken-hearted about Ulysses. They want me to marry again at once, andI have to invent stratagems in order to deceive them. In the first place heavenput it in my mind to set up a great tambour-frame in my room, and to beginworking upon an enormous piece of fine needlework. Then I said to them,‘Sweethearts, Ulysses is indeed dead, still, do not press me to marryagain immediately; wait—for I would not have my skill in needleworkperish unrecorded—till I have finished making a pall for the heroLaertes, to be ready against the time when death shall take him. He is veryrich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without apall.’ This was what I said, and they assented; whereon I used to keepworking at my great web all day long, but at night I would unpick the stitchesagain by torch light. I fooled them in this way for three years without theirfinding it out, but as time wore on and I was now in my fourth year, in thewaning of moons, and many days had been accomplished, those good for nothinghussies my maids betrayed me to the suitors, who broke in upon me and caughtme; they were very angry with me, so I was forced to finish my work whether Iwould or no. And now I do not see how I can find any further shift for gettingout of this marriage. My parents are putting great pressure upon me, and my sonchafes at the ravages the suitors are making upon his estate, for he is now oldenough to understand all about it and is perfectly able to look after his ownaffairs, for heaven has blessed him with an excellent disposition. Still,notwithstanding all this, tell me who you are and where you come from—foryou must have had father and mother of some sort; you cannot be the son of anoak or of a rock.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, since you persist inasking me about my family, I will answer, no matter what it costs me: peoplemust expect to be pained when they have been exiles as long as I have, andsuffered as much among as many peoples. Nevertheless, as regards your questionI will tell you all you ask. There is a fair and fruitful island in mid-oceancalled Crete; it is thickly peopled and there are ninety cities in it: thepeople speak many different languages which overlap one another, for there areAchaeans, brave Eteocretans, Dorians of three-fold race, and noble Pelasgi.There is a great town there, Cnossus, where Minos reigned who every nine yearshad a conference with Jove himself.[152] Minos was father to Deucalion,whose son I am, for Deucalion had two sons Idomeneus and myself. Idomeneussailed for Troy, and I, who am the younger, am called Aethon; my brother,however, was at once the older and the more valiant of the two; hence it was inCrete that I saw Ulysses and showed him hospitality, for the winds took himthere as he was on his way to Troy, carrying him out of his course from capeMalea and leaving him in Amnisus off the cave of Ilithuia, where the harboursare difficult to enter and he could hardly find shelter from the winds thatwere then raging. As soon as he got there he went into the town and asked forIdomeneus, claiming to be his old and valued friend, but Idomeneus had alreadyset sail for Troy some ten or twelve days earlier, so I took him to my ownhouse and showed him every kind of hospitality, for I had abundance ofeverything. Moreover, I fed the men who were with him with barley meal from thepublic store, and got subscriptions of wine and oxen for them to sacrifice totheir heart’s content. They stayed with me twelve days, for there was agale blowing from the North so strong that one could hardly keep one’sfeet on land. I suppose some unfriendly god had raised it for them, but on thethirteenth day the wind dropped, and they got away.”Many a plausible tale did Ulysses further tell her, and Penelope wept as shelistened, for her heart was melted. As the snow wastes upon the mountain topswhen the winds from South East and West have breathed upon it and thawed ittill the rivers run bank full with water, even so did her cheeks overflow withtears for the husband who was all the time sitting by her side. Ulysses feltfor her and was sorry for her, but he kept his eyes as hard as horn or ironwithout letting them so much as quiver, so cunningly did he restrain his tears.Then, when she had relieved herself by weeping, she turned to him again andsaid: “Now, stranger, I shall put you to the test and see whether or noyou really did entertain my husband and his men, as you say you did. Tell me,then, how he was dressed, what kind of a man he was to look at, and so alsowith his companions.”“Madam,” answered Ulysses, “it is such a long time ago that Ican hardly say. Twenty years are come and gone since he left my home, and wentelsewhither; but I will tell you as well as I can recollect. Ulysses wore amantle of purple wool, double lined, and it was fastened by a gold brooch withtwo catches for the pin. On the face of this there was a device that shewed adog holding a spotted fawn between his fore paws, and watching it as it laypanting upon the ground. Every one marvelled at the way in which these thingshad been done in gold, the dog looking at the fawn, and strangling it, whilethe fawn was struggling convulsively to escape.[153] As for the shirt that he wore nexthis skin, it was so soft that it fitted him like the skin of an onion, andglistened in the sunlight to the admiration of all the women who beheld it.Furthermore I say, and lay my saying to your heart, that I do not know whetherUlysses wore these clothes when he left home, or whether one of his companionshad given them to him while he was on his voyage; or possibly some one at whosehouse he was staying made him a present of them, for he was a man of manyfriends and had few equals among the Achaeans. I myself gave him a sword ofbronze and a beautiful purple mantle, double lined, with a shirt that went downto his feet, and I sent him on board his ship with every mark of honour. He hada servant with him, a little older than himself, and I can tell you what he waslike; his shoulders were hunched,[154] he was dark, and he had thick curlyhair. His name was Eurybates, and Ulysses treated him with greater familiaritythan he did any of the others, as being the most like-minded withhimself.”Penelope was moved still more deeply as she heard the indisputable proofs thatUlysses laid before her; and when she had again found relief in tears she saidto him, “Stranger, I was already disposed to pity you, but henceforth youshall be honoured and made welcome in my house. It was I who gave Ulysses theclothes you speak of. I took them out of the store room and folded them upmyself, and I gave him also the gold brooch to wear as an ornament. Alas! Ishall never welcome him home again. It was by an ill fate that he ever set outfor that detested city whose very name I cannot bring myself even tomention.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, do not disfigure yourselffurther by grieving thus bitterly for your loss, though I can hardly blame youfor doing so. A woman who has loved her husband and borne him children, wouldnaturally be grieved at losing him, even though he were a worse man thanUlysses, who they say was like a god. Still, cease your tears and listen towhat I can tell you. I will hide nothing from you, and can say with perfecttruth that I have lately heard of Ulysses as being alive and on his way home;he is among the Thesprotians, and is bringing back much valuable treasure thathe has begged from one and another of them; but his ship and all his crew werelost as they were leaving the Thrinacian island, for Jove and the sun-god wereangry with him because his men had slaughtered the sun-god’s cattle, andthey were all drowned to a man. But Ulysses stuck to the keel of the ship andwas drifted on to the land of the Phaeacians, who are near of kin to theimmortals, and who treated him as though he had been a god, giving him manypresents, and wishing to escort him home safe and sound. In fact Ulysses wouldhave been here long ago, had he not thought better to go from land to landgathering wealth; for there is no man living who is so wily as he is; there isno one can compare with him. Pheidon king of the Thesprotians told me all this,and he swore to me—making drink-offerings in his house as he didso—that the ship was by the water side and the crew found who would takeUlysses to his own country. He sent me off first, for there happened to be aThesprotian ship sailing for the wheat-growing island of Dulichium, but heshowed me all the treasure Ulysses had got together, and he had enough lying inthe house of king Pheidon to keep his family for ten generations; but the kingsaid Ulysses had gone to Dodona that he might learn Jove’s mind from thehigh oak tree, and know whether after so long an absence he should return toIthaca openly or in secret. So you may know he is safe and will be hereshortly; he is close at hand and cannot remain away from home much longer;nevertheless I will confirm my words with an oath, and call Jove who is thefirst and mightiest of all gods to witness, as also that hearth of Ulysses towhich I have now come, that all I have spoken shall surely come to pass.Ulysses will return in this self same year; with the end of this moon and thebeginning of the next he will be here.”“May it be even so,” answered Penelope; “if your words cometrue you shall have such gifts and such good will from me that all who see youshall congratulate you; but I know very well how it will be. Ulysses will notreturn, neither will you get your escort hence, for so surely as that Ulyssesever was, there are now no longer any such masters in the house as he was, toreceive honourable strangers or to further them on their way home. And now, youmaids, wash his feet for him, and make him a bed on a couch with rugs andblankets, that he may be warm and quiet till morning. Then, at day break washhim and anoint him again, that he may sit in the cloister and take his mealswith Telemachus. It shall be the worse for any one of these hateful people whois uncivil to him; like it or not, he shall have no more to do in this house.For how, sir, shall you be able to learn whether or no I am superior to othersof my sex both in goodness of heart and understanding, if I let you dine in mycloisters squalid and ill clad? Men live but for a little season; if they arehard, and deal hardly, people wish them ill so long as they are alive, andspeak contemptuously of them when they are dead, but he that is righteous anddeals righteously, the people tell of his praise among all lands, and manyshall call him blessed.”Ulysses answered, “Madam, I have foresworn rugs and blankets from the daythat I left the snowy ranges of Crete to go on shipboard. I will lie as I havelain on many a sleepless night hitherto. Night after night have I passed in anyrough sleeping place, and waited for morning. Nor, again, do I like having myfeet washed; I shall not let any of the young hussies about your house touch myfeet; but, if you have any old and respectable woman who has gone through asmuch trouble as I have, I will allow her to wash them.”To this Penelope said, “My dear sir, of all the guests who ever yet cameto my house there never was one who spoke in all things with such admirablepropriety as you do. There happens to be in the house a most respectable oldwoman—the same who received my poor dear husband in her arms the night hewas born, and nursed him in infancy. She is very feeble now, but she shall washyour feet.” “Come here,” said she, “Euryclea, and washyour master’s age-mate; I suppose Ulysses’ hands and feet are verymuch the same now as his are, for trouble ages all of us dreadfullyfast.”On these words the old woman covered her face with her hands; she began to weepand made lamentation saying, “My dear child, I cannot think whatever I amto do with you. I am certain no one was ever more god-fearing than yourself,and yet Jove hates you. No one in the whole world ever burned him more thighbones, nor gave him finer hecatombs when you prayed you might come to a greenold age yourself and see your son grow up to take after you: yet see how he hasprevented you alone from ever getting back to your own home. I have no doubtthe women in some foreign palace which Ulysses has got to are gibing at him asall these sluts here have been gibing at you. I do not wonder at your notchoosing to let them wash you after the manner in which they have insulted you;I will wash your feet myself gladly enough, as Penelope has said that I am todo so; I will wash them both for Penelope’s sake and for your own, foryou have raised the most lively feelings of compassion in my mind; and let mesay this moreover, which pray attend to; we have had all kinds of strangers indistress come here before now, but I make bold to say that no one ever yet camewho was so like Ulysses in figure, voice, and feet as you are.”“Those who have seen us both,” answered Ulysses, “have alwayssaid we were wonderfully like each other, and now you have noticed ittoo.”Then the old woman took the cauldron in which she was going to wash his feet,and poured plenty of cold water into it, adding hot till the bath was warmenough. Ulysses sat by the fire, but ere long he turned away from the light,for it occurred to him that when the old woman had hold of his leg she wouldrecognise a certain scar which it bore, whereon the whole truth would come out.And indeed as soon as she began washing her master, she at once knew the scaras one that had been given him by a wild boar when he was hunting on Mt.Parnassus with his excellent grandfather Autolycus—who was the mostaccomplished thief and perjurer in the whole world—and with the sons ofAutolycus. Mercury himself had endowed him with this gift, for he used to burnthe thigh bones of goats and kids to him, so he took pleasure in hiscompanionship. It happened once that Autolycus had gone to Ithaca and had foundthe child of his daughter just born. As soon as he had done supper Euryclea setthe infant upon his knees and said, “Autolycus, you must find a name foryour grandson; you greatly wished that you might have one.”“Son-in-law and daughter,” replied Autolycus, “call the childthus: I am highly displeased with a large number of people in one place andanother, both men and women; so name the child ‘Ulysses,’ or thechild of anger. When he grows up and comes to visit his mother’s familyon Mt. Parnassus, where my possessions lie, I will make him a present and willsend him on his way rejoicing.”Ulysses, therefore, went to Parnassus to get the presents from Autolycus, whowith his sons shook hands with him and gave him welcome. His grandmotherAmphithea threw her arms about him, and kissed his head, and both his beautifuleyes, while Autolycus desired his sons to get dinner ready, and they did as hetold them. They brought in a five year old bull, flayed it, made it ready anddivided it into joints; these they then cut carefully up into smaller piecesand spitted them; they roasted them sufficiently and served the portions round.Thus through the livelong day to the going down of the sun they feasted, andevery man had his full share so that all were satisfied; but when the sun setand it came on dark, they went to bed and enjoyed the boon of sleep.When the child of morning, rosy-fingered Dawn, appeared, the sons of Autolycuswent out with their hounds hunting, and Ulysses went too. They climbed thewooded slopes of Parnassus and soon reached its breezy upland valleys; but asthe sun was beginning to beat upon the fields, fresh-risen from the slow stillcurrents of Oceanus, they came to a mountain dell. The dogs were in frontsearching for the tracks of the beast they were chasing, and after them camethe sons of Autolycus, among whom was Ulysses, close behind the dogs, and hehad a long spear in his hand. Here was the lair of a huge boar among some thickbrushwood, so dense that the wind and rain could not get through it, nor couldthe sun’s rays pierce it, and the ground underneath lay thick with fallenleaves. The boar heard the noise of the men’s feet, and the hounds bayingon every side as the huntsmen came up to him, so he rushed from his lair,raised the bristles on his neck, and stood at bay with fire flashing from hiseyes. Ulysses was the first to raise his spear and try to drive it into thebrute, but the boar was too quick for him, and charged him sideways, rippinghim above the knee with a gash that tore deep though it did not reach the bone.As for the boar, Ulysses hit him on the right shoulder, and the point of thespear went right through him, so that he fell groaning in the dust until thelife went out of him. The sons of Autolycus busied themselves with the carcassof the boar, and bound Ulysses’ wound; then, after saying a spell to stopthe bleeding, they went home as fast as they could. But when Autolycus and hissons had thoroughly healed Ulysses, they made him some splendid presents, andsent him back to Ithaca with much mutual good will. When he got back, hisfather and mother were rejoiced to see him, and asked him all about it, and howhe had hurt himself to get the scar; so he told them how the boar had rippedhim when he was out hunting with Autolycus and his sons on Mt. Parnassus.As soon as Euryclea had got the scarred limb in her hands and had well hold ofit, she recognised it and dropped the foot at once. The leg fell into the bath,which rang out and was overturned, so that all the water was spilt on theground; Euryclea’s eyes between her joy and her grief filled with tears,and she could not speak, but she caught Ulysses by the beard and said,“My dear child, I am sure you must be Ulysses himself, only I did notknow you till I had actually touched and handled you.”As she spoke she looked towards Penelope, as though wanting to tell her thather dear husband was in the house, but Penelope was unable to look in thatdirection and observe what was going on, for Minerva had diverted herattention; so Ulysses caught Euryclea by the throat with his right hand andwith his left drew her close to him, and said, “Nurse, do you wish to bethe ruin of me, you who nursed me at your own breast, now that after twentyyears of wandering I am at last come to my own home again? Since it has beenborne in upon you by heaven to recognise me, hold your tongue, and do not say aword about it to any one else in the house, for if you do I tell you—andit shall surely be—that if heaven grants me to take the lives of thesesuitors, I will not spare you, though you are my own nurse, when I am killingthe other women.”“My child,” answered Euryclea, “what are you talking about?You know very well that nothing can either bend or break me. I will hold mytongue like a stone or a piece of iron; furthermore let me say, and lay mysaying to your heart, when heaven has delivered the suitors into your hand, Iwill give you a list of the women in the house who have been ill-behaved, andof those who are guiltless.”And Ulysses answered, “Nurse, you ought not to speak in that way; I amwell able to form my own opinion about one and all of them; hold your tongueand leave everything to heaven.”As he said this Euryclea left the cloister to fetch some more water, for thefirst had been all spilt; and when she had washed him and anointed him withoil, Ulysses drew his seat nearer to the fire to warm himself, and hid the scarunder his rags. Then Penelope began talking to him and said:“Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter.It is indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep in spiteof sorrow. As for myself, heaven has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe,that even by day when I am attending to my duties and looking after theservants, I am still weeping and lamenting during the whole time; then, whennight comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie awake thinking, and my heartbecomes a prey to the most incessant and cruel tortures. As the dunnightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in the early spring from her seat inshadiest covert hid, and with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how bymishap she killed her own child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does mymind toss and turn in its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here,and safeguard my substance, my bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out ofregard to public opinion and the memory of my late husband, or whether it isnot now time for me to go with the best of these suitors who are wooing me andmaking me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was still young, andunable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my husband’s house,but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed atthe way in which the suitors are eating up his property. Listen, then, to adream that I have had and interpret it for me if you can. I have twenty geeseabout the house that eat mash out of a trough,[155] and of which I am exceedingly fond.I dreamed that a great eagle came swooping down from a mountain, and dug hiscurved beak into the neck of each of them till he had killed them all.Presently he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead about the yard;whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so piteouslywas I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he came back again,and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and told meto leave off crying. ‘Be of good courage,’ he said, ‘daughterof Icarius; this is no dream, but a vision of good omen that shall surely cometo pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am no longer an eagle, but your ownhusband, who am come back to you, and who will bring these suitors to adisgraceful end.’ On this I woke, and when I looked out I saw my geese atthe trough eating their mash as usual.”“This dream, Madam,” replied Ulysses, “can admit but of oneinterpretation, for had not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled?The death of the suitors is portended, and not one single one of them willescape.”And Penelope answered, “Stranger, dreams are very curious andunaccountable things, and they do not by any means invariably come true. Thereare two gates through which these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one is ofhorn, and the other ivory. Those that come through the gate of ivory arefatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean something to those that see them.I do not think, however, that my own dream came through the gate of horn,though I and my son should be most thankful if it proves to have done so.Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart—the coming dawnwill usher in the ill-omened day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses,for I am about to hold a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelveaxes in the court, one in front of the other, like the stays upon which a shipis built; he would then go back from them and shoot an arrow through the wholetwelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same thing, and whichever ofthem can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through all the twelveaxes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodlyand so abounding in wealth. But even so, I doubt not that I shall remember itin my dreams.”Then Ulysses answered, “Madam, wife of Ulysses, you need not defer yourtournament, for Ulysses will return ere ever they can string the bow, handle ithow they will, and send their arrows through the iron.”To this Penelope said, “As long, sir, as you will sit here and talk tome, I can have no desire to go to bed. Still, people cannot do permanentlywithout sleep, and heaven has appointed us dwellers on earth a time for allthings. I will therefore go upstairs and recline upon that couch which I havenever ceased to flood with my tears from the day Ulysses set out for the citywith a hateful name.”She then went upstairs to her own room, not alone, but attended by her maidens,and when there, she lamented her dear husband till Minerva shed sweet sleepover her eyelids.BOOK XXULYSSES CANNOT SLEEP—PENELOPE’S PRAYER TO DIANA—THE TWO SIGNSFROM HEAVEN—EUMAEUS AND PHILOETIUS ARRIVE—THE SUITORSDINE—CTESIPPUS THROWS AN OX’S FOOT AT ULYSSES—THEOCLYMENUSFORETELLS DISASTER AND LEAVES THE HOUSE.Ulysses slept in the cloister upon an undressed bullock’s hide, on thetop of which he threw several skins of the sheep the suitors had eaten, andEurynome[156]threw a cloak over him after he had laid himself down. There, then, Ulysses laywakefully brooding upon the way in which he should kill the suitors; and by andby, the women who had been in the habit of misconducting themselves with them,left the house giggling and laughing with one another. This made Ulysses veryangry, and he doubted whether to get up and kill every single one of them thenand there, or to let them sleep one more and last time with the suitors. Hisheart growled within him, and as a bitch with puppies growls and shows herteeth when she sees a stranger, so did his heart growl with anger at the evildeeds that were being done: but he beat his breast and said, “Heart, bestill, you had worse than this to bear on the day when the terrible Cyclops ateyour brave companions; yet you bore it in silence till your cunning got yousafe out of the cave, though you made sure of being killed.”Thus he chided with his heart, and checked it into endurance, but he tossedabout as one who turns a paunch full of blood and fat in front of a hot fire,doing it first on one side and then on the other, that he may get it cooked assoon as possible, even so did he turn himself about from side to side, thinkingall the time how, single handed as he was, he should contrive to kill so largea body of men as the wicked suitors. But by and by Minerva came down fromheaven in the likeness of a woman, and hovered over his head saying, “Mypoor unhappy man, why do you lie awake in this way? This is your house: yourwife is safe inside it, and so is your son who is just such a young man as anyfather may be proud of.”“Goddess,” answered Ulysses, “all that you have said is true,but I am in some doubt as to how I shall be able to kill these wicked suitorssingle handed, seeing what a number of them there always are. And there is thisfurther difficulty, which is still more considerable. Supposing that withJove’s and your assistance I succeed in killing them, I must ask you toconsider where I am to escape to from their avengers when it is allover.”“For shame,” replied Minerva, “why, any one else would trusta worse ally than myself, even though that ally were only a mortal and lesswise than I am. Am I not a goddess, and have I not protected you throughout inall your troubles? I tell you plainly that even though there were fifty bandsof men surrounding us and eager to kill us, you should take all their sheep andcattle, and drive them away with you. But go to sleep; it is a very bad thingto lie awake all night, and you shall be out of your troubles beforelong.”As she spoke she shed sleep over his eyes, and then went back to Olympus.While Ulysses was thus yielding himself to a very deep slumber that eased theburden of his sorrows, his admirable wife awoke, and sitting up in her bedbegan to cry. When she had relieved herself by weeping she prayed to Dianasaying, “Great Goddess Diana, daughter of Jove, drive an arrow into myheart and slay me; or let some whirlwind snatch me up and bear me through pathsof darkness till it drop me into the mouths of over-flowing Oceanus, as it didthe daughters of Pandareus. The daughters of Pandareus lost their father andmother, for the gods killed them, so they were left orphans. But Venus tookcare of them, and fed them on cheese, honey, and sweet wine. Juno taught themto excel all women in beauty of form and understanding; Diana gave them animposing presence, and Minerva endowed them with every kind of accomplishment;but one day when Venus had gone up to Olympus to see Jove about getting themmarried (for well does he know both what shall happen and what not happen toevery one) the storm winds came and spirited them away to become handmaids tothe dread Erinyes. Even so I wish that the gods who live in heaven would hideme from mortal sight, or that fair Diana might strike me, for I would fain goeven beneath the sad earth if I might do so still looking towards Ulysses only,and without having to yield myself to a worse man than he was. Besides, nomatter how much people may grieve by day, they can put up with it so long asthey can sleep at night, for when the eyes are closed in slumber people forgetgood and ill alike; whereas my misery haunts me even in my dreams. This verynight methought there was one lying by my side who was like Ulysses as he waswhen he went away with his host, and I rejoiced, for I believed that it was nodream, but the very truth itself.”On this the day broke, but Ulysses heard the sound of her weeping, and itpuzzled him, for it seemed as though she already knew him and was by his side.Then he gathered up the cloak and the fleeces on which he had lain, and setthem on a seat in the cloister, but he took the bullock’s hide out intothe open. He lifted up his hands to heaven, and prayed, saying “FatherJove, since you have seen fit to bring me over land and sea to my own homeafter all the afflictions you have laid upon me, give me a sign out of themouth of some one or other of those who are now waking within the house, andlet me have another sign of some kind from outside.”Thus did he pray. Jove heard his prayer and forthwith thundered high up amongthe clouds from the splendour of Olympus, and Ulysses was glad when he heardit. At the same time within the house, a miller-woman from hard by in the millroom lifted up her voice and gave him another sign. There were twelvemiller-women whose business it was to grind wheat and barley which are thestaff of life. The others had ground their task and had gone to take theirrest, but this one had not yet finished, for she was not so strong as theywere, and when she heard the thunder she stopped grinding and gave the sign toher master. “Father Jove,” said she, “you, who rule overheaven and earth, you have thundered from a clear sky without so much as acloud in it, and this means something for somebody; grant the prayer, then, ofme your poor servant who calls upon you, and let this be the very last day thatthe suitors dine in the house of Ulysses. They have worn me out with labour ofgrinding meal for them, and I hope they may never have another dinner anywhereat all.”Ulysses was glad when he heard the omens conveyed to him by the woman’sspeech, and by the thunder, for he knew they meant that he should avengehimself on the suitors.Then the other maids in the house rose and lit the fire on the hearth;Telemachus also rose and put on his clothes. He girded his sword about hisshoulder, bound his sandals on to his comely feet, and took a doughty spearwith a point of sharpened bronze; then he went to the threshold of the cloisterand said to Euryclea, “Nurse, did you make the stranger comfortable bothas regards bed and board, or did you let him shift for himself?—for mymother, good woman though she is, has a way of paying great attention tosecond-rate people, and of neglecting others who are in reality much bettermen.”“Do not find fault child,” said Euryclea, “when there is noone to find fault with. The stranger sat and drank his wine as long as heliked: your mother did ask him if he would take any more bread and he said hewould not. When he wanted to go to bed she told the servants to make one forhim, but he said he was such a wretched outcast that he would not sleep on abed and under blankets; he insisted on having an undressed bullock’s hideand some sheepskins put for him in the cloister and I threw a cloak over himmyself.”[157]Then Telemachus went out of the court to the place where the Achaeans weremeeting in assembly; he had his spear in his hand, and he was not alone, forhis two dogs went with him. But Euryclea called the maids and said,“Come, wake up; set about sweeping the cloisters and sprinkling them withwater to lay the dust; put the covers on the seats; wipe down the tables, someof you, with a wet sponge; clean out the mixing-jugs and the cups, and go forwater from the fountain at once; the suitors will be here directly; they willbe here early, for it is a feast day.”Thus did she speak, and they did even as she had said: twenty of them went tothe fountain for water, and the others set themselves busily to work about thehouse. The men who were in attendance on the suitors also came up and beganchopping firewood. By and by the women returned from the fountain, and theswineherd came after them with the three best pigs he could pick out. These helet feed about the premises, and then he said good-humouredly to Ulysses,“Stranger, are the suitors treating you any better now, or are they asinsolent as ever?”“May heaven,” answered Ulysses, “requite to them thewickedness with which they deal high-handedly in another man’s housewithout any sense of shame.”Thus did they converse; meanwhile Melanthius the goatherd came up, for he toowas bringing in his best goats for the suitors’ dinner; and he had twoshepherds with him. They tied the goats up under the gatehouse, and thenMelanthius began gibing at Ulysses. “Are you still here, stranger,”said he, “to pester people by begging about the house? Why can you not goelsewhere? You and I shall not come to an understanding before we have giveneach other a taste of our fists. You beg without any sense of decency: arethere not feasts elsewhere among the Achaeans, as well as here?”Ulysses made no answer, but bowed his head and brooded. Then a third man,Philoetius, joined them, who was bringing in a barren heifer and some goats.These were brought over by the boatmen who are there to take people over whenany one comes to them. So Philoetius made his heifer and his goats secure underthe gatehouse, and then went up to the swineherd. “Who, Swineherd,”said he, “is this stranger that is lately come here? Is he one of yourmen? What is his family? Where does he come from? Poor fellow, he looks as ifhe had been some great man, but the gods give sorrow to whom theywill—even to kings if it so pleases them.”As he spoke he went up to Ulysses and saluted him with his right hand;“Good day to you, father stranger,” said he, “you seem to bevery poorly off now, but I hope you will have better times by and by. FatherJove, of all gods you are the most malicious. We are your own children, yet youshow us no mercy in all our misery and afflictions. A sweat came over me when Isaw this man, and my eyes filled with tears, for he reminds me of Ulysses, whoI fear is going about in just such rags as this man’s are, if indeed heis still among the living. If he is already dead and in the house of Hades,then, alas! for my good master, who made me his stockman when I was quite youngamong the Cephallenians, and now his cattle are countless; no one could havedone better with them than I have, for they have bred like ears of corn;nevertheless I have to keep bringing them in for others to eat, who take noheed to his son though he is in the house, and fear not the wrath of heaven,but are already eager to divide Ulysses’ property among them because hehas been away so long. I have often thought—only it would not be rightwhile his son is living—of going off with the cattle to some foreigncountry; bad as this would be, it is still harder to stay here and beill-treated about other people’s herds. My position is intolerable, and Ishould long since have run away and put myself under the protection of someother chief, only that I believe my poor master will yet return, and send allthese suitors flying out of the house.”“Stockman,” answered Ulysses, “you seem to be a verywell-disposed person, and I can see that you are a man of sense. Therefore Iwill tell you, and will confirm my words with an oath. By Jove, the chief ofall gods, and by that hearth of Ulysses to which I am now come, Ulysses shallreturn before you leave this place, and if you are so minded you shall see himkilling the suitors who are now masters here.”“If Jove were to bring this to pass,” replied the stockman,“you should see how I would do my very utmost to help him.”And in like manner Eumaeus prayed that Ulysses might return home.Thus did they converse. Meanwhile the suitors were hatching a plot to murderTelemachus: but a bird flew near them on their left hand—an eagle with adove in its talons. On this Amphinomus said, “My friends, this plot ofours to murder Telemachus will not succeed; let us go to dinner instead.”The others assented, so they went inside and laid their cloaks on the benchesand seats. They sacrificed the sheep, goats, pigs, and the heifer, and when theinward meats were cooked they served them round. They mixed the wine in themixing-bowls, and the swineherd gave every man his cup, while Philoetius handedround the bread in the bread baskets, and Melanthius poured them out theirwine. Then they laid their hands upon the good things that were before them.Telemachus purposely made Ulysses sit in the part of the cloister that waspaved with stone;[158] he gave him a shabby looking seatat a little table to himself, and had his portion of the inward meats broughtto him, with his wine in a gold cup. “Sit there,” said he,“and drink your wine among the great people. I will put a stop to thegibes and blows of the suitors, for this is no public house, but belongs toUlysses, and has passed from him to me. Therefore, suitors, keep your hands andyour tongues to yourselves, or there will be mischief.”The suitors bit their lips, and marvelled at the boldness of his speech; thenAntinous said, “We do not like such language but we will put up with it,for Telemachus is threatening us in good earnest. If Jove had let us we shouldhave put a stop to his brave talk ere now.”Thus spoke Antinous, but Telemachus heeded him not. Meanwhile the heralds werebringing the holy hecatomb through the city, and the Achaeans gathered underthe shady grove of Apollo.Then they roasted the outer meat, drew it off the spits, gave every man hisportion, and feasted to their heart’s content; those who waited at tablegave Ulysses exactly the same portion as the others had, for Telemachus hadtold them to do so.But Minerva would not let the suitors for one moment drop their insolence, forshe wanted Ulysses to become still more bitter against them. Now there happenedto be among them a ribald fellow, whose name was Ctesippus, and who came fromSame. This man, confident in his great wealth, was paying court to the wife ofUlysses, and said to the suitors, “Hear what I have to say. The strangerhas already had as large a portion as any one else; this is well, for it is notright nor reasonable to ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes here. Iwill, however, make him a present on my own account, that he may have somethingto give to the bath-woman, or to some other of Ulysses’ servants.”As he spoke he picked up a heifer’s foot from the meat-basket in which itlay, and threw it at Ulysses, but Ulysses turned his head a little aside, andavoided it, smiling grimly Sardinian fashion[159] as he did so, and it hit the wall,not him. On this Telemachus spoke fiercely to Ctesippus, “It is a goodthing for you,” said he, “that the stranger turned his head so thatyou missed him. If you had hit him I should have run you through with my spear,and your father would have had to see about getting you buried rather thanmarried in this house. So let me have no more unseemly behaviour from any ofyou, for I am grown up now to the knowledge of good and evil and understandwhat is going on, instead of being the child that I have been heretofore. Ihave long seen you killing my sheep and making free with my corn and wine: Ihave put up with this, for one man is no match for many, but do me no furtherviolence. Still, if you wish to kill me, kill me; I would far rather die thansee such disgraceful scenes day after day—guests insulted, and mendragging the women servants about the house in an unseemly way.”They all held their peace till at last Agelaus son of Damastor said, “Noone should take offence at what has just been said, nor gainsay it, for it isquite reasonable. Leave off, therefore, ill-treating the stranger, or any oneelse of the servants who are about the house; I would say, however, a friendlyword to Telemachus and his mother, which I trust may commend itself to both.‘As long,’ I would say, ‘as you had ground for hoping thatUlysses would one day come home, no one could complain of your waiting andsuffering[160]the suitors to be in your house. It would have been better that he should havereturned, but it is now sufficiently clear that he will never do so; thereforetalk all this quietly over with your mother, and tell her to marry the bestman, and the one who makes her the most advantageous offer. Thus you willyourself be able to manage your own inheritance, and to eat and drink in peace,while your mother will look after some other man’s house, notyours.’”To this Telemachus answered, “By Jove, Agelaus, and by the sorrows of myunhappy father, who has either perished far from Ithaca, or is wandering insome distant land, I throw no obstacles in the way of my mother’smarriage; on the contrary I urge her to choose whomsoever she will, and I willgive her numberless gifts into the bargain, but I dare not insist point blankthat she shall leave the house against her own wishes. Heaven forbid that Ishould do this.”Minerva now made the suitors fall to laughing immoderately, and set their witswandering; but they were laughing with a forced laughter. Their meat becamesmeared with blood; their eyes filled with tears, and their hearts were heavywith forebodings. Theoclymenus saw this and said, “Unhappy men, what isit that ails you? There is a shroud of darkness drawn over you from head tofoot, your cheeks are wet with tears; the air is alive with wailing voices; thewalls and roof-beams drip blood; the gate of the cloisters and the court beyondthem are full of ghosts trooping down into the night of hell; the sun isblotted out of heaven, and a blighting gloom is over all the land.”Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily. Eurymachus then said,“This stranger who has lately come here has lost his senses. Servants,turn him out into the streets, since he finds it so dark here.”But Theoclymenus said, “Eurymachus, you need not send any one with me. Ihave eyes, ears, and a pair of feet of my own, to say nothing of anunderstanding mind. I will take these out of the house with me, for I seemischief overhanging you, from which not one of you men who are insultingpeople and plotting ill deeds in the house of Ulysses will be able toescape.”He left the house as he spoke, and went back to Piraeus who gave him welcome,but the suitors kept looking at one another and provoking Telemachus bylaughing at the strangers. One insolent fellow said to him, “Telemachus,you are not happy in your guests; first you have this importunate tramp, whocomes begging bread and wine and has no skill for work or for hard fighting,but is perfectly useless, and now here is another fellow who is setting himselfup as a prophet. Let me persuade you, for it will be much better to put them onboard ship and send them off to the Sicels to sell for what they willbring.”Telemachus gave him no heed, but sate silently watching his father, expectingevery moment that he would begin his attack upon the suitors.Meanwhile the daughter of Icarius, wise Penelope, had had a rich seat placedfor her facing the court and cloisters, so that she could hear what every onewas saying. The dinner indeed had been prepared amid much merriment; it hadbeen both good and abundant, for they had sacrificed many victims; but thesupper was yet to come, and nothing can be conceived more gruesome than themeal which a goddess and a brave man were soon to lay before them—forthey had brought their doom upon themselves.BOOK XXITHE TRIAL OF THE AXES, DURING WHICH ULYSSES REVEALS HIMSELF TO EUMAEUS ANDPHILOETIUSMinerva now put it in Penelope’s mind to make the suitors try their skillwith the bow and with the iron axes, in contest among themselves, as a means ofbringing about their destruction. She went upstairs and got the store-room key,which was made of bronze and had a handle of ivory; she then went with hermaidens into the store-room at the end of the house, where her husband’streasures of gold, bronze, and wrought iron were kept, and where was also hisbow, and the quiver full of deadly arrows that had been given him by a friendwhom he had met in Lacedaemon—Iphitus the son of Eurytus. The two fell inwith one another in Messene at the house of Ortilochus, where Ulysses wasstaying in order to recover a debt that was owing from the whole people; forthe Messenians had carried off three hundred sheep from Ithaca, and had sailedaway with them and with their shepherds. In quest of these Ulysses took a longjourney while still quite young, for his father and the other chieftains senthim on a mission to recover them. Iphitus had gone there also to try and getback twelve brood mares that he had lost, and the mule foals that were runningwith them. These mares were the death of him in the end, for when he went tothe house of Jove’s son, mighty Hercules, who performed such prodigies ofvalour, Hercules to his shame killed him, though he was his guest, for hefeared not heaven’s vengeance, nor yet respected his own table which hehad set before Iphitus, but killed him in spite of everything, and kept themares himself. It was when claiming these that Iphitus met Ulysses, and gavehim the bow which mighty Eurytus had been used to carry, and which on his deathhad been left by him to his son. Ulysses gave him in return a sword and aspear, and this was the beginning of a fast friendship, although they nevervisited at one another’s houses, for Jove’s son Hercules killedIphitus ere they could do so. This bow, then, given him by Iphitus, had notbeen taken with him by Ulysses when he sailed for Troy; he had used it so longas he had been at home, but had left it behind as having been a keepsake from avalued friend.Penelope presently reached the oak threshold of the store-room; the carpenterhad planed this duly, and had drawn a line on it so as to get it quitestraight; he had then set the door posts into it and hung the doors. She loosedthe strap from the handle of the door, put in the key, and drove it straighthome to shoot back the bolts that held the doors;[161] these flew open with a noise like abull bellowing in a meadow, and Penelope stepped upon the raised platform,where the chests stood in which the fair linen and clothes were laid by alongwith fragrant herbs: reaching thence, she took down the bow with its bow casefrom the peg on which it hung. She sat down with it on her knees, weepingbitterly as she took the bow out of its case, and when her tears had relievedher, she went to the cloister where the suitors were, carrying the bow and thequiver, with the many deadly arrows that were inside it. Along with her cameher maidens, bearing a chest that contained much iron and bronze which herhusband had won as prizes. When she reached the suitors, she stood by one ofthe bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, holding a veil beforeher face, and with a maid on either side of her. Then she said:“Listen to me you suitors, who persist in abusing the hospitality of thishouse because its owner has been long absent, and without other pretext thanthat you want to marry me; this, then, being the prize that you are contendingfor, I will bring out the mighty bow of Ulysses, and whomsoever of you shallstring it most easily and send his arrow through each one of twelve axes, himwill I follow and quit this house of my lawful husband, so goodly, and soabounding in wealth. But even so I doubt not that I shall remember it in mydreams.”As she spoke, she told Eumaeus to set the bow and the pieces of iron before thesuitors, and Eumaeus wept as he took them to do as she had bidden him. Hard by,the stockman wept also when he saw his master’s bow, but Antinous scoldedthem. “You country louts,” said he, “silly simpletons; whyshould you add to the sorrows of your mistress by crying in this way? She hasenough to grieve her in the loss of her husband; sit still, therefore, and eatyour dinners in silence, or go outside if you want to cry, and leave the bowbehind you. We suitors shall have to contend for it with might and main, for weshall find it no light matter to string such a bow as this is. There is not aman of us all who is such another as Ulysses; for I have seen him and rememberhim, though I was then only a child.”This was what he said, but all the time he was expecting to be able to stringthe bow and shoot through the iron, whereas in fact he was to be the first thatshould taste of the arrows from the hands of Ulysses, whom he was dishonouringin his own house—egging the others on to do so also.Then Telemachus spoke. “Great heavens!” he exclaimed, “Jovemust have robbed me of my senses. Here is my dear and excellent mother sayingshe will quit this house and marry again, yet I am laughing and enjoying myselfas though there were nothing happening. But, suitors, as the contest has beenagreed upon, let it go forward. It is for a woman whose peer is not to be foundin Pylos, Argos, or Mycene, nor yet in Ithaca nor on the mainland. You knowthis as well as I do; what need have I to speak in praise of my mother? Comeon, then, make no excuses for delay, but let us see whether you can string thebow or no. I too will make trial of it, for if I can string it and shootthrough the iron, I shall not suffer my mother to quit this house with astranger, not if I can win the prizes which my father won before me.”As he spoke he sprang from his seat, threw his crimson cloak from him, and tookhis sword from his shoulder. First he set the axes in a row, in a long groovewhich he had dug for them, and had made straight by line.[162] Then hestamped the earth tight round them, and everyone was surprised when they sawhim set them up so orderly, though he had never seen anything of the kindbefore. This done, he went on to the pavement to make trial of the bow; thricedid he tug at it, trying with all his might to draw the string, and thrice hehad to leave off, though he had hoped to string the bow and shoot through theiron. He was trying for the fourth time, and would have strung it had notUlysses made a sign to check him in spite of all his eagerness. So he said:“Alas! I shall either be always feeble and of no prowess, or I am tooyoung, and have not yet reached my full strength so as to be able to hold myown if any one attacks me. You others, therefore, who are stronger than I, maketrial of the bow and get this contest settled.”On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door [that led intothe house] with the arrow standing against the top of the bow. Then he sat downon the seat from which he had risen, and Antinous said:“Come on each of you in his turn, going towards the right from the placeat which the cupbearer begins when he is handing round the wine.”The rest agreed, and Leiodes son of Oenops was the first to rise. He wassacrificial priest to the suitors, and sat in the corner near the mixing-bowl.[163] He was theonly man who hated their evil deeds and was indignant with the others. He wasnow the first to take the bow and arrow, so he went on to the pavement to makehis trial, but he could not string the bow, for his hands were weak and unusedto hard work, they therefore soon grew tired, and he said to the suitors,“My friends, I cannot string it; let another have it, this bow shall takethe life and soul out of many a chief among us, for it is better to die than tolive after having missed the prize that we have so long striven for, and whichhas brought us so long together. Some one of us is even now hoping and prayingthat he may marry Penelope, but when he has seen this bow and tried it, let himwoo and make bridal offerings to some other woman, and let Penelope marrywhoever makes her the best offer and whose lot it is to win her.”On this he put the bow down, letting it lean against the door,[164] with the arrowstanding against the tip of the bow. Then he took his seat again on the seatfrom which he had risen; and Antinous rebuked him saying:“Leiodes, what are you talking about? Your words are monstrous andintolerable; it makes me angry to listen to you. Shall, then, this bow take thelife of many a chief among us, merely because you cannot bend it yourself?True, you were not born to be an archer, but there are others who will soonstring it.”Then he said to Melanthius the goatherd, “Look sharp, light a fire in thecourt, and set a seat hard by with a sheep skin on it; bring us also a largeball of lard, from what they have in the house. Let us warm the bow and greaseit—we will then make trial of it again, and bring the contest to anend.”Melanthius lit the fire, and set a seat covered with sheep skins beside it. Healso brought a great ball of lard from what they had in the house, and thesuitors warmed the bow and again made trial of it, but they were none of themnearly strong enough to string it. Nevertheless there still remained Antinousand Eurymachus, who were the ringleaders among the suitors and much theforemost among them all.Then the swineherd and the stockman left the cloisters together, and Ulyssesfollowed them. When they had got outside the gates and the outer yard, Ulyssessaid to them quietly:“Stockman, and you swineherd, I have something in my mind which I am indoubt whether to say or no; but I think I will say it. What manner of men wouldyou be to stand by Ulysses, if some god should bring him back here all of asudden? Say which you are disposed to do—to side with the suitors, orwith Ulysses?”“Father Jove,” answered the stockman, “would indeed that youmight so ordain it. If some god were but to bring Ulysses back, you should seewith what might and main I would fight for him.”In like words Eumaeus prayed to all the gods that Ulysses might return; when,therefore, he saw for certain what mind they were of, Ulysses said, “Itis I, Ulysses, who am here. I have suffered much, but at last, in the twentiethyear, I am come back to my own country. I find that you two alone of all myservants are glad that I should do so, for I have not heard any of the otherspraying for my return. To you two, therefore, will I unfold the truth as itshall be. If heaven shall deliver the suitors into my hands, I will find wivesfor both of you, will give you house and holding close to my own, and you shallbe to me as though you were brothers and friends of Telemachus. I will now giveyou convincing proofs that you may know me and be assured. See, here is thescar from the boar’s tooth that ripped me when I was out hunting on Mt.Parnassus with the sons of Autolycus.”As he spoke he drew his rags aside from the great scar, and when they hadexamined it thoroughly, they both of them wept about Ulysses, threw their armsround him, and kissed his head and shoulders, while Ulysses kissed their handsand faces in return. The sun would have gone down upon their mourning ifUlysses had not checked them and said:“Cease your weeping, lest some one should come outside and see us, andtell those who are within. When you go in, do so separately, not both together;I will go first, and do you follow afterwards; let this moreover be the tokenbetween us; the suitors will all of them try to prevent me from getting hold ofthe bow and quiver; do you, therefore, Eumaeus, place it in my hands when youare carrying it about, and tell the women to close the doors of theirapartment. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of men fighting about thehouse, they must not come out; they must keep quiet, and stay where they are attheir work. And I charge you, Philoetius, to make fast the doors of the outercourt, and to bind them securely at once.”When he had thus spoken, he went back to the house and took the seat that hehad left. Presently, his two servants followed him inside.At this moment the bow was in the hands of Eurymachus, who was warming it bythe fire, but even so he could not string it, and he was greatly grieved. Heheaved a deep sigh and said, “I grieve for myself and for us all; Igrieve that I shall have to forgo the marriage, but I do not care nearly somuch about this, for there are plenty of other women in Ithaca and elsewhere;what I feel most is the fact of our being so inferior to Ulysses in strengththat we cannot string his bow. This will disgrace us in the eyes of those whoare yet unborn.”“It shall not be so, Eurymachus,” said Antinous, “and youknow it yourself. Today is the feast of Apollo throughout all the land; who canstring a bow on such a day as this? Put it on one side—as for the axesthey can stay where they are, for no one is likely to come to the house andtake them away: let the cupbearer go round with his cups, that we may make ourdrink-offerings and drop this matter of the bow; we will tell Melanthius tobring us in some goats tomorrow—the best he has; we can then offer thighbones to Apollo the mighty archer, and again make trial of the bow, so as tobring the contest to an end.”The rest approved his words, and thereon men servants poured water over thehands of the guests, while pages filled the mixing-bowls with wine and waterand handed it round after giving every man his drink-offering. Then, when theyhad made their offerings and had drunk each as much as he desired, Ulyssescraftily said:—“Suitors of the illustrious queen, listen that I may speak even as I amminded. I appeal more especially to Eurymachus, and to Antinous who has justspoken with so much reason. Cease shooting for the present and leave the matterto the gods, but in the morning let heaven give victory to whom it will. Forthe moment, however, give me the bow that I may prove the power of my handsamong you all, and see whether I still have as much strength as I used to have,or whether travel and neglect have made an end of it.”This made them all very angry, for they feared he might string the bow,Antinous therefore rebuked him fiercely saying, “Wretched creature, youhave not so much as a grain of sense in your whole body; you ought to thinkyourself lucky in being allowed to dine unharmed among your betters, withouthaving any smaller portion served you than we others have had, and in beingallowed to hear our conversation. No other beggar or stranger has been allowedto hear what we say among ourselves; the wine must have been doing you amischief, as it does with all those who drink immoderately. It was wine thatinflamed the Centaur Eurytion when he was staying with Peirithous among theLapithae. When the wine had got into his head, he went mad and did ill deedsabout the house of Peirithous; this angered the heroes who were thereassembled, so they rushed at him and cut off his ears and nostrils; then theydragged him through the doorway out of the house, so he went away crazed, andbore the burden of his crime, bereft of understanding. Henceforth, therefore,there was war between mankind and the centaurs, but he brought it upon himselfthrough his own drunkenness. In like manner I can tell you that it will gohardly with you if you string the bow: you will find no mercy from any onehere, for we shall at once ship you off to king Echetus, who kills every onethat comes near him: you will never get away alive, so drink and keep quietwithout getting into a quarrel with men younger than yourself.”Penelope then spoke to him. “Antinous,” said she, “it is notright that you should ill-treat any guest of Telemachus who comes to thishouse. If the stranger should prove strong enough to string the mighty bow ofUlysses, can you suppose that he would take me home with him and make me hiswife? Even the man himself can have no such idea in his mind: none of you needlet that disturb his feasting; it would be out of all reason.”“Queen Penelope,” answered Eurymachus, “we do not supposethat this man will take you away with him; it is impossible; but we are afraidlest some of the baser sort, men or women among the Achaeans, should gogossiping about and say, ‘These suitors are a feeble folk; they arepaying court to the wife of a brave man whose bow not one of them was able tostring, and yet a beggarly tramp who came to the house strung it at once andsent an arrow through the iron.’ This is what will be said, and it willbe a scandal against us.”“Eurymachus,” Penelope answered, “people who persist ineating up the estate of a great chieftain and dishonouring his house must notexpect others to think well of them. Why then should you mind if men talk asyou think they will? This stranger is strong and well-built, he says moreoverthat he is of noble birth. Give him the bow, and let us see whether he canstring it or no. I say—and it shall surely be—that if Apollovouchsafes him the glory of stringing it, I will give him a cloak and shirt ofgood wear, with a javelin to keep off dogs and robbers, and a sharp sword. Iwill also give him sandals, and will see him sent safely wherever he wants togo.”Then Telemachus said, “Mother, I am the only man either in Ithaca or inthe islands that are over against Elis who has the right to let any one havethe bow or to refuse it. No one shall force me one way or the other, not eventhough I choose to make the stranger a present of the bow outright, and let himtake it away with him. Go, then, within the house and busy yourself with yourdaily duties, your loom, your distaff, and the ordering of your servants. Thisbow is a man’s matter, and mine above all others, for it is I who ammaster here.”She went wondering back into the house, and laid her son’s saying in herheart. Then going upstairs with her handmaids into her room, she mourned herdear husband till Minerva sent sweet sleep over her eyelids.The swineherd now took up the bow and was for taking it to Ulysses, but thesuitors clamoured at him from all parts of the cloisters, and one of them said,“You idiot, where are you taking the bow to? Are you out of your wits? IfApollo and the other gods will grant our prayer, your own boarhounds shall getyou into some quiet little place, and worry you to death.”Eumaeus was frightened at the outcry they all raised, so he put the bow downthen and there, but Telemachus shouted out at him from the other side of thecloisters, and threatened him saying, “Father Eumaeus, bring the bow onin spite of them, or young as I am I will pelt you with stones back to thecountry, for I am the better man of the two. I wish I was as much stronger thanall the other suitors in the house as I am than you, I would soon send some ofthem off sick and sorry, for they mean mischief.”Thus did he speak, and they all of them laughed heartily, which put them in abetter humour with Telemachus; so Eumaeus brought the bow on and placed it inthe hands of Ulysses. When he had done this, he called Euryclea apart and saidto her, “Euryclea, Telemachus says you are to close the doors of thewomen’s apartments. If they hear any groaning or uproar as of menfighting about the house, they are not to come out, but are to keep quiet andstay where they are at their work.”Euryclea did as she was told and closed the doors of the women’sapartments.Meanwhile Philoetius slipped quietly out and made fast the gates of the outercourt. There was a ship’s cable of byblus fibre lying in the gatehouse,so he made the gates fast with it and then came in again, resuming the seatthat he had left, and keeping an eye on Ulysses, who had now got the bow in hishands, and was turning it every way about, and proving it all over to seewhether the worms had been eating into its two horns during his absence. Thenwould one turn towards his neighbour saying, “This is some tricky oldbow-fancier; either he has got one like it at home, or he wants to make one, insuch workmanlike style does the old vagabond handle it.”Another said, “I hope he may be no more successful in other things thanhe is likely to be in stringing this bow.”But Ulysses, when he had taken it up and examined it all over, strung it aseasily as a skilled bard strings a new peg of his lyre and makes the twistedgut fast at both ends. Then he took it in his right hand to prove the string,and it sang sweetly under his touch like the twittering of a swallow. Thesuitors were dismayed, and turned colour as they heard it; at that moment,moreover, Jove thundered loudly as a sign, and the heart of Ulysses rejoiced ashe heard the omen that the son of scheming Saturn had sent him.He took an arrow that was lying upon the table[165]—for those which the Achaeanswere so shortly about to taste were all inside the quiver—he laid it onthe centre-piece of the bow, and drew the notch of the arrow and the stringtoward him, still seated on his seat. When he had taken aim he let fly, and hisarrow pierced every one of the handle-holes of the axes from the first onwardstill it had gone right through them, and into the outer courtyard. Then he saidto Telemachus:“Your guest has not disgraced you, Telemachus. I did not miss what Iaimed at, and I was not long in stringing my bow. I am still strong, and not asthe suitors twit me with being. Now, however, it is time for the Achaeans toprepare supper while there is still daylight, and then otherwise to disportthemselves with song and dance which are the crowning ornaments of abanquet.”As he spoke he made a sign with his eyebrows, and Telemachus girded on hissword, grasped his spear, and stood armed beside his father’s seat.BOOK XXIITHE KILLING OF THE SUITORS—THE MAIDS WHO HAVE MISCONDUCTED THEMSELVES AREMADE TO CLEANSE THE CLOISTERS AND ARE THEN HANGED.Then Ulysses tore off his rags, and sprang on to the broad pavement with hisbow and his quiver full of arrows. He shed the arrows on to the ground at hisfeet and said, “The mighty contest is at an end. I will now see whetherApollo will vouchsafe it to me to hit another mark which no man has yethit.”On this he aimed a deadly arrow at Antinous, who was about to take up atwo-handled gold cup to drink his wine and already had it in his hands. He hadno thought of death—who amongst all the revellers would think that oneman, however brave, would stand alone among so many and kill him? The arrowstruck Antinous in the throat, and the point went clean through his neck, sothat he fell over and the cup dropped from his hand, while a thick stream ofblood gushed from his nostrils. He kicked the table from him and upset thethings on it, so that the bread and roasted meats were all soiled as they fellover on to the ground.[166] The suitors were in an uproar whenthey saw that a man had been hit; they sprang in dismay one and all of themfrom their seats and looked everywhere towards the walls, but there was neithershield nor spear, and they rebuked Ulysses very angrily.“Stranger,” said they, “you shall pay for shooting people inthis way: you shall see no other contest; you are a doomed man; he whom youhave slain was the foremost youth in Ithaca, and the vultures shall devour youfor having killed him.”Thus they spoke, for they thought that he had killed Antinous by mistake, anddid not perceive that death was hanging over the head of every one of them. ButUlysses glared at them and said:“Dogs, did you think that I should not come back from Troy? You havewasted my substance,[167] have forced my women servants tolie with you, and have wooed my wife while I was still living. You have fearedneither God nor man, and now you shall die.”They turned pale with fear as he spoke, and every man looked round about to seewhither he might fly for safety, but Eurymachus alone spoke.“If you are Ulysses,” said he, “then what you have said isjust. We have done much wrong on your lands and in your house. But Antinous whowas the head and front of the offending lies low already. It was all his doing.It was not that he wanted to marry Penelope; he did not so much care aboutthat; what he wanted was something quite different, and Jove has not vouchsafedit to him; he wanted to kill your son and to be chief man in Ithaca. Now,therefore, that he has met the death which was his due, spare the lives of yourpeople. We will make everything good among ourselves, and pay you in full forall that we have eaten and drunk. Each one of us shall pay you a fine worthtwenty oxen, and we will keep on giving you gold and bronze till your heart issoftened. Until we have done this no one can complain of your being enragedagainst us.”Ulysses again glared at him and said, “Though you should give me all thatyou have in the world both now and all that you ever shall have, I will notstay my hand till I have paid all of you in full. You must fight, or fly foryour lives; and fly, not a man of you shall.”Their hearts sank as they heard him, but Eurymachus again spoke saying:“My friends, this man will give us no quarter. He will stand where he isand shoot us down till he has killed every man among us. Let us then showfight; draw your swords, and hold up the tables to shield you from his arrows.Let us have at him with a rush, to drive him from the pavement and doorway: wecan then get through into the town, and raise such an alarm as shall soon stayhis shooting.”As he spoke he drew his keen blade of bronze, sharpened on both sides, and witha loud cry sprang towards Ulysses, but Ulysses instantly shot an arrow into hisbreast that caught him by the nipple and fixed itself in his liver. He droppedhis sword and fell doubled up over his table. The cup and all the meats wentover on to the ground as he smote the earth with his forehead in the agonies ofdeath, and he kicked the stool with his feet until his eyes were closed indarkness.Then Amphinomus drew his sword and made straight at Ulysses to try and get himaway from the door; but Telemachus was too quick for him, and struck him frombehind; the spear caught him between the shoulders and went right through hischest, so that he fell heavily to the ground and struck the earth with hisforehead. Then Telemachus sprang away from him, leaving his spear still in thebody, for he feared that if he stayed to draw it out, some one of the Achaeansmight come up and hack at him with his sword, or knock him down, so he set offat a run, and immediately was at his father’s side. Then he said:“Father, let me bring you a shield, two spears, and a brass helmet foryour temples. I will arm myself as well, and will bring other armour for theswineherd and the stockman, for we had better be armed.”“Run and fetch them,” answered Ulysses, “while my arrows holdout, or when I am alone they may get me away from the door.”Telemachus did as his father said, and went off to the store room where thearmour was kept. He chose four shields, eight spears, and four brass helmetswith horse-hair plumes. He brought them with all speed to his father, and armedhimself first, while the stockman and the swineherd also put on their armour,and took their places near Ulysses. Meanwhile Ulysses, as long as his arrowslasted, had been shooting the suitors one by one, and they fell thick on oneanother: when his arrows gave out, he set the bow to stand against the end wallof the house by the door post, and hung a shield four hides thick about hisshoulders; on his comely head he set his helmet, well wrought with a crest ofhorse-hair that nodded menacingly above it,[168] and he grasped two redoubtablebronze-shod spears.Now there was a trap door[169] on the wall, while at one end ofthe pavement[170]there was an exit leading to a narrow passage, and this exit was closed by awell-made door. Ulysses told Philoetius to stand by this door and guard it, foronly one person could attack it at a time. But Agelaus shouted out,“Cannot some one go up to the trap door and tell the people what is goingon? Help would come at once, and we should soon make an end of this man and hisshooting.”“This may not be, Agelaus,” answered Melanthius, “the mouthof the narrow passage is dangerously near the entrance to the outer court. Onebrave man could prevent any number from getting in. But I know what I will do,I will bring you arms from the store-room, for I am sure it is there thatUlysses and his son have put them.”On this the goatherd Melanthius went by back passages to the store-room ofUlysses’ house. There he chose twelve shields, with as many helmets andspears, and brought them back as fast as he could to give them to the suitors.Ulysses’ heart began to fail him when he saw the suitors[171] putting ontheir armour and brandishing their spears. He saw the greatness of the danger,and said to Telemachus, “Some one of the women inside is helping thesuitors against us, or it may be Melanthius.”Telemachus answered, “The fault, father, is mine, and mine only; I leftthe store room door open, and they have kept a sharper look out than I have.Go, Eumaeus, put the door to, and see whether it is one of the women who isdoing this, or whether, as I suspect, it is Melanthius the son ofDolius.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Melanthius was again going to the store roomto fetch more armour, but the swineherd saw him and said to Ulysses who wasbeside him, “Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, it is that scoundrelMelanthius, just as we suspected, who is going to the store room. Say, shall Ikill him, if I can get the better of him, or shall I bring him here that youmay take your own revenge for all the many wrongs that he has done in yourhouse?”Ulysses answered, “Telemachus and I will hold these suitors in check, nomatter what they do; go back both of you and bind Melanthius’ hands andfeet behind him. Throw him into the store room and make the door fast behindyou; then fasten a noose about his body, and string him close up to the raftersfrom a high bearing-post,[172] that he may linger on in anagony.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said; they went to the storeroom, which they entered before Melanthius saw them, for he was busy searchingfor arms in the innermost part of the room, so the two took their stand oneither side of the door and waited. By and by Melanthius came out with a helmetin one hand, and an old dry-rotted shield in the other, which had been borne byLaertes when he was young, but which had been long since thrown aside, and thestraps had become unsewn; on this the two seized him, dragged him back by thehair, and threw him struggling to the ground. They bent his hands and feet wellbehind his back, and bound them tight with a painful bond as Ulysses had toldthem; then they fastened a noose about his body and strung him up from a highpillar till he was close up to the rafters, and over him did you then vaunt, Oswineherd Eumaeus saying, “Melanthius, you will pass the night on a softbed as you deserve. You will know very well when morning comes from the streamsof Oceanus, and it is time for you to be driving in your goats for the suitorsto feast on.”There, then, they left him in very cruel bondage, and having put on theirarmour they closed the door behind them and went back to take their places bythe side of Ulysses; whereon the four men stood in the cloister, fierce andfull of fury; nevertheless, those who were in the body of the court were stillboth brave and many. Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, havingassumed the voice and form of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her andsaid, “Mentor, lend me your help, and forget not your old comrade, northe many good turns he has done you. Besides, you are my age-mate.”But all the time he felt sure it was Minerva, and the suitors from the otherside raised an uproar when they saw her. Agelaus was the first to reproach her.“Mentor,” he cried, “do not let Ulysses beguile you intosiding with him and fighting the suitors. This is what we will do: when we havekilled these people, father and son, we will kill you too. You shall pay for itwith your head, and when we have killed you, we will take all you have, indoors or out, and bring it into hotch-pot with Ulysses’ property; we willnot let your sons live in your house, nor your daughters, nor shall your widowcontinue to live in the city of Ithaca.”This made Minerva still more furious, so she scolded Ulysses very angrily.[173]“Ulysses,” said she, “your strength and prowess are no longerwhat they were when you fought for nine long years among the Trojans about thenoble lady Helen. You killed many a man in those days, and it was through yourstratagem that Priam’s city was taken. How comes it that you are solamentably less valiant now that you are on your own ground, face to face withthe suitors in your own house? Come on, my good fellow, stand by my side andsee how Mentor, son of Alcimus shall fight your foes and requite yourkindnesses conferred upon him.”But she would not give him full victory as yet, for she wished still further toprove his own prowess and that of his brave son, so she flew up to one of therafters in the roof of the cloister and sat upon it in the form of a swallow.Meanwhile Agelaus son of Damastor, Eurynomus, Amphimedon, Demoptolemus,Pisander, and Polybus son of Polyctor bore the brunt of the fight upon thesuitors’ side; of all those who were still fighting for their lives theywere by far the most valiant, for the others had already fallen under thearrows of Ulysses. Agelaus shouted to them and said, “My friends, he willsoon have to leave off, for Mentor has gone away after having done nothing forhim but brag. They are standing at the doors unsupported. Do not aim at him allat once, but six of you throw your spears first, and see if you cannot coveryourselves with glory by killing him. When he has fallen we need not be uneasyabout the others.”They threw their spears as he bade them, but Minerva made them all of noeffect. One hit the door post; another went against the door; the pointed shaftof another struck the wall; and as soon as they had avoided all the spears ofthe suitors Ulysses said to his own men, “My friends, I should say we toohad better let drive into the middle of them, or they will crown all the harmthey have done us by killing us outright.”They therefore aimed straight in front of them and threw their spears. Ulysseskilled Demoptolemus, Telemachus Euryades, Eumaeus Elatus, while the stockmankilled Pisander. These all bit the dust, and as the others drew back into acorner Ulysses and his men rushed forward and regained their spears by drawingthem from the bodies of the dead.The suitors now aimed a second time, but again Minerva made their weapons forthe most part without effect. One hit a bearing-post of the cloister; anotherwent against the door; while the pointed shaft of another struck the wall.Still, Amphimedon just took a piece of the top skin from off Telemachus’swrist, and Ctesippus managed to graze Eumaeus’s shoulder above hisshield; but the spear went on and fell to the ground. Then Ulysses and his menlet drive into the crowd of suitors. Ulysses hit Eurydamas, TelemachusAmphimedon, and Eumaeus Polybus. After this the stockman hit Ctesippus in thebreast, and taunted him saying, “Foul-mouthed son of Polytherses, do notbe so foolish as to talk wickedly another time, but let heaven direct yourspeech, for the gods are far stronger than men. I make you a present of thisadvice to repay you for the foot which you gave Ulysses when he was beggingabout in his own house.”Thus spoke the stockman, and Ulysses struck the son of Damastor with a spear inclose fight, while Telemachus hit Leocritus son of Evenor in the belly, and thedart went clean through him, so that he fell forward full on his face upon theground. Then Minerva from her seat on the rafter held up her deadly aegis, andthe hearts of the suitors quailed. They fled to the other end of the court likea herd of cattle maddened by the gadfly in early summer when the days are attheir longest. As eagle-beaked, crook-taloned vultures from the mountains swoopdown on the smaller birds that cower in flocks upon the ground, and kill them,for they cannot either fight or fly, and lookers on enjoy the sport—evenso did Ulysses and his men fall upon the suitors and smite them on every side.They made a horrible groaning as their brains were being battered in, and theground seethed with their blood.Leiodes then caught the knees of Ulysses and said, “Ulysses I beseech youhave mercy upon me and spare me. I never wronged any of the women in your houseeither in word or deed, and I tried to stop the others. I saw them, but theywould not listen, and now they are paying for their folly. I was theirsacrificing priest; if you kill me, I shall die without having done anything todeserve it, and shall have got no thanks for all the good that I did.”Ulysses looked sternly at him and answered, “If you were theirsacrificing priest, you must have prayed many a time that it might be longbefore I got home again, and that you might marry my wife and have children byher. Therefore you shall die.”With these words he picked up the sword that Agelaus had dropped when he wasbeing killed, and which was lying upon the ground. Then he struck Leiodes onthe back of his neck, so that his head fell rolling in the dust while he wasyet speaking.The minstrel Phemius son of Terpes—he who had been forced by the suitorsto sing to them—now tried to save his life. He was standing near towardsthe trap door,[174] and held his lyre in his hand. Hedid not know whether to fly out of the cloister and sit down by the altar ofJove that was in the outer court, and on which both Laertes and Ulysses hadoffered up the thigh bones of many an ox, or whether to go straight up toUlysses and embrace his knees, but in the end he deemed it best to embraceUlysses’ knees. So he laid his lyre on the ground between the mixing bowl[175] and thesilver-studded seat; then going up to Ulysses he caught hold of his knees andsaid, “Ulysses, I beseech you have mercy on me and spare me. You will besorry for it afterwards if you kill a bard who can sing both for gods and menas I can. I make all my lays myself, and heaven visits me with every kind ofinspiration. I would sing to you as though you were a god, do not therefore bein such a hurry to cut my head off. Your own son Telemachus will tell you thatI did not want to frequent your house and sing to the suitors after theirmeals, but they were too many and too strong for me, so they made me.”Telemachus heard him, and at once went up to his father. “Hold!” hecried, “the man is guiltless, do him no hurt; and we will spare Medontoo, who was always good to me when I was a boy, unless Philoetius or Eumaeushas already killed him, or he has fallen in your way when you were raging aboutthe court.”Medon caught these words of Telemachus, for he was crouching under a seatbeneath which he had hidden by covering himself up with a freshly flayedheifer’s hide, so he threw off the hide, went up to Telemachus, and laidhold of his knees.“Here I am, my dear sir,” said he, “stay your hand therefore,and tell your father, or he will kill me in his rage against the suitors forhaving wasted his substance and been so foolishly disrespectful toyourself.”Ulysses smiled at him and answered, “Fear not; Telemachus has saved yourlife, that you may know in future, and tell other people, how greatly bettergood deeds prosper than evil ones. Go, therefore, outside the cloisters intothe outer court, and be out of the way of the slaughter—you and thebard—while I finish my work here inside.”The pair went into the outer court as fast as they could, and sat down byJove’s great altar, looking fearfully round, and still expecting thatthey would be killed. Then Ulysses searched the whole court carefully over, tosee if anyone had managed to hide himself and was still living, but he foundthem all lying in the dust and weltering in their blood. They were like fisheswhich fishermen have netted out of the sea, and thrown upon the beach to liegasping for water till the heat of the sun makes an end of them. Even so werethe suitors lying all huddled up one against the other.Then Ulysses said to Telemachus, “Call nurse Euryclea; I have somethingto say to her.”Telemachus went and knocked at the door of the women’s room. “Makehaste,” said he, “you old woman who have been set over all theother women in the house. Come outside; my father wishes to speak toyou.”When Euryclea heard this she unfastened the door of the women’s room andcame out, following Telemachus. She found Ulysses among the corpses bespatteredwith blood and filth like a lion that has just been devouring an ox, and hisbreast and both his cheeks are all bloody, so that he is a fearful sight; evenso was Ulysses besmirched from head to foot with gore. When she saw all thecorpses and such a quantity of blood, she was beginning to cry out for joy, forshe saw that a great deed had been done; but Ulysses checked her, “Oldwoman,” said he, “rejoice in silence; restrain yourself, and do notmake any noise about it; it is an unholy thing to vaunt over dead men.Heaven’s doom and their own evil deeds have brought these men todestruction, for they respected no man in the whole world, neither rich norpoor, who came near them, and they have come to a bad end as a punishment fortheir wickedness and folly. Now, however, tell me which of the women in thehouse have misconducted themselves, and who are innocent.”[176]“I will tell you the truth, my son,” answered Euryclea.“There are fifty women in the house whom we teach to do things, such ascarding wool, and all kinds of household work. Of these, twelve in all[177] havemisbehaved, and have been wanting in respect to me, and also to Penelope. Theyshowed no disrespect to Telemachus, for he has only lately grown and his mothernever permitted him to give orders to the female servants; but let me goupstairs and tell your wife all that has happened, for some god has beensending her to sleep.”“Do not wake her yet,” answered Ulysses, “but tell the womenwho have misconducted themselves to come to me.”Euryclea left the cloister to tell the women, and make them come to Ulysses; inthe meantime he called Telemachus, the stockman, and the swineherd.“Begin,” said he, “to remove the dead, and make the womenhelp you. Then, get sponges and clean water to swill down the tables and seats.When you have thoroughly cleansed the whole cloisters, take the women into thespace between the domed room and the wall of the outer court, and run themthrough with your swords till they are quite dead, and have forgotten all aboutlove and the way in which they used to lie in secret with the suitors.”On this the women came down in a body, weeping and wailing bitterly. First theycarried the dead bodies out, and propped them up against one another in thegatehouse. Ulysses ordered them about and made them do their work quickly, sothey had to carry the bodies out. When they had done this, they cleaned all thetables and seats with sponges and water, while Telemachus and the two othersshovelled up the blood and dirt from the ground, and the women carried it allaway and put it out of doors. Then when they had made the whole place quiteclean and orderly, they took the women out and hemmed them in the narrow spacebetween the wall of the domed room and that of the yard, so that they could notget away: and Telemachus said to the other two, “I shall not let thesewomen die a clean death, for they were insolent to me and my mother, and usedto sleep with the suitors.”So saying he made a ship’s cable fast to one of the bearing-posts thatsupported the roof of the domed room, and secured it all around the building,at a good height, lest any of the women’s feet should touch the ground;and as thrushes or doves beat against a net that has been set for them in athicket just as they were getting to their nest, and a terrible fate awaitsthem, even so did the women have to put their heads in nooses one after theother and die most miserably.[178] Their feet moved convulsively for awhile, but not for very long.As for Melanthius, they took him through the cloister into the inner court.There they cut off his nose and his ears; they drew out his vitals and gavethem to the dogs raw, and then in their fury they cut off his hands and hisfeet.When they had done this they washed their hands and feet and went back into thehouse, for all was now over; and Ulysses said to the dear old nurse Euryclea,“Bring me sulphur, which cleanses all pollution, and fetch fire also thatI may burn it, and purify the cloisters. Go, moreover, and tell Penelope tocome here with her attendants, and also all the maidservants that are in thehouse.”“All that you have said is true,” answered Euryclea, “but letme bring you some clean clothes—a shirt and cloak. Do not keep these ragson your back any longer. It is not right.”“First light me a fire,” replied Ulysses.She brought the fire and sulphur, as he had bidden her, and Ulysses thoroughlypurified the cloisters and both the inner and outer courts. Then she wentinside to call the women and tell them what had happened; whereon they camefrom their apartment with torches in their hands, and pressed round Ulysses toembrace him, kissing his head and shoulders and taking hold of his hands. Itmade him feel as if he should like to weep, for he remembered every one ofthem.[179]BOOK XXIIIPENELOPE EVENTUALLY RECOGNISES HER HUSBAND—EARLY IN THE MORNING ULYSSES,TELEMACHUS, EUMAEUS, AND PHILOETIUS LEAVE THE TOWN.Euryclea now went upstairs laughing to tell her mistress that her dear husbandhad come home. Her aged knees became young again and her feet were nimble forjoy as she went up to her mistress and bent over her head to speak to her.“Wake up Penelope, my dear child,” she exclaimed, “and seewith your own eyes something that you have been wanting this long time past.Ulysses has at last indeed come home again, and has killed the suitors who weregiving so much trouble in his house, eating up his estate and ill treating hisson.”“My good nurse,” answered Penelope, “you must be mad. Thegods sometimes send some very sensible people out of their minds, and makefoolish people become sensible. This is what they must have been doing to you;for you always used to be a reasonable person. Why should you thus mock me whenI have trouble enough already—talking such nonsense, and waking me up outof a sweet sleep that had taken possession of my eyes and closed them? I havenever slept so soundly from the day my poor husband went to that city with theill-omened name. Go back again into the women’s room; if it had been anyone else who had woke me up to bring me such absurd news I should have sent heraway with a severe scolding. As it is your age shall protect you.”“My dear child,” answered Euryclea, “I am not mocking you. Itis quite true as I tell you that Ulysses is come home again. He was thestranger whom they all kept on treating so badly in the cloister. Telemachusknew all the time that he was come back, but kept his father’s secretthat he might have his revenge on all these wicked people.”Then Penelope sprang up from her couch, threw her arms round Euryclea, and weptfor joy. “But my dear nurse,” said she, “explain this to me;if he has really come home as you say, how did he manage to overcome the wickedsuitors single handed, seeing what a number of them there always were?”“I was not there,” answered Euryclea, “and do not know; Ionly heard them groaning while they were being killed. We sat crouching andhuddled up in a corner of the women’s room with the doors closed, tillyour son came to fetch me because his father sent him. Then I found Ulyssesstanding over the corpses that were lying on the ground all round him, one ontop of the other. You would have enjoyed it if you could have seen him standingthere all bespattered with blood and filth, and looking just like a lion. Butthe corpses are now all piled up in the gatehouse that is in the outer court,and Ulysses has lit a great fire to purify the house with sulphur. He has sentme to call you, so come with me that you may both be happy together after all;for now at last the desire of your heart has been fulfilled; your husband iscome home to find both wife and son alive and well, and to take his revenge inhis own house on the suitors who behaved so badly to him.”“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “do not exult too confidentlyover all this. You know how delighted every one would be to see Ulysses comehome—more particularly myself, and the son who has been born to both ofus; but what you tell me cannot be really true. It is some god who is angrywith the suitors for their great wickedness, and has made an end of them; forthey respected no man in the whole world, neither rich nor poor, who came nearthem, and they have come to a bad end in consequence of their iniquity; Ulyssesis dead far away from the Achaean land; he will never return home again.”Then nurse Euryclea said, “My child, what are you talking about? but youwere all hard of belief and have made up your mind that your husband is nevercoming, although he is in the house and by his own fire side at this verymoment. Besides I can give you another proof; when I was washing him Iperceived the scar which the wild boar gave him, and I wanted to tell you aboutit, but in his wisdom he would not let me, and clapped his hands over my mouth;so come with me and I will make this bargain with you—if I am deceivingyou, you may have me killed by the most cruel death you can think of.”“My dear nurse,” said Penelope, “however wise you may be youcan hardly fathom the counsels of the gods. Nevertheless, we will go in searchof my son, that I may see the corpses of the suitors, and the man who haskilled them.”On this she came down from her upper room, and while doing so she consideredwhether she should keep at a distance from her husband and question him, orwhether she should at once go up to him and embrace him. When, however, she hadcrossed the stone floor of the cloister, she sat down opposite Ulysses by thefire, against the wall at right angles[180] [to that by which she had entered],while Ulysses sat near one of the bearing-posts, looking upon the ground, andwaiting to see what his brave wife would say to him when she saw him. For along time she sat silent and as one lost in amazement. At one moment she lookedhim full in the face, but then again directly, she was misled by his shabbyclothes and failed to recognise him,[181] till Telemachus began to reproachher and said:“Mother—but you are so hard that I cannot call you by such aname—why do you keep away from my father in this way? Why do you not sitby his side and begin talking to him and asking him questions? No other womancould bear to keep away from her husband when he had come back to her aftertwenty years of absence, and after having gone through so much; but your heartalways was as hard as a stone.”Penelope answered, “My son, I am so lost in astonishment that I can findno words in which either to ask questions or to answer them. I cannot even lookhim straight in the face. Still, if he really is Ulysses come back to his ownhome again, we shall get to understand one another better by and by, for thereare tokens with which we two are alone acquainted, and which are hidden fromall others.”Ulysses smiled at this, and said to Telemachus, “Let your mother put meto any proof she likes; she will make up her mind about it presently. Sherejects me for the moment and believes me to be somebody else, because I amcovered with dirt and have such bad clothes on; let us, however, consider whatwe had better do next. When one man has killed another—even though he wasnot one who would leave many friends to take up his quarrel—the man whohas killed him must still say good bye to his friends and fly the country;whereas we have been killing the stay of a whole town, and all the picked youthof Ithaca. I would have you consider this matter.”“Look to it yourself, father,” answered Telemachus, “for theysay you are the wisest counsellor in the world, and that there is no othermortal man who can compare with you. We will follow you with right good will,nor shall you find us fail you in so far as our strength holds out.”“I will say what I think will be best,” answered Ulysses.“First wash and put your shirts on; tell the maids also to go to theirown room and dress; Phemius shall then strike up a dance tune on his lyre, sothat if people outside hear, or any of the neighbours, or some one going alongthe street happens to notice it, they may think there is a wedding in thehouse, and no rumours about the death of the suitors will get about in thetown, before we can escape to the woods upon my own land. Once there, we willsettle which of the courses heaven vouchsafes us shall seem wisest.”Thus did he speak, and they did even as he had said. First they washed and puttheir shirts on, while the women got ready. Then Phemius took his lyre and setthem all longing for sweet song and stately dance. The house re-echoed with thesound of men and women dancing, and the people outside said, “I supposethe queen has been getting married at last. She ought to be ashamed of herselffor not continuing to protect her husband’s property until he comeshome.”[182]This was what they said, but they did not know what it was that had beenhappening. The upper servant Eurynome washed and anointed Ulysses in his ownhouse and gave him a shirt and cloak, while Minerva made him look taller andstronger than before; she also made the hair grow thick on the top of his head,and flow down in curls like hyacinth blossoms; she glorified him about the headand shoulders just as a skilful workman who has studied art of all kinds underVulcan or Minerva—and his work is full of beauty—enriches a pieceof silver plate by gilding it. He came from the bath looking like one of theimmortals, and sat down opposite his wife on the seat he had left. “Mydear,” said he, “heaven has endowed you with a heart moreunyielding than woman ever yet had. No other woman could bear to keep away fromher husband when he had come back to her after twenty years of absence, andafter having gone through so much. But come, nurse, get a bed ready for me; Iwill sleep alone, for this woman has a heart as hard as iron.”“My dear,” answered Penelope, “I have no wish to set myselfup, nor to depreciate you; but I am not struck by your appearance, for I verywell remember what kind of a man you were when you set sail from Ithaca.Nevertheless, Euryclea, take his bed outside the bed chamber that he himselfbuilt. Bring the bed outside this room, and put bedding upon it with fleeces,good coverlets, and blankets.”She said this to try him, but Ulysses was very angry and said, “Wife, Iam much displeased at what you have just been saying. Who has been taking mybed from the place in which I left it? He must have found it a hard task, nomatter how skilled a workman he was, unless some god came and helped him toshift it. There is no man living, however strong and in his prime, who couldmove it from its place, for it is a marvellous curiosity which I made with myvery own hands. There was a young olive growing within the precincts of thehouse, in full vigour, and about as thick as a bearing-post. I built my roomround this with strong walls of stone and a roof to cover them, and I made thedoors strong and well-fitting. Then I cut off the top boughs of the olive treeand left the stump standing. This I dressed roughly from the root upwards andthen worked with carpenter’s tools well and skilfully, straightening mywork by drawing a line on the wood, and making it into a bed-prop. I then boreda hole down the middle, and made it the centre-post of my bed, at which Iworked till I had finished it, inlaying it with gold and silver; after this Istretched a hide of crimson leather from one side of it to the other. So yousee I know all about it, and I desire to learn whether it is still there, orwhether any one has been removing it by cutting down the olive tree at itsroots.”When she heard the sure proofs Ulysses now gave her, she fairly broke down. Sheflew weeping to his side, flung her arms about his neck, and kissed him.“Do not be angry with me Ulysses,” she cried, “you, who arethe wisest of mankind. We have suffered, both of us. Heaven has denied us thehappiness of spending our youth, and of growing old, together; do not then beaggrieved or take it amiss that I did not embrace you thus as soon as I sawyou. I have been shuddering all the time through fear that someone might comehere and deceive me with a lying story; for there are many very wicked peoplegoing about. Jove’s daughter Helen would never have yielded herself to aman from a foreign country, if she had known that the sons of Achaeans wouldcome after her and bring her back. Heaven put it in her heart to do wrong, andshe gave no thought to that sin, which has been the source of all our sorrows.Now, however, that you have convinced me by showing that you know all about ourbed (which no human being has ever seen but you and I and a single maidservant,the daughter of Actor, who was given me by my father on my marriage, and whokeeps the doors of our room) hard of belief though I have been I can mistrustno longer.”Then Ulysses in his turn melted, and wept as he clasped his dear and faithfulwife to his bosom. As the sight of land is welcome to men who are swimmingtowards the shore, when Neptune has wrecked their ship with the fury of hiswinds and waves; a few alone reach the land, and these, covered with brine, arethankful when they find themselves on firm ground and out of danger—evenso was her husband welcome to her as she looked upon him, and she could nottear her two fair arms from about his neck. Indeed they would have gone onindulging their sorrow till rosy-fingered morn appeared, had not Minervadetermined otherwise, and held night back in the far west, while she would notsuffer Dawn to leave Oceanus, nor to yoke the two steeds Lampus and Phaethonthat bear her onward to break the day upon mankind.At last, however, Ulysses said, “Wife, we have not yet reached the end ofour troubles. I have an unknown amount of toil still to undergo. It is long anddifficult, but I must go through with it, for thus the shade of Teiresiasprophesied concerning me, on the day when I went down into Hades to ask aboutmy return and that of my companions. But now let us go to bed, that we may liedown and enjoy the blessed boon of sleep.”“You shall go to bed as soon as you please,” replied Penelope,“now that the gods have sent you home to your own good house and to yourcountry. But as heaven has put it in your mind to speak of it, tell me aboutthe task that lies before you. I shall have to hear about it later, so it isbetter that I should be told at once.”“My dear,” answered Ulysses, “why should you press me to tellyou? Still, I will not conceal it from you, though you will not like it. I donot like it myself, for Teiresias bade me travel far and wide, carrying an oar,till I came to a country where the people have never heard of the sea, and donot even mix salt with their food. They know nothing about ships, nor oars thatare as the wings of a ship. He gave me this certain token which I will not hidefrom you. He said that a wayfarer should meet me and ask me whether it was awinnowing shovel that I had on my shoulder. On this, I was to fix my oar in theground and sacrifice a ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune; after which I was togo home and offer hecatombs to all the gods in heaven, one after the other. Asfor myself, he said that death should come to me from the sea, and that my lifeshould ebb away very gently when I was full of years and peace of mind, and mypeople should bless me. All this, he said, should surely come to pass.”And Penelope said, “If the gods are going to vouchsafe you a happier timein your old age, you may hope then to have some respite from misfortune.”Thus did they converse. Meanwhile Eurynome and the nurse took torches and madethe bed ready with soft coverlets; as soon as they had laid them, the nursewent back into the house to go to her rest, leaving the bed chamber womanEurynome[183] toshow Ulysses and Penelope to bed by torch light. When she had conducted them totheir room she went back, and they then came joyfully to the rites of their ownold bed. Telemachus, Philoetius, and the swineherd now left off dancing, andmade the women leave off also. They then laid themselves down to sleep in thecloisters.When Ulysses and Penelope had had their fill of love they fell talking with oneanother. She told him how much she had had to bear in seeing the house filledwith a crowd of wicked suitors who had killed so many sheep and oxen on heraccount, and had drunk so many casks of wine. Ulysses in his turn told her whathe had suffered, and how much trouble he had himself given to other people. Hetold her everything, and she was so delighted to listen that she never went tosleep till he had ended his whole story.He began with his victory over the Cicons, and how he thence reached thefertile land of the Lotus-eaters. He told her all about the Cyclops and how hehad punished him for having so ruthlessly eaten his brave comrades; how he thenwent on to Aeolus, who received him hospitably and furthered him on his way,but even so he was not to reach home, for to his great grief a hurricanecarried him out to sea again; how he went on to the Laestrygonian cityTelepylos, where the people destroyed all his ships with their crews, savehimself and his own ship only. Then he told of cunning Circe and her craft, andhow he sailed to the chill house of Hades, to consult the ghost of the Thebanprophet Teiresias, and how he saw his old comrades in arms, and his mother whobore him and brought him up when he was a child; how he then heard the wondroussinging of the Sirens, and went on to the wandering rocks and terribleCharybdis and to Scylla, whom no man had ever yet passed in safety; how his menthen ate the cattle of the sun-god, and how Jove therefore struck the ship withhis thunderbolts, so that all his men perished together, himself alone beingleft alive; how at last he reached the Ogygian island and the nymph Calypso,who kept him there in a cave, and fed him, and wanted him to marry her, inwhich case she intended making him immortal so that he should never grow old,but she could not persuade him to let her do so; and how after much sufferinghe had found his way to the Phaeacians, who had treated him as though he hadbeen a god, and sent him back in a ship to his own country after having givenhim gold, bronze, and raiment in great abundance. This was the last thing aboutwhich he told her, for here a deep sleep took hold upon him and eased theburden of his sorrows.Then Minerva bethought her of another matter. When she deemed that Ulysses hadhad both of his wife and of repose, she bade gold-enthroned Dawn rise out ofOceanus that she might shed light upon mankind. On this, Ulysses rose from hiscomfortable bed and said to Penelope, “Wife, we have both of us had ourfull share of troubles, you, here, in lamenting my absence, and I in beingprevented from getting home though I was longing all the time to do so. Now,however, that we have at last come together, take care of the property that isin the house. As for the sheep and goats which the wicked suitors have eaten, Iwill take many myself by force from other people, and will compel the Achaeansto make good the rest till they shall have filled all my yards. I am now goingto the wooded lands out in the country to see my father who has so long beengrieved on my account, and to yourself I will give these instructions, thoughyou have little need of them. At sunrise it will at once get abroad that I havebeen killing the suitors; go upstairs, therefore,[184] and stay there with your women. Seenobody and ask no questions.”[185]As he spoke he girded on his armour. Then he roused Telemachus, Philoetius, andEumaeus, and told them all to put on their armour also. This they did, andarmed themselves. When they had done so, they opened the gates and salliedforth, Ulysses leading the way. It was now daylight, but Minerva neverthelessconcealed them in darkness and led them quickly out of the town.BOOK XXIVTHE GHOSTS OF THE SUITORS IN HADES—ULYSSES AND HIS MEN GO TO THE HOUSE OFLAERTES—THE PEOPLE OF ITHACA COME OUT TO ATTACK ULYSSES, BUT MINERVACONCLUDES A PEACE.Then Mercury of Cyllene summoned the ghosts of the suitors, and in his hand heheld the fair golden wand with which he seals men’s eyes in sleep orwakes them just as he pleases; with this he roused the ghosts and led them,while they followed whining and gibbering behind him. As bats fly squealing inthe hollow of some great cave, when one of them has fallen out of the clusterin which they hang, even so did the ghosts whine and squeal as Mercury thehealer of sorrow led them down into the dark abode of death. When they hadpassed the waters of Oceanus and the rock Leucas, they came to the gates of thesun and the land of dreams, whereon they reached the meadow of asphodel wheredwell the souls and shadows of them that can labour no more.Here they found the ghost of Achilles son of Peleus, with those of Patroclus,Antilochus, and Ajax, who was the finest and handsomest man of all the Danaansafter the son of Peleus himself.They gathered round the ghost of the son of Peleus, and the ghost of Agamemnonjoined them, sorrowing bitterly. Round him were gathered also the ghosts ofthose who had perished with him in the house of Aegisthus; and the ghost ofAchilles spoke first.“Son of Atreus,” it said, “we used to say that Jove had lovedyou better from first to last than any other hero, for you were captain overmany and brave men, when we were all fighting together before Troy; yet thehand of death, which no mortal can escape, was laid upon you all too early.Better for you had you fallen at Troy in the hey-day of your renown, for theAchaeans would have built a mound over your ashes, and your son would have beenheir to your good name, whereas it has now been your lot to come to a mostmiserable end.”“Happy son of Peleus,” answered the ghost of Agamemnon, “forhaving died at Troy far from Argos, while the bravest of the Trojans and theAchaeans fell round you fighting for your body. There you lay in the whirlingclouds of dust, all huge and hugely, heedless now of your chivalry. We foughtthe whole of the livelong day, nor should we ever have left off if Jove had notsent a hurricane to stay us. Then, when we had borne you to the ships out ofthe fray, we laid you on your bed and cleansed your fair skin with warm waterand with ointments. The Danaans tore their hair and wept bitterly round aboutyou. Your mother, when she heard, came with her immortal nymphs from out of thesea, and the sound of a great wailing went forth over the waters so that theAchaeans quaked for fear. They would have fled panic-stricken to their shipshad not wise old Nestor whose counsel was ever truest checked them saying,‘Hold, Argives, fly not sons of the Achaeans, this is his mother comingfrom the sea with her immortal nymphs to view the body of her son.’“Thus he spoke, and the Achaeans feared no more. The daughters of the oldman of the sea stood round you weeping bitterly, and clothed you in immortalraiment. The nine muses also came and lifted up their sweet voices inlament—calling and answering one another; there was not an Argive butwept for pity of the dirge they chaunted. Days and nights seven and ten wemourned you, mortals and immortals, but on the eighteenth day we gave you tothe flames, and many a fat sheep with many an ox did we slay in sacrificearound you. You were burnt in raiment of the gods, with rich resins and withhoney, while heroes, horse and foot, clashed their armour round the pile as youwere burning, with the tramp as of a great multitude. But when the flames ofheaven had done their work, we gathered your white bones at daybreak and laidthem in ointments and in pure wine. Your mother brought us a golden vase tohold them—gift of Bacchus, and work of Vulcan himself; in this we mingledyour bleached bones with those of Patroclus who had gone before you, andseparate we enclosed also those of Antilochus, who had been closer to you thanany other of your comrades now that Patroclus was no more.“Over these the host of the Argives built a noble tomb, on a pointjutting out over the open Hellespont, that it might be seen from far out uponthe sea by those now living and by them that shall be born hereafter. Yourmother begged prizes from the gods, and offered them to be contended for by thenoblest of the Achaeans. You must have been present at the funeral of many ahero, when the young men gird themselves and make ready to contend for prizeson the death of some great chieftain, but you never saw such prizes assilver-footed Thetis offered in your honour; for the gods loved you well. Thuseven in death your fame, Achilles, has not been lost, and your name livesevermore among all mankind. But as for me, what solace had I when the days ofmy fighting were done? For Jove willed my destruction on my return, by thehands of Aegisthus and those of my wicked wife.”Thus did they converse, and presently Mercury came up to them with the ghostsof the suitors who had been killed by Ulysses. The ghosts of Agamemnon andAchilles were astonished at seeing them, and went up to them at once. The ghostof Agamemnon recognised Amphimedon son of Melaneus, who lived in Ithaca and hadbeen his host, so it began to talk to him.“Amphimedon,” it said, “what has happened to all you fineyoung men—all of an age too—that you are come down here under theground? One could pick no finer body of men from any city. Did Neptune raisehis winds and waves against you when you were at sea, or did your enemies makean end of you on the mainland when you were cattle-lifting or sheep-stealing,or while fighting in defence of their wives and city? Answer my question, for Ihave been your guest. Do you not remember how I came to your house withMenelaus, to persuade Ulysses to join us with his ships against Troy? It was awhole month ere we could resume our voyage, for we had hard work to persuadeUlysses to come with us.”And the ghost of Amphimedon answered, “Agamemnon, son of Atreus, king ofmen, I remember everything that you have said, and will tell you fully andaccurately about the way in which our end was brought about. Ulysses had beenlong gone, and we were courting his wife, who did not say point blank that shewould not marry, nor yet bring matters to an end, for she meant to compass ourdestruction: this, then, was the trick she played us. She set up a greattambour frame in her room and began to work on an enormous piece of fineneedlework. ‘Sweethearts,’ said she, ‘Ulysses is indeed dead,still, do not press me to marry again immediately; wait—for I would nothave my skill in needlework perish unrecorded—till I have completed apall for the hero Laertes, against the time when death shall take him. He isvery rich, and the women of the place will talk if he is laid out without apall.’ This is what she said, and we assented; whereupon we could see herworking upon her great web all day long, but at night she would unpick thestitches again by torchlight. She fooled us in this way for three years withoutour finding it out, but as time wore on and she was now in her fourth year, inthe waning of moons and many days had been accomplished, one of her maids whoknew what she was doing told us, and we caught her in the act of undoing herwork, so she had to finish it whether she would or no; and when she showed usthe robe she had made, after she had had it washed,[186] its splendour was as that of thesun or moon.“Then some malicious god conveyed Ulysses to the upland farm where hisswineherd lives. Thither presently came also his son, returning from a voyageto Pylos, and the two came to the town when they had hatched their plot for ourdestruction. Telemachus came first, and then after him, accompanied by theswineherd, came Ulysses, clad in rags and leaning on a staff as though he weresome miserable old beggar. He came so unexpectedly that none of us knew him,not even the older ones among us, and we reviled him and threw things at him.He endured both being struck and insulted without a word, though he was in hisown house; but when the will of Aegis-bearing Jove inspired him, he andTelemachus took the armour and hid it in an inner chamber, bolting the doorsbehind them. Then he cunningly made his wife offer his bow and a quantity ofiron to be contended for by us ill-fated suitors; and this was the beginning ofour end, for not one of us could string the bow—nor nearly do so. When itwas about to reach the hands of Ulysses, we all of us shouted out that itshould not be given him, no matter what he might say, but Telemachus insistedon his having it. When he had got it in his hands he strung it with ease andsent his arrow through the iron. Then he stood on the floor of the cloister andpoured his arrows on the ground, glaring fiercely about him. First he killedAntinous, and then, aiming straight before him, he let fly his deadly darts andthey fell thick on one another. It was plain that some one of the gods washelping them, for they fell upon us with might and main throughout thecloisters, and there was a hideous sound of groaning as our brains were beingbattered in, and the ground seethed with our blood. This, Agamemnon, is how wecame by our end, and our bodies are lying still uncared for in the house ofUlysses, for our friends at home do not yet know what has happened, so thatthey cannot lay us out and wash the black blood from our wounds, making moanover us according to the offices due to the departed.”“Happy Ulysses, son of Laertes,” replied the ghost of Agamemnon,“you are indeed blessed in the possession of a wife endowed with suchrare excellence of understanding, and so faithful to her wedded lord asPenelope the daughter of Icarius. The fame, therefore, of her virtue shallnever die, and the immortals shall compose a song that shall be welcome to allmankind in honour of the constancy of Penelope. How far otherwise was thewickedness of the daughter of Tyndareus who killed her lawful husband; her songshall be hateful among men, for she has brought disgrace on all womankind evenon the good ones.”Thus did they converse in the house of Hades deep down within the bowels of theearth. Meanwhile Ulysses and the others passed out of the town and soon reachedthe fair and well-tilled farm of Laertes, which he had reclaimed with infinitelabour. Here was his house, with a lean-to running all round it, where theslaves who worked for him slept and sat and ate, while inside the house therewas an old Sicel woman, who looked after him in this his country-farm. WhenUlysses got there, he said to his son and to the other two:“Go to the house, and kill the best pig that you can find for dinner.Meanwhile I want to see whether my father will know me, or fail to recognise meafter so long an absence.”He then took off his armour and gave it to Eumaeus and Philoetius, who wentstraight on to the house, while he turned off into the vineyard to make trialof his father. As he went down into the great orchard, he did not see Dolius,nor any of his sons nor of the other bondsmen, for they were all gatheringthorns to make a fence for the vineyard, at the place where the old man hadtold them; he therefore found his father alone, hoeing a vine. He had on adirty old shirt, patched and very shabby; his legs were bound round with thongsof oxhide to save him from the brambles, and he also wore sleeves of leather;he had a goat skin cap on his head, and was looking very woe-begone. WhenUlysses saw him so worn, so old and full of sorrow, he stood still under a tallpear tree and began to weep. He doubted whether to embrace him, kiss him, andtell him all about his having come home, or whether he should first questionhim and see what he would say. In the end he deemed it best to be crafty withhim, so in this mind he went up to his father, who was bending down and diggingabout a plant.“I see, sir,” said Ulysses, “that you are an excellentgardener—what pains you take with it, to be sure. There is not a singleplant, not a fig tree, vine, olive, pear, nor flower bed, but bears the traceof your attention. I trust, however, that you will not be offended if I saythat you take better care of your garden than of yourself. You are old,unsavoury, and very meanly clad. It cannot be because you are idle that yourmaster takes such poor care of you, indeed your face and figure have nothing ofthe slave about them, and proclaim you of noble birth. I should have said thatyou were one of those who should wash well, eat well, and lie soft at night asold men have a right to do; but tell me, and tell me true, whose bondman areyou, and in whose garden are you working? Tell me also about another matter. Isthis place that I have come to really Ithaca? I met a man just now who said so,but he was a dull fellow, and had not the patience to hear my story out when Iwas asking him about an old friend of mine, whether he was still living, or wasalready dead and in the house of Hades. Believe me when I tell you that thisman came to my house once when I was in my own country and never yet did anystranger come to me whom I liked better. He said that his family came fromIthaca and that his father was Laertes, son of Arceisius. I received himhospitably, making him welcome to all the abundance of my house, and when hewent away I gave him all customary presents. I gave him seven talents of finegold, and a cup of solid silver with flowers chased upon it. I gave him twelvelight cloaks, and as many pieces of tapestry; I also gave him twelve cloaks ofsingle fold, twelve rugs, twelve fair mantles, and an equal number of shirts.To all this I added four good looking women skilled in all useful arts, and Ilet him take his choice.”His father shed tears and answered, “Sir, you have indeed come to thecountry that you have named, but it is fallen into the hands of wicked people.All this wealth of presents has been given to no purpose. If you could havefound your friend here alive in Ithaca, he would have entertained youhospitably and would have requited your presents amply when you lefthim—as would have been only right considering what you had already givenhim. But tell me, and tell me true, how many years is it since you entertainedthis guest—my unhappy son, as ever was? Alas! He has perished far fromhis own country; the fishes of the sea have eaten him, or he has fallen a preyto the birds and wild beasts of some continent. Neither his mother, nor I hisfather, who were his parents, could throw our arms about him and wrap him inhis shroud, nor could his excellent and richly dowered wife Penelope bewail herhusband as was natural upon his death bed, and close his eyes according to theoffices due to the departed. But now, tell me truly for I want to know. Who andwhence are you—tell me of your town and parents? Where is the ship lyingthat has brought you and your men to Ithaca? Or were you a passenger on someother man’s ship, and those who brought you here have gone on their wayand left you?”“I will tell you everything,” answered Ulysses, “quite truly.I come from Alybas, where I have a fine house. I am son of king Apheidas, whois the son of Polypemon. My own name is Eperitus; heaven drove me off my courseas I was leaving Sicania, and I have been carried here against my will. As formy ship it is lying over yonder, off the open country outside the town, andthis is the fifth year since Ulysses left my country. Poor fellow, yet theomens were good for him when he left me. The birds all flew on our right hands,and both he and I rejoiced to see them as we parted, for we had every hope thatwe should have another friendly meeting and exchange presents.”A dark cloud of sorrow fell upon Laertes as he listened. He filled both handswith the dust from off the ground and poured it over his grey head, groaningheavily as he did so. The heart of Ulysses was touched, and his nostrilsquivered as he looked upon his father; then he sprang towards him, flung hisarms about him and kissed him, saying, “I am he, father, about whom youare asking—I have returned after having been away for twenty years. Butcease your sighing and lamentation—we have no time to lose, for I shouldtell you that I have been killing the suitors in my house, to punish them fortheir insolence and crimes.”“If you really are my son Ulysses,” replied Laertes, “andhave come back again, you must give me such manifest proof of your identity asshall convince me.”“First observe this scar,” answered Ulysses, “which I gotfrom a boar’s tusk when I was hunting on Mt. Parnassus. You and my motherhad sent me to Autolycus, my mother’s father, to receive the presentswhich when he was over here he had promised to give me. Furthermore I willpoint out to you the trees in the vineyard which you gave me, and I asked youall about them as I followed you round the garden. We went over them all, andyou told me their names and what they all were. You gave me thirteen peartrees, ten apple trees, and forty fig trees; you also said you would give mefifty rows of vines; there was corn planted between each row, and they yieldgrapes of every kind when the heat of heaven has been laid heavy uponthem.”Laertes’ strength failed him when he heard the convincing proofs whichhis son had given him. He threw his arms about him, and Ulysses had to supporthim, or he would have gone off into a swoon; but as soon as he came to, and wasbeginning to recover his senses, he said, “O father Jove, then you godsare still in Olympus after all, if the suitors have really been punished fortheir insolence and folly. Nevertheless, I am much afraid that I shall have allthe townspeople of Ithaca up here directly, and they will be sending messengerseverywhere throughout the cities of the Cephallenians.”Ulysses answered, “Take heart and do not trouble yourself about that, butlet us go into the house hard by your garden. I have already told Telemachus,Philoetius, and Eumaeus to go on there and get dinner ready as soon aspossible.”Thus conversing the two made their way towards the house. When they got therethey found Telemachus with the stockman and the swineherd cutting up meat andmixing wine with water. Then the old Sicel woman took Laertes inside and washedhim and anointed him with oil. She put him on a good cloak, and Minerva came upto him and gave him a more imposing presence, making him taller and stouterthan before. When he came back his son was surprised to see him looking so likean immortal, and said to him, “My dear father, some one of the gods hasbeen making you much taller and better-looking.”Laertes answered, “Would, by Father Jove, Minerva, and Apollo, that Iwere the man I was when I ruled among the Cephallenians, and took Nericum, thatstrong fortress on the foreland. If I were still what I then was and had beenin our house yesterday with my armour on, I should have been able to stand byyou and help you against the suitors. I should have killed a great many ofthem, and you would have rejoiced to see it.”Thus did they converse; but the others, when they had finished their work andthe feast was ready, left off working, and took each his proper place on thebenches and seats. Then they began eating; by and by old Dolius and his sonsleft their work and came up, for their mother, the Sicel woman who looked afterLaertes now that he was growing old, had been to fetch them. When they sawUlysses and were certain it was he, they stood there lost in astonishment; butUlysses scolded them good naturedly and said, “Sit down to your dinner,old man, and never mind about your surprise; we have been wanting to begin forsome time and have been waiting for you.”Then Dolius put out both his hands and went up to Ulysses. “Sir,”said he, seizing his master’s hand and kissing it at the wrist, “wehave long been wishing you home: and now heaven has restored you to us after wehad given up hoping. All hail, therefore, and may the gods prosper you.[187] But tell me,does Penelope already know of your return, or shall we send some one to tellher?”“Old man,” answered Ulysses, “she knows already, so you neednot trouble about that.” On this he took his seat, and the sons of Doliusgathered round Ulysses to give him greeting and embrace him one after theother; then they took their seats in due order near Dolius their father.While they were thus busy getting their dinner ready, Rumour went round thetown, and noised abroad the terrible fate that had befallen the suitors; assoon, therefore, as the people heard of it they gathered from every quarter,groaning and hooting before the house of Ulysses. They took the dead away,buried every man his own, and put the bodies of those who came from elsewhereon board the fishing vessels, for the fishermen to take each of them to his ownplace. They then met angrily in the place of assembly, and when they were gottogether Eupeithes rose to speak. He was overwhelmed with grief for the deathof his son Antinous, who had been the first man killed by Ulysses, so he said,weeping bitterly, “My friends, this man has done the Achaeans greatwrong. He took many of our best men away with him in his fleet, and he has lostboth ships and men; now, moreover, on his return he has been killing all theforemost men among the Cephallenians. Let us be up and doing before he can getaway to Pylos or to Elis where the Epeans rule, or we shall be ashamed ofourselves for ever afterwards. It will be an everlasting disgrace to us if wedo not avenge the murder of our sons and brothers. For my own part I shouldhave no more pleasure in life, but had rather die at once. Let us be up, then,and after them, before they can cross over to the main land.”He wept as he spoke and every one pitied him. But Medon and the bard Phemiushad now woke up, and came to them from the house of Ulysses. Every one wasastonished at seeing them, but they stood in the middle of the assembly, andMedon said, “Hear me, men of Ithaca. Ulysses did not do these thingsagainst the will of heaven. I myself saw an immortal god take the form ofMentor and stand beside him. This god appeared, now in front of him encouraginghim, and now going furiously about the court and attacking the suitors whereonthey fell thick on one another.”On this pale fear laid hold of them, and old Halitherses, son of Mastor, roseto speak, for he was the only man among them who knew both past and future; sohe spoke to them plainly and in all honesty, saying,“Men of Ithaca, it is all your own fault that things have turned out asthey have; you would not listen to me, nor yet to Mentor, when we bade youcheck the folly of your sons who were doing much wrong in the wantonness oftheir hearts—wasting the substance and dishonouring the wife of achieftain who they thought would not return. Now, however, let it be as I say,and do as I tell you. Do not go out against Ulysses, or you may find that youhave been drawing down evil on your own heads.”This was what he said, and more than half raised a loud shout, and at once leftthe assembly. But the rest stayed where they were, for the speech ofHalitherses displeased them, and they sided with Eupeithes; they thereforehurried off for their armour, and when they had armed themselves, they mettogether in front of the city, and Eupeithes led them on in their folly. Hethought he was going to avenge the murder of his son, whereas in truth he wasnever to return, but was himself to perish in his attempt.Then Minerva said to Jove, “Father, son of Saturn, king of kings, answerme this question—What do you propose to do? Will you set them fightingstill further, or will you make peace between them?”And Jove answered, “My child, why should you ask me? Was it not by yourown arrangement that Ulysses came home and took his revenge upon the suitors?Do whatever you like, but I will tell you what I think will be most reasonablearrangement. Now that Ulysses is revenged, let them swear to a solemn covenant,in virtue of which he shall continue to rule, while we cause the others toforgive and forget the massacre of their sons and brothers. Let them then allbecome friends as heretofore, and let peace and plenty reign.”This was what Minerva was already eager to bring about, so down she darted fromoff the topmost summits of Olympus.Now when Laertes and the others had done dinner, Ulysses began by saying,“Some of you go out and see if they are not getting close up tous.” So one of Dolius’s sons went as he was bid. Standing on thethreshold he could see them all quite near, and said to Ulysses, “Herethey are, let us put on our armour at once.”They put on their armour as fast as they could—that is to say Ulysses,his three men, and the six sons of Dolius. Laertes also and Dolius did thesame—warriors by necessity in spite of their grey hair. When they had allput on their armour, they opened the gate and sallied forth, Ulysses leadingthe way.Then Jove’s daughter Minerva came up to them, having assumed the form andvoice of Mentor. Ulysses was glad when he saw her, and said to his sonTelemachus, “Telemachus, now that you are about to fight in anengagement, which will show every man’s mettle, be sure not to disgraceyour ancestors, who were eminent for their strength and courage all the worldover.”“You say truly, my dear father,” answered Telemachus, “andyou shall see, if you will, that I am in no mind to disgrace yourfamily.”Laertes was delighted when he heard this. “Good heavens,” heexclaimed, “what a day I am enjoying: I do indeed rejoice at it. My sonand grandson are vying with one another in the matter of valour.”On this Minerva came close up to him and said, “Son ofArceisius—-best friend I have in the world—pray to the blue-eyeddamsel, and to Jove her father; then poise your spear and hurl it.”As she spoke she infused fresh vigour into him, and when he had prayed to herhe poised his spear and hurled it. He hit Eupeithes’ helmet, and thespear went right through it, for the helmet stayed it not, and his armour rangrattling round him as he fell heavily to the ground. Meantime Ulysses and hisson fell upon the front line of the foe and smote them with their swords andspears; indeed, they would have killed every one of them, and prevented themfrom ever getting home again, only Minerva raised her voice aloud, and madeevery one pause. “Men of Ithaca,” she cried, “cease thisdreadful war, and settle the matter at once without further bloodshed.”On this pale fear seized every one; they were so frightened that their armsdropped from their hands and fell upon the ground at the sound of thegoddess’ voice, and they fled back to the city for their lives. ButUlysses gave a great cry, and gathering himself together swooped down like asoaring eagle. Then the son of Saturn sent a thunderbolt of fire that fell justin front of Minerva, so she said to Ulysses, “Ulysses, noble son ofLaertes, stop this warful strife, or Jove will be angry with you.”Thus spoke Minerva, and Ulysses obeyed her gladly. Then Minerva assumed theform and voice of Mentor, and presently made a covenant of peace between thetwo contending parties.FOOTNOTES:[1] [ Black races are evidently known to thewriter as stretching all across Africa, one half looking West on to theAtlantic, and the other East on to the Indian Ocean.][2] [ The original use of the footstool wasprobably less to rest the feet than to keep them (especially when bare) from afloor which was often wet and dirty.][3] [ Theθρόνος or seat, is occasionally called“high,” as being higher than theθρῆνυς or low footstool. It was probably nohigher than an ordinary chair is now, and seems to have had no back.][4] [ Temesa was on the West Coast of the toeof Italy, in what is now the gulf of Sta Eufemia. It was famous in remote timesfor its copper mines, which, however, were worked out when Strabo wrote.][5] [ i.e. “with a current init”—see illustrations and map near the end of bks. v. and vi.respectively.][6] [ ReadingΝηρίτῳ for Νηίῳ, cf.“Od.” iii. 81 where the same mistake is made, and xiii. 351 wherethe mountain is called Neritum, the same place being intended both here and inbook xiii.][7] [ It is never plausibly explained whyPenelope cannot do this, and from bk. ii. it is clear that she kept ondeliberately encouraging the suitors, though we are asked to believe that shewas only fooling them.][8] [ See note on “Od.” i. 365.][9] [ Middle Argos means the Peleponnesewhich, however, is never so called in the “Iliad”. I presume“middle” means “middle between the two Greek-speakingcountries of Asia Minor and Sicily, with South Italy”; for that parts ofSicily and also large parts, though not the whole of South Italy, wereinhabited by Greek-speaking races centuries before the Dorian colonisations canhardly be doubted. The Sicians, and also the Sicels, both of them probablyspoke Greek.][10] [ cf. “Il.” vi. 490-495. Inthe “Iliad” it is “war,” not “speech,” thatis a man’s matter. It argues a certain hardness, or at any rate dislikeof the “Iliad” on the part of the writer of the“Odyssey,” that she should have adopted Hector’s farewell toAndromache here, as elsewhere in the poem, for a scene of such inferiorpathos.][11] [ μέγαρασκιοέντα The whole open court with thecovered cloister running round it was calledμέγαρον, orμέγαρα, but the covered part was distinguishedby being called “shady” or “shadow-giving”. It was inthis part that the tables for the suitors were laid. The Fountain Court atHampton Court may serve as an illustration (save as regards the use of archesinstead of wooden supports and rafters) and the arrangement is still common inSicily. The usual translation “shadowy” or “dusky”halls, gives a false idea of the scene.][12] [ The reader will note the extreme carewhich the writer takes to make it clear that none of the suitors were allowedto sleep in Ulysses’ house.][13] [ See Appendix; g, in plan ofUlysses’ house.][14] [ I imagine this passage to be arejoinder to “Il.” xxiii. 702-705 in which a tripod is valued attwelve oxen, and a good useful maid of all work at only four. The scrupulousregard of Laertes for his wife’s feelings is of a piece with the extremejealousy for the honour of woman, which is manifest throughout the“Odyssey”.][15] [ χιτῶνα“The χιτών, or tunica, was a shirt orshift, and served as the chief under garment of the Greeks and Romans, whethermen or women.” Smith’s Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities,under “Tunica”.][16] [ Doors fastened to all intents andpurposes as here described may be seen in the older houses at Trapani. There isa slot on the outer side of the door by means of which a person who has leftthe room can shoot the bolt. My bedroom at the Albergo Centrale was fastened inthis way.][17] [πύματον δ’ὡπλίσσατοδόρπον. So we vulgarly say “had cooked hisgoose,” or “had settled his hash.” Ægyptius cannot of courseknow of the fate Antiphus had met with, for there had as yet been no news of orfrom Ulysses.][18] [ “Il.” xxii. 416.σχέσθε φίλοι,καὶ μ’ οἷονἐάσατε...... The authoress has bungled byborrowing these words verbatim from the “Iliad”, without prefixingthe necessary “do not,” which I have supplied.][19] [ i.e. you have money, and could paywhen I got judgment, whereas the suitors are men of straw.][20] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 76.ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦςεὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ἀνέστηΝέστωρ, ὄς ῥα.......................................ὄ σφιν ἐὺφρονέωνἀγορήσατο καὶμετέειπεν.The Odyssean passage runs—“ἦ τοι ὄ γ’ ὦςεὶπὼν κατ’ ἄρ’ἔζετο τοῖσι δ’ἀνέστηΜεντορ ὄς ῥ’.......................................ὄ σφιν ἐὺφρονέωνἀγορήσατο καὶμετέειπεν.Is it possible not to suspect that the name Mentor was coined upon that of Nestor?][21] [ i.e. in the outer court, and in theuncovered part of the inner house.][22] [ This would be fair from Sicily, whichwas doing duty for Ithaca in the mind of the writer, but a North wind wouldhave been preferable for a voyage from the real Ithaca to Pylos.][23] [κελάδοντ’ ἐπὶοὶνοπα πόντον Thewind does not whistle over waves. It only whistles through rigging or someother obstacle that cuts it.][24] [ cf. “Il.” v.20.Ἰδαῖος δ’ἀπόρουσελιπὼνπερικαλλέαδίφρον, the Odyssean line isἠέλιος δ’ἀνόρουσελιπὼνπερικαλλέαλίμνην. There can be no doubt that the Odysseanline was suggested by the Iliadic, but nothing can explain why Idæus jumpingfrom his chariot should suggest to the writer of the “Odyssey” thesun jumping from the sea. The probability is that she never gave the matter athought, but took the line in question as an effect of saturation with the“Iliad,” and of unconscious cerebration. The “Odyssey”contains many such examples.][25] [ The heart, liver, lights, kidneys,etc. were taken out from the inside and eaten first as being more readilycooked; the {Greek}, or bone meat, was cooking while the {Greek} or inwardparts were being eaten. I imagine that the thigh bones made a kind of gridiron,while at the same time the marrow inside them got cooked.][26] [ i.e. skewers, either single, double,or even five pronged. The meat would be pierced with the skewer, and laid overthe ashes to grill—the two ends of the skewer being supported in whateverway convenient. Meat so cooking may be seen in any eating house in Smyrna, orany Eastern town. When I rode across the Troad from the Dardanelles toHissarlik and Mount Ida, I noticed that my dragoman and his men did all ouroutdoor cooking exactly in the Odyssean and Iliadic fashion.][27] [ cf. “Il.” xvii. 567.{Greek} The Odyssean lines are—{Greek}][28] [ Reading {Greek} for {Greek}, cf.“Od.” i. 186.]29[] [ The geography of the Ægean as abovedescribed is correct, but is probably taken from the lost poem, the Nosti, theexistence of which is referred to “Od.” i. 326, 327 and 350,&c. A glance at the map will show that heaven advised its supplicants quitecorrectly.][30] [ The writer—ever jealous for thehonour of women—extenuates Clytemnestra’s guilt as far as possible,and explains it as due to her having been left unprotected, and fallen into thehands of a wicked man.][31] [ The Greek is {Greek} cf.“Iliad” ii. 408 {Greek} Surely the {Greek} of the Odyssean passagewas due to the {Greek} of the “Iliad.” No other reason suggestsitself for the making Menelaus return on the very day of the feast given byOrestes. The fact that in the “Iliad” Menelaus came to a banquetwithout waiting for an invitation, determines the writer of the“Odyssey” to make him come to a banquet, also uninvited, but ascircumstances did not permit of his having been invited, his coming uninvitedis shown to have been due to chance. I do not think the authoress thought allthis out, but attribute the strangeness of the coincidence to unconsciouscerebration and saturation.][32] [ cf. “Il.” I. 458, II.421. The writer here interrupts an Iliadic passage (to which she returnsimmediately) for the double purpose of dwelling upon the slaughter of theheifer, and of letting Nestor’s wife and daughter enjoy it also. A malewriter, if he was borrowing from the “Iliad,” would have stuck tohis borrowing.][33] [ cf. “Il.” xxiv. 587, 588where the lines refer to the washing the dead body of Hector.][34] [ See illustration on opposite page.The yard is typical of many that may be seen in Sicily. The existingground-plan is probably unmodified from Odyssean, and indeed long pre-Odysseantimes, but the earlier buildings would have no arches, and would, one wouldsuppose, be mainly timber. The Odyssean {Greek} were the sheds that ran roundthe yard as the arches do now. The {Greek} was the one through which the mainentrance passed, and which was hence “noisy,” or reverberating. Ithad an upper story in which visitors were often lodged.][35] [ This journey is an impossible one.Telemachus and Pisistratus would have been obliged to drive over the Taygetusrange, over which there has never yet been a road for wheeled vehicles. It isplain therefore that the audience for whom the “Odyssey” waswritten was one that would be unlikely to know anything about the topography ofthe Peloponnese, so that the writer might take what liberties she chose.][36] [ The lines which I have enclosed inbrackets are evidently an afterthought—added probably by the writerherself—for they evince the same instinctively greater interest inanything that may concern a woman, which is so noticeable throughout the poem.There is no further sign of any special festivities nor of any other gueststhan Telemachus and Pisistratus, until lines 621-624 (ordinarily enclosed inbrackets) are abruptly introduced, probably with a view of trying to carry offthe introduction of the lines now in question.The addition was, I imagine, suggested by a desire to excuse and explain thenon-appearance of Hermione in bk. xv., as also of both Hermione and Megapenthesin the rest of bk. iv. Megapenthes in bk. xv. seems to be still a bachelor: thepresumption therefore is that bk. xv. was written before the story of hismarriage here given. I take it he is only married here because his sister isbeing married. She having been properly attended to, Megapenthes might as wellbe married at the same time. Hermione could not now be less than thirty.I have dealt with this passage somewhat more fully in my “Authoress ofthe Odyssey”, p. 136-138. See also p. 256 of the same book.][37] [ Sparta and Lacedaemon are heretreated as two different places, though in other parts of the poem it is clearthat the writer understands them as one. The catalogue in the“Iliad,” which the writer is here presumably following, makes thesame mistake (“Il.” ii. 581, 582)][38] [ These last three lines are identicalwith “Il.” vxiii. 604-606.][39] [ From the Greek {Greek} it is plainthat Menelaus took up the piece of meat with his fingers.][40] [ Amber is never mentioned in the“Iliad.” Sicily, where I suppose the “Odyssey” to havebeen written, has always been, and still is, one of the principal amberproducing countries. It was probably the only one known in the Odyssean age.See “The Authoress of the Odyssey,” Longmans 1898, p. 186.][41] [ This no doubt refers to the storytold in the last poem of the Cypria about Paris and Helen robbing Menelaus ofthe greater part of his treasures, when they sailed together for Troy.][42] [ It is inconceivable that Helen shouldenter thus, in the middle of supper, intending to work with her distaff, ifgreat festivities were going on. Telemachus and Pisistratus are evidentlydining en famille.][43] [ In the Italian insurrection of 1848,eight young men who were being hotly pursued by the Austrian police hidthemselves inside Donatello’s colossal wooden horse in the Salone atPadua, and remained there for a week being fed by their confederates. In 1898the last survivor was carried round Padua in triumph.][44] [ The Greek is {Greek}. Is it unfair toargue that the writer is a person of somewhat delicate sensibility, to whom astrong smell of fish is distasteful?][45] [ The Greek is {Greek}. I believe thisto be a hit at the writer’s own countrymen who were of Phocaean descent,and the next following line to be a rejoinder to complaints made against her inbk. vi. 273-288, to the effect that she gave herself airs and would marry noneof her own people. For that the writer of the “Odyssey” was theperson who has been introduced into the poem under the name of Nausicaa, Icannot bring myself to question. I may remind English readers that {Greek}(i.e. phoca) means “seal.” Seals almost always appear on Phocaeancoins.][46] [ Surely here again we are in the handsof a writer of delicate sensibility. It is not as though the seals were stale;they had only just been killed. The writer, however is obviously laughing ather own countrymen, and insulting them as openly as she dares.][47] [ We were told above (lines 356, 357)that it was only one day’s sail.][48] [ I give the usual translation, but Ido not believe the Greek will warrant it. The Greek reads {Greek}.This is usually held to mean that Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats,and on that account more delectable to the speaker than it would have been ifit were fit for breeding horses. I find little authority for such atranslation; the most equitable translation of the text as it stands is,“Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and delectable rather thanfit for breeding horses; for not one of the islands is good driving ground, norwell meadowed.” Surely the writer does not mean that a pleasant ordelectable island would not be fit for breeding horses? The most equitabletranslation, therefore, of the present text being thus halt and impotent, wemay suspect corruption, and I hazard the following emendation, though I havenot adopted it in my translation, as fearing that it would be deemed toofanciful. I would read:—{Greek}.As far as scanning goes the {Greek} is not necessary; {Greek} iv. 72, (FootnoteGreek) iv. 233, to go no further afield than earlier lines of the same book,give sufficient authority for {Greek}, but the {Greek} would not be redundant;it would emphasise the surprise of the contrast, and I should prefer to haveit, though it is not very important either way. This reading of course shouldbe translated “Ithaca is an island fit for breeding goats, and (by yourleave) itself a horseman rather than fit for breeding horses—for not oneof the islands is good and well meadowed ground.”This would be sure to baffle the Alexandrian editors. “How,” theywould ask themselves, “could an island be a horseman?” and theywould cast about for an emendation. A visit to the top of Mt. Eryx mightperhaps make the meaning intelligible, and suggest my proposed restoration ofthe text to the reader as readily as it did to myself.I have elsewhere stated my conviction that the writer of the“Odyssey” was familiar with the old Sican city at the top of Mt.Eryx, and that the Aegadean islands which are so striking when seen thence didduty with her for the Ionian islands—Marettimo, the highest and mostwesterly of the group, standing for Ithaca. When seen from the top of Mt. EryxMarettimo shows as it should do according to “Od.” ix. 25, 26,“on the horizon, all highest up in the sea towards the West,” whilethe other islands lie “some way off it to the East.” As we descendto Trapani, Marettimo appears to sink on to the top of the island of Levanzo,behind which it disappears. My friend, the late Signor E. Biaggini, pointed toit once as it was just standing on the top of Levanzo, and said to me“Come cavalca bene” (“How well it rides”), and thisimmediately suggested my emendation to me. Later on I found in the hymn to thePythian Apollo (which abounds with tags taken from the “Odyssey”) aline ending {Greek} which strengthened my suspicion that this was the originalending of the second of the two lines above under consideration.][49] [ See note on line 3 of this book. Thereader will observe that the writer has been unable to keep the women out of aninterpolation consisting only of four lines.][50] [ Scheria means a piece of land juttingout into the sea. In my “Authoress of the Odyssey” I thought“Jutland” would be a suitable translation, but it has been pointedout to me that “Jutland” only means the land of the Jutes.][51] [ Irrigation as here described iscommon in gardens near Trapani. The water that supplies the ducts is drawn fromwells by a mule who turns a wheel with buckets on it.][52] [ There is not a word here about thecattle of the sun-god.][53] [ The writer evidently thought thatgreen, growing wood might also be well seasoned.][54] [ The reader will note that the riverwas flowing with salt water i.e. that it was tidal.][55] [ Then the Ogygian island was not sofar off, but that Nausicaa might be assumed to know where it was.][56] [ Greek {Greek}][57] [ I suspect a family joke, or slyallusion to some thing of which we know nothing, in this story ofEurymedusa’s having been brought from Apeira. The Greek word“apeiros” means “inexperienced,”“ignorant.” Is it possible that Eurymedusa was notoriouslyincompetent?][58] [ Polyphemus was also son to Neptune,see “Od.” ix. 412, 529. he was therefore half brother to Nausithous,half uncle to King Alcinous, and half great uncle to Nausicaa.][59] [ It would seem as though the writerthought that Marathon was close to Athens.][60] [ Here the writer, knowing that she isdrawing (with embellishments) from things actually existing, becomes impatientof past tenses and slides into the present.][61] [ This is hidden malice, implying thatthe Phaeacian magnates were no better than they should be. The finaldrink-offering should have been made to Jove or Neptune, not to the god ofthievishness and rascality of all kinds. In line 164 we do indeed find Echeneusproposing that a drink-offering should be made to Jove, but Mercury isevidently, according to our authoress, the god who was most likely to be of useto them.][62] [ The fact of Alcinous knowing anythingabout the Cyclopes suggests that in the writer’s mind Scheria and thecountry of the Cyclopes were not very far from one another. I take the Cyclopesand the giants to be one and the same people.][63] [ “My property, etc.” Theauthoress is here adopting an Iliadic line (xix. 333), and this must accountfor the absence of all reference to Penelope. If she had happened to remember“Il.” v. 213, she would doubtless have appropriated it bypreference, for that line reads “my country, my wife, and all thegreatness of my house.”][64] [ The at first inexplicable sleep ofUlysses (bk. xiii. 79, etc.) is here, as also in viii. 445, being obviouslyprepared. The writer evidently attached the utmost importance to it. Those whoknow that the harbour which did duty with the writer of the“Odyssey” for the one in which Ulysses landed in Ithaca, was onlyabout 2 miles from the place in which Ulysses is now talking with Alcinous,will understand why the sleep was so necessary.][65] [ There were two classes—thelower who were found in provisions which they had to cook for themselves in theyards and outer precincts, where they would also eat—and the upper whowould eat in the cloisters of the inner court, and have their cooking done forthem.][66] [ Translation very dubious. I supposethe {Greek} here to be the covered sheds that ran round the outer courtyard.See illustrations at the end of bk. iii.][67] [ The writer apparently deems that thewords “as compared with what oxen can plough in the same time” gowithout saying. Not so the writer of the “Iliad” from which theOdyssean passage is probably taken. He explains that mules can plough quickerthan oxen (“Il.” x. 351-353)][68] [ It was very fortunate that such adisc happened to be there, seeing that none like it were in common use.][69] [ “Il.” xiii. 37. Here, asso often elsewhere in the “Odyssey,” the appropriation of anIliadic line which is not quite appropriate puzzles the reader. The“they” is not the chains, nor yet Mars and Venus. It is an overflowfrom the Iliadic passage in which Neptune hobbles his horses in bonds“which none could either unloose or break so that they might stay therein that place.” If the line would have scanned without the addition ofthe words “so that they might stay there in that place,” they wouldhave been omitted in the “Odyssey.”][70] [ The reader will note that Alcinousnever goes beyond saying that he is going to give the goblet; he never givesit. Elsewhere in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” the offerof a present is immediately followed by the statement that it was given andreceived gladly—Alcinous actually does give a chest and a cloak andshirt—probably also some of the corn and wine for the long two-milevoyage was provided by him—but it is quite plain that he gave no talentand no cup.][71] [ “Il.” xviii. 344-349.These lines in the “Iliad” tell of the preparation for washing thebody of Patroclus, and I am not pleased that the writer of the“Odyssey” should have adopted them here.][72] [ see note [64] : ][73] [ see note [43] : ][74] [ The reader will find this threatfulfilled in bk. xiii][75] [ If the other islands lay somedistance away from Ithaca (which the word {Greek} suggests), what becomes ofthe πόρθμος or gut between Ithaca and Samoswhich we hear of in Bks. iv. and xv.? I suspect that the authoress in her mindmakes Telemachus come back from Pylos to the Lilybaean promontory and thence toTrapani through the strait between the Isola Grande and themainland—the island of Asteria being the one on which Motya afterwardsstood.][76] [ “Il.” xviii. 533-534. Thesudden lapse into the third person here for a couple of lines is due to thefact that the two Iliadic lines taken are in the third person.][77] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 776. Thewords in both “Iliad” and “Odyssey” are [FootnoteGreek]. In the “Iliad” they are used of the horses ofAchilles’ followers as they stood idle, “champing lotus.”][78] [ I take all this passage about theCyclopes having no ships to be sarcastic—meaning, “You people ofDrepanum have no excuse for not colonising the island of Favognana, which youcould easily do, for you have plenty of ships, and the island is a very goodone.” For that the island so fully described here is the Aegadean or“goat” island of Favognana, and that the Cyclopes are the old Sicaninhabitants of Mt. Eryx should not be doubted.][79] [ For the reasons why it was necessarythat the night should be so exceptionally dark see “The Authoress of theOdyssey” pp. 188-189.][80] [ None but such lambs as would suck ifthey were with their mothers would be left in the yard. The older lambs shouldhave been out feeding. The authoress has got it all wrong, but it does notmatter. See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” p. 148.][81] [ This line is enclosed in brackets inthe received text, and is omitted (with note) by Messrs. Butcher & Lang.But lines enclosed in brackets are almost always genuine; all that bracketsmean is that the bracketed passage puzzled some early editor, who neverthelessfound it too well established in the text to venture on omitting it. In thepresent case the line bracketed is the very last which a full-grown male editorwould be likely to interpolate. It is safer to infer that the writer, a youngwoman, not knowing or caring at which end of the ship the rudder should be,determined to make sure by placing it at both ends, which we shall find shepresently does by repeating it (line 340) at the stern of the ship. As for thetwo rocks thrown, the first I take to be the Asinelli, see map facing p. 80.The second I see as the two contiguous islands of the Formiche, which aretreated as one, see map facing p. 108. The Asinelli is an island shaped like aboat, and pointing to the island of Favognana. I think the authoress’scompatriots, who probably did not like her much better that she did them,jeered at the absurdity of Ulysses’ conduct, and saw the Asinelli or“donkeys,” not as the rock thrown by Polyphemus, but as the boatitself containing Ulysses and his men.][82] [ This line exists in the text here butnot in the corresponding passage xii. 141. I am inclined to think it isinterpolated (probably by the poetess herself) from the first of lines xi.115-137, which I can hardly doubt were added by the writer when the scheme ofthe work was enlarged and altered. See “The Authoress of theOdyssey” pp. 254-255.][83] [ “Floating”(πλωτῇ) is not to be taken literally. The islanditself, as apart from its inhabitants, was quite normal. There is no indicationof its moving during the month that Ulysses stayed with Aeolus, and on hisreturn from his unfortunate voyage, he seems to have found it in the sameplace. The πλωτῇ in fact should no more be pressedthan θοῇσι as applied to islands,“Odyssey” xv. 299—where they are called “flying”because the ship would fly past them. So also the “Wanderers,” asexplained by Buttmann; see note on “Odyssey” xii. 57.][84] [ Literally “for the ways of thenight and of the day are near.” I have seen what Mr. Andrew Lang says(“Homer and the Epic,” p. 236, and “Longman’sMagazine” for January, 1898, p. 277) about the “amber route”and the “Sacred Way” in this connection; but until he gives hisgrounds for holding that the Mediterranean peoples in the Odyssean age used togo far North for their amber instead of getting it in Sicily, where it is stillfound in considerable quantities, I do not know what weight I ought to attachto his opinion. I have been unable to find grounds for asserting that B.C. 1000there was any commerce between the Mediterranean and the “FarNorth,” but I shall be very ready to learn if Mr. Lang will enlighten me.See “The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 185-186.][85] [ One would have thought that when thesun was driving the stag down to the water, Ulysses might have observed itswhereabouts.][86] [ See Hobbes of Malmesbury’stranslation.][87] [ “Il.” vxiii. 349. Againthe writer draws from the washing the body of Patroclus—which offends.][88] [ This visit is wholly withouttopographical significance.][89] [ Brides presented themselvesinstinctively to the imagination of the writer, as the phase of humanity whichshe found most interesting.][90] [ Ulysses was, in fact, to become amissionary and preach Neptune to people who knew not his name. I was fortunateenough to meet in Sicily a woman carrying one of these winnowing shovels; itwas not much shorter than an oar, and I was able at once to see what the writerof the “Odyssey” intended.][91] [ I suppose the lines I have enclosedin brackets to have been added by the author when she enlarged her originalscheme by the addition of books i.-iv. and xiii. (from line 187)-xxiv. Thereader will observe that in the corresponding passage (xii. 137-141) theprophecy ends with “after losing all your comrades,” and that thereis no allusion to the suitors. For fuller explanation see “The Authoressof the Odyssey” pp. 254-255.][92] [ The reader will remember that we arein the first year of Ulysses’ wanderings, Telemachus therefore was onlyeleven years old. The same anachronism is made later on in this book. See“The Authoress of the Odyssey” pp. 132-133.][93] [ Tradition says that she had hangedherself. Cf. “Odyssey” xv. 355, etc.][94] [ Not to be confounded with Aeolus kingof the winds.][95] [ Melampus, vide book xv. 223, etc.][96] [ I have already said in a note on bk.xi. 186 that at this point of Ulysses’ voyage Telemachus could only bebetween eleven and twelve years old.][97] [ Is the writer a man or a woman?][98] [ Cf. “Il.” iv. 521,{Greek}. The Odyssean line reads, {Greek}. The famous dactylism, therefore, ofthe Odyssean line was probably suggested by that of the Ileadic rather than bya desire to accommodate sound to sense. At any rate the double coincidence of adactylic line, and an ending {Greek}, seems conclusive as to the familiarity ofthe writer of the “Odyssey” with the Iliadic line.][99] [ Off the coast of Sicily and SouthItaly, in the month of May, I have seen men fastened half way up a boat’smast with their feet resting on a crosspiece, just large enough to supportthem. From this point of vantage they spear sword-fish. When I saw men thusemployed I could hardly doubt that the writer of the “Odyssey” hadseen others like them, and had them in her mind when describing the binding ofUlysses. I have therefore with some diffidence ventured to depart from thereceived translation of ἰστοπέδη (cf.Alcaeus frag. 18, where, however, it is very hard to say whatἰστοπέδαν means). InSophocles’ Lexicon I find a reference to Chrysostom (l, 242, A. Ed.Benedictine Paris 1834-1839) for the wordἰστοπόδη, which is probably the sameas ἰστοπέδη, but I have looked forthe passage in vain.][100] [ The writer is at fault here andtries to put it off on Circe. When Ulysses comes to take the route prescribedby Circe, he ought to pass either the Wanderers or some other difficulty ofwhich we are not told, but he does not do so. The Planctae, or Wanderers, mergeinto Scylla and Charybdis, and the alternative between them and somethinguntold merges into the alternative whether Ulysses had better choose Scylla orCharybdis. Yet from line 260, it seems we are to consider the Wanderers ashaving been passed by Ulysses; this appears even more plainly from xxiii. 327,in which Ulysses expressly mentions the Wandering rocks as having been betweenthe Sirens and Scylla and Charybdis. The writer, however, is evidently unawarethat she does not quite understand her own story; her difficulty was perhapsdue to the fact that though Trapanese sailors had given her a fair idea as towhere all her other localities really were, no one in those days more than inour own could localise the Planctae, which in fact, as Buttmann has argued,were derived not from any particular spot, but from sailors’ tales aboutthe difficulties of navigating the group of the Aeolian islands as a whole (seenote on “Od.” x. 3). Still the matter of the poor doves caught herfancy, so she would not forgo them. The whirlwinds of fire and the smoke thathangs on Scylla suggests allusion to Stromboli and perhaps even Etna. Scylla ison the Italian side, and therefore may be said to look West. It is about 8miles thence to the Sicilian coast, so Ulysses may be perfectly well told thatafter passing Scylla he will come to the Thrinacian island or Sicily. Charybdisis transposed to a site some few miles to the north of its actual position.][101] [ I suppose this line to have beenintercalated by the author when lines 426-446 were added.][102] [ For the reasons which enable us toidentify the island of the two Sirens with the Lipari island nowSalinas—the ancient Didyme, or “twin” island—see TheAuthoress of the Odyssey, pp. 195, 196. The two Sirens doubtless were, as theirname suggests, the whistling gusts, or avalanches of air that at times descendwithout a moment’s warning from the two lofty mountains ofSalinas—as also from all high points in the neighbourhood.][103] [ See Admiral Smyth on the currentsin the Straits of Messina, quoted in “The Authoress of theOdyssey,” p. 197.][104] [ In the islands of Favognana andMarettimo off Trapani I have seen men fish exactly as here described. They chewbread into a paste and throw it into the sea to attract the fish, which theythen spear. No line is used.][105] [ The writer evidently regardsUlysses as on a coast that looked East at no great distance south of theStraits of Messina somewhere, say, near Tauromenium, now Taormina.][106] [ Surely there must be a line missinghere to tell us that the keel and mast were carried down into Charybdis.Besides, the aorist {Greek} in its present surrounding is perplexing. I havetranslated it as though it were an imperfect; I see Messrs. Butcher and Langtranslate it as a pluperfect, but surely Charybdis was in the act of suckingdown the water when Ulysses arrived.][107] [ I suppose the passage withinbrackets to have been an afterthought but to have been written by the same handas the rest of the poem. I suppose xii. 103 to have been also added by thewriter when she decided on sending Ulysses back to Charybdis. The similesuggests the hand of the wife or daughter of a magistrate who had often seenher father come in cross and tired.][108] [ Gr.πολυδαίδαλος. Thisputs coined money out of the question, but nevertheless implies that the goldhad been worked into ornaments of some kind.][109] [ I suppose Teiresias’ prophecyof bk. xi. 114-120 had made no impression on Ulysses. More probably theprophecy was an afterthought, intercalated, as I have already said, by theauthoress when she changed her scheme.][110] [ A male writer would have madeUlysses say, not “may you give satisfaction to your wives,” but“may your wives give satisfaction to you.”][111] [ See note [64].][112] [ The land was in reality the shallowinlet, now the salt works of S. Cusumano—the neighbourhood of Trapani andMt. Eryx being made to do double duty, both as Scheria and Ithaca. Hence thenecessity for making Ulysses set out after dark, fall instantly into a profoundsleep, and wake up on a morning so foggy that he could not see anything tillthe interviews between Neptune and Jove and between Ulysses and Minerva shouldhave given the audience time to accept the situation. See illustrations and mapnear the end of bks. v. and vi. respectively.][113] [ This cave, which is identifiablewith singular completeness, is now called the “grotta del toro,”probably a corruption of “tesoro,” for it is held to contain atreasure. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 167-170.][114] [ Probably they would.][115] [ Then it had a shallow shelvingbottom.][116] [ Doubtless the road would pass theharbour in Odyssean times as it passes the salt works now; indeed, if there isto be a road at all there is no other level ground which it could take. See mapabove referred to.][117] [ The rock at the end of the Northernharbour of Trapani, to which I suppose the writer of the “Odyssey”to be here referring, still bears the name Malconsiglio—“the rockof evil counsel.” There is a legend that it was a ship of Turkish pirateswho were intending to attack Trapani, but the “Madonna di Trapani”crushed them under this rock just as they were coming into port. My friendCavaliere Giannitrapani of Trapani told me that his father used to tell himwhen he was a boy that if he would drop exactly three drops of oil on to thewater near the rock, he would see the ship still at the bottom. The legend isevidently a Christianised version of the Odyssean story, while the namesupplies the additional detail that the disaster happened in consequence of anevil counsel.][118] [ It would seem then that the shiphad got all the way back from Ithaca in about a quarter of an hour.][119] [ And may we not add “and alsoto prevent his recognising that he was only in the place where he had metNausicaa two days earlier.”][120] [ All this is to excuse the entireabsence of Minerva from books ix.-xii., which I suppose had been writtenalready, before the authoress had determined on making Minerva so prominent acharacter.][121] [ We have met with this somewhat lameattempt to cover the writer’s change of scheme at the end of bk. vi.][122] [ I take the following from TheAuthoress of the Odyssey, p. 167. “It is clear from the text that therewere two [caves] not one, but some one has enclosed in brackets the two linesin which the second cave is mentioned, I presume because he found himselfpuzzled by having a second cave sprung upon him when up to this point he hadonly been told of one.“I venture to think that if he had known the ground he would not havebeen puzzled, for there are two caves, distant about 80 or 100 yards from oneanother.” The cave in which Ulysses hid his treasure is, as I havealready said, identifiable with singular completeness. The other cave presentsno special features, neither in the poem nor in nature.][123] [ There is no attempt to disguise thefact that Penelope had long given encouragement to the suitors. The onlydefence set up is that she did not really mean to encourage them. Would it nothave been wiser to have tried a little discouragement?][124] [ See map near the end of bk. vi.Ruccazzù dei corvi of course means “the rock of the ravens.”Both name and ravens still exist.][125] [ See The Authoress of the Odyssey,pp. 140, 141. The real reason for sending Telemachus to Pylos and Lacedaemonwas that the authoress might get Helen of Troy into her poem. He was sent atthe only point in the story at which he could be sent, so he must have gonethen or not at all.][126] [ The site I assign toEumaeus’s hut, close to the Ruccazzù dei corvi, is about 2,000feet above the sea, and commands an extensive view.][127] [ Sandals such as Eumaeus was makingare still worn in the Abruzzi and elsewhere. An oblong piece of leather formsthe sole: holes are cut at the four corners, and through these holes leathernstraps are passed, which are bound round the foot and cross-gartered up thecalf.][128] [ See note [75] : ][129] [ Telemachus like many another goodyoung man seems to expect every one to fetch and carry for him.][130] [ “Il.” vi. 288. Thestore room was fragrant because it was made of cedar wood. See“Il.” xxiv. 192.][131] [ cf. “Il.” vi. 289 and293-296. The dress was kept at the bottom of the chest as one that would onlybe wanted on the greatest occasions; but surely the marriage of Hermione and ofMegapenthes (bk, iv. ad init.) might have induced Helen to wear it onthe preceding evening, in which case it could hardly have got back. We find nohint here of Megapenthes’ recent marriage.][132] [ See note [83].][133] [ cf. “Od.” xi. 196,etc.][134] [ The names Syra and Ortygia, onwhich island a great part of the Doric Syracuse was originally built, suggestthat even in Odyssean times there was a prehistoric Syracuse, the existence ofwhich was known to the writer of the poem.][135] [ Literally “where are theturnings of the sun.” Assuming, as we may safely do, that the Syra andOrtygia of the “Odyssey” refer to Syracuse, it is the fact that notfar to the South of these places the land turns sharply round, so that marinersfollowing the coast would find the sun upon the other side of their ship tothat on which they’d had it hitherto.Mr. A. S. Griffith has kindly called my attention to Herod iv. 42, where,speaking of the circumnavigation of Africa by Phoenician mariners under Necos,he writes:“On their return they declared—I for my part do not believe them,but perhaps others may—that in sailing round Libya [i.e. Africa] they hadthe sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya firstdiscovered.“I take it that Eumaeus was made to have come from Syracuse because thewriter thought she rather ought to have made something happen at Syracuseduring her account of the voyages of Ulysses. She could not, however, break hislong drift from Charybdis to the island of Pantellaria; she therefore resolvedto make it up to Syracuse in another way.”Modern excavations establish the existence of two and only two pre-Doriancommunities at Syracuse; they were, so Dr. Orsi informed me, at Plemmirio andCozzo Pantano. See The Authoress of the Odyssey, pp. 211-213.][136] [ This harbour is again evidently theharbour in which Ulysses had landed, i.e. the harbour that is now the saltworks of S. Cusumano.][137] [ This never can have been anythingbut very niggardly pay for some eight or nine days’ service. I supposethe crew were to consider the pleasure of having had a trip to Pylos as a setoff. There is no trace of the dinner as having been actually given, either onthe following or any other morning.][138] [ No hawk can tear its prey while itis on the wing.][139] [ The text is here apparentlycorrupt, and will not make sense as it stands. I follow Messrs. Butcher &Lang in omitting line 101.][140] [ i.e. to be milked, as in SouthItalian and Sicilian towns at the present day.][141] [ The butchering and making ready thecarcases took place partly in the outer yard and partly in the open part of theinner court.][142] [ These words cannot mean that itwould be afternoon soon after they were spoken. Ulysses and Eumaeus reached thetown which was “some way off” (xvii. 25) in time for thesuitor’s early meal (xvii. 170 and 176) say at ten or eleven o’clock. The context of the rest of the book shows this. Eumaeus and Ulysses,therefore, cannot have started later than eight or nine, and Eumaeus’swords must be taken as an exaggeration for the purpose of making Ulysses bestirhimself.][143] [ I imagine the fountain to have beensomewhere about where the church of the Madonna di Trapani now stands,and to have been fed with water from what is now called the Fontana Diffali onMt. Eryx.][144] [ From this and other passages in the“Odyssey” it appears that we are in an age anterior to the use ofcoined money—an age when cauldrons, tripods, swords, cattle, chattels ofall kinds, measures of corn, wine, or oil, etc. etc., not to say pieces ofgold, silver, bronze, or even iron, wrought more or less, but unstamped, werethe nearest approach to a currency that had as yet been reached.][145] [ Gr. ἐςμέσσον.][146] [ I correct these proofs abroad andam not within reach of Hesiod, but surely this passage suggests acquaintancewith the Works and Ways, though it by no means compels it.][147] [ It would seem as though Eurynomeand Euryclea were the same person. See note 156][148] [ It is plain, therefore, that Iriswas commonly accepted as the messenger of the gods, though our authoress willnever permit her to fetch or carry for any one.][149] [ i.e. the doorway leading from theinner to the outer court.][150] [See note 156][151] [ These, I imagine, must have been inthe open part of the inner courtyard, where the maids also stood, and threw thelight of their torches into the covered cloister that ran all round it. Thesmoke would otherwise have been intolerable.][152] [ Translation very uncertain; videLiddell and Scott, under {Greek}][153] [ See photo on opposite page.][154] [ cf. “Il.” ii. 184, and217, 218. An additional and well-marked feature being wanted to convincePenelope, the writer has taken the hunched shoulders of Thersites (who ismentioned immediately after Eurybates in the “Iliad”) and put themon to Eurybates’ back.][155] [ This is how geese are now fed inSicily, at any rate in summer, when the grass is all burnt up. I have neverseen them grazing.][156] [ Lower down (line 143) Euryclea saysit was herself that had thrown the cloak over Ulysses—for the pluralshould not be taken as implying more than one person. The writer is evidentlystill fluctuating between Euryclea and Eurynome as the name for the old nurse.She probably originally meant to call her Euryclea, but finding it notimmediately easy to make Euryclea scan in xvii. 495, she hastily called herEurynome, intending either to alter this name later or to change the earlierEuryclea’s into Eurynome. She then drifted in to Eurynome as conveniencefurther directed, still nevertheless hankering after Euryclea, till at last shefound that the path of least resistance would lie in the direction of makingEurynome and Euryclea two persons. Therefore in xxiii. 289-292 both Eurynomeand “the nurse” (who can be none other than Euryclea) come ontogether. I do not say that this is feminine, but it is not unfeminine.][157] [ See note [156]][158] [ This, I take it, was immediately infront of the main entrance of the inner courtyard into the body of the house.][159] [ This is the only allusion toSardinia in either “Iliad” or “Odyssey.”][160] [ The normal translation of the Greekword would be “holding back,” “curbing,”“restraining,” but I cannot think that the writer meantthis—she must have been using the word in its other sense of“having,” “holding,” “keeping,”“maintaining.”][161] [ I have vainly tried to realise theconstruction of the fastening here described.][162] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house inthe appendix. It is evident that the open part of the court had no flooring butthe natural soil.][163] [ See plan of Ulysses’ house,and note [175].][164] [ i.e. the door that led into thebody of the house.][165] [ This was, no doubt, the littletable that was set for Ulysses, “Od.” xx. 259.Surely the difficulty of this passage has been overrated. I suppose the ironpart of the axe to have been wedged into the handle, or bound securely toit—the handle being half buried in the ground. The axe would be placededgeways towards the archer, and he would have to shoot his arrow through thehole into which the handle was fitted when the axe was in use. Twelve axes wereplaced in a row all at the same height, all exactly in front of one another,all edgeways to Ulysses whose arrow passed through all the holes from the firstonward. I cannot see how the Greek can bear any other interpretation, the wordsbeing, {Greek}“He did not miss a single hole from the first onwards.” {Greek}according to Liddell and Scott being “the hole for the handle of an axe,etc.,” while {Greek} (“Od.” v. 236) is, according to the sameauthorities, the handle itself. The feat is absurdly impossible, but ourauthoress sometimes has a soul above impossibilities.][166] [ The reader will note how thespoiling of good food distresses the writer even in such a supreme moment asthis.][167] [ Here we have it again. Waste ofsubstance comes first.][168] [ cf. “Il.” iii. 337 andthree other places. It is strange that the author of the “Iliad”should find a little horse-hair so alarming. Possibly enough she was merelyborrowing a common form line from some earlier poet—or poetess—forthis is a woman’s line rather than a man’s.][169] [ Or perhaps simply“window.” See plan in the appendix.][170] [ i.e. the pavement on which Ulysseswas standing.][171] [ The interpretation of lines 126-143is most dubious, and at best we are in a region of melodrama: cf., however,i. 425, etc. from which it appears that there was a tower in the outer court,and that Telemachus used to sleep in it. Theὀρσοθύρα I take to be a door, or trapdoor, leading on to the roof above Telemachus’s bed room, which we aretold was in a place that could be seen from all round—or it might besimply a window in Telemachus’s room looking out into the street. Fromthe top of the tower the outer world was to be told what was going on, butpeople could not get in by theὀρσοθύρα: they would have to come inby the main entrance, and Melanthius explains that the mouth of the narrowpassage (which was in the lands of Ulysses and his friends) commanded the onlyentrance by which help could come, so that there would be nothing gained byraising an alarm.    As for the ῥῶγες of line 143, no commentatorancient or modern has been able to say what was intended—but whateverthey were, Melanthius could never carry twelve shields, twelve helmets, andtwelve spears. Moreover, where he could go the others could go also. If a dozensuitors had followed Melanthius into the house they could have attacked Ulyssesin the rear, in which case, unless Minerva had intervened promptly, the“Odyssey” would have had a different ending. But throughout thescene we are in a region of extravagance rather than of true fiction—itcannot be taken seriously by any but the very serious, until we come to theepisode of Phemius and Medon, where the writer begins to be at home again.][172] [ I presume it was intended thatthere should be a hook driven into the bearing-post.][173] [ What for?][174] [ Gr: {Greek}. This is not {Greek}.][175] [ From lines 333 and 341 of thisbook, and lines 145 and 146 of bk. xxi we can locate the approach to the{Greek} with some certainty.][176] [ But in xix. 500-502 Ulysses scoldedEuryclea for offering information on this very point, and declared himselfquite able to settle it for himself.][177] [ There were a hundred and eightSuitors.][178] [ Lord Grimthorpe, whoseunderstanding does not lend itself to easy imposition, has been good enough towrite to me about my conviction that the “Odyssey” was written by awoman, and to send me remarks upon the gross absurdity of the incident hererecorded. It is plain that all the authoress cared about was that the womenshould be hanged: as for attempting to realise, or to make her readers realise,how the hanging was done, this was of no consequence. The reader must take herword for it and ask no questions. Lord Grimthorpe wrote:“I had better send you my ideas about Nausicaa’s hanging of themaids (not ‘maidens,’ of whom Froude wrote so well in his‘Science of History’) before I forget it all. Luckily for meLiddell & Scott have specially translated most of the doubtful words,referring to this very place.“A ship’s cable. I don’t know how big a ship she meant, butit must have been a very small one indeed if its ‘cable’ could beused to tie tightly round a woman’s neck, and still more round a dozen ofthem ‘in a row,’ besides being strong enough to hold them and pullthem all up.“A dozen average women would need the weight and strength of more than adozen strong heavy men even over the best pulley hung to the roof over them;and the idea of pulling them up by a rope hung anyhow round a pillar {Greek} isabsurdly impossible; and how a dozen of them could be hung dangling round onepost is a problem which a senior wrangler would be puzzled to answer... She hadbetter have let Telemachus use his sword as he had intended till she changedhis mind for him.”][179] [ Then they had all been inUlysses’ service over twenty years; perhaps the twelve guilty ones hadbeen engaged more recently.][180] [ Translation very doubtful—cf.“It.” xxiv. 598.][181] [ But why could she not at once askto see the scar, of which Euryclea had told her, or why could not Ulysses haveshown it to her?][182] [ The people of Ithaca seem to havebeen as fond of carping as the Phaeacians were in vi. 273, etc.][183] [ See note [156]. Ulysses’s bedroom does not appear to have been upstairs, nor yet quite within the house. Isit possible that it was “the domed room” round the outside of whichthe erring maids were, for aught we have heard to the contrary, still hanging?][184] [ Ulysses bedroom in the mind of thewriter is here too apparently down stairs.][185] [ Penelope having been nowsufficiently whitewashed, disappears from the poem.][186] [ So practised a washerwoman as ourauthoress doubtless knew that by this time the web must have become such awreck that it would have gone to pieces in the wash.]A lady points out to me, just as these sheets are leaving my hands, that noreally good needlewoman—no one, indeed, whose work or character was worthconsideration—could have endured, no matter for what reason, theunpicking of her day’s work, day after day for between three and fouryears.][187] [ We must suppose Dolius not yet toknow that his son Melanthius had been tortured, mutilated, and left to die byUlysses’ orders on the preceding day, and that his daughter Melantho hadbeen hanged. Dolius was probably exceptionally simple-minded, and his name wasironical. So on Mt. Eryx I was shown a man who was always called Sonza Maliziaor “Guileless”—he being held exceptionally cunning.]*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ODYSSEY ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.