START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WINNIE-THE-POOH *** WINNIE-THE-POOHBY A. A. MILNEJUVENILESWhen We Were Very Young"The best book of verses for children everwritten."—A. EDWARD NEWTON in The Atlantic Monthly.Fourteen Songs from When We Were Very YoungWords by A. A. Milne.Music by H. Fraser-Simson. Decorations by E. H. Shepard.The King's BreakfastWords by A. A. Milne. Music by H. Fraser-Simson.Decorations by E. H. ShepardESSAYSNot That It MattersThe Sunny SideIf I MayMYSTERY STORYThe Red House MysteryWINNIE-THE-POOHBY A. A. MILNEMcCLELLAND & STEWART, LTD.PUBLISHERS—TORONTOCopyright, Canada, 1926By McClelland & Stewart, LimitedPublishers, TorontoFirst Printing, October, 1926Second " July, 1927Third " December, 1928Fourth " December, 1929Fifth " March, 1931Printed in Canada To Her  HAND IN HAND WE COME CHRISTOPHER ROBIN AND I TO LAY THIS BOOK IN YOUR LAP. SAY YOU'RE SURPRISED? SAY YOU LIKE IT? SAY IT'S JUST WHAT YOU WANTED? BECAUSE IT'S YOURS—— BECAUSE WE LOVE YOU. INTRODUCTIONIf you happen to have read another book about Christopher Robin, you mayremember that he once had a swan (or the swan had Christopher Robin, Idon't know which) and that he used to call this swan Pooh. That was along time ago, and when we said good-bye, we took the name with us, aswe didn't think the swan would want it any more. Well, when Edward Bearsaid that he would like an exciting name all to himself, ChristopherRobin said at once, without stopping to think, that he wasWinnie-the-Pooh. And he was. So, as I have explained the Pooh part, Iwill now explain the rest of it.You can't be in London for long without going to the Zoo. There are somepeople who begin the Zoo at the beginning, called WAYIN, and walk asquickly as they can past every cage until they get to the one calledWAYOUT, but the nicest people go straight to the animal they love themost, and stay there. So when Christopher Robin goes to the Zoo, he goesto where the Polar Bears are, and he whispers something to the thirdkeeper from the left, and doors are unlocked, and we wander through darkpassages and up steep stairs, until at last we come to the special cage,and the cage is opened, and out trots something brown and furry, andwith a happy cry of "Oh, Bear!" Christopher Robin rushes into its arms.Now this bear's name is Winnie, which shows what a good name for bearsit is, but the funny thing is that we can't remember whether Winnie iscalled after Pooh, or Pooh after Winnie. We did know once, but we haveforgotten....I had written as far as this when Piglet looked up and said in hissqueaky voice, "What about Me?" "My dear Piglet," I said, "the wholebook is about you." "So it is about Pooh," he squeaked. You see what itis. He is jealous because he thinks Pooh is having a Grand Introductionall to himself. Pooh is the favourite, of course, there's no denying it,but Piglet comes in for a good many things which Pooh misses; becauseyou can't take Pooh to school without everybody knowing it, but Pigletis so small that he slips into a pocket, where it is very comforting tofeel him when you are not quite sure whether twice seven is twelve ortwenty-two. Sometimes he slips out and has a good look in the ink-pot,and in this way he has got more education than Pooh, but Pooh doesn'tmind. Some have brains, and some haven't, he says, and there it is.And now all the others are saying, "What about Us?" So perhaps thebest thing to do is to stop writing Introductions and get on with thebook.A. A. M.CONTENTSI.IN WHICH WE ARE INTRODUCED TO WINNIE-THE-POOH AND SOME BEES, AND THESTORIES BEGINII. IN WHICH POOH GOES VISITING AND GETS INTO A TIGHT PLACEIII. IN WHICH POOH AND PIGLET GO HUNTING AND NEARLY CATCH A WOOZLEIV. IN WHICH EEYORE LOSES A TAIL AND POOH FINDS ONEV. IN WHICH PIGLET MEETS A HEFFALUMPVI. IN WHICH EEYORE HAS A BIRTHDAY AND GETS TWO PRESENTSVII. IN WHICH KANGA AND BABY ROO COME TO THE FOREST, AND PIGLET HAS ABATHVIII. IN WHICH CHRISTOPHER ROBIN LEADS AN EXPOTITION TO THE NORTH POLEIX. IN WHICH PIGLET IS ENTIRELY SURROUNDED BY WATERX. IN WHICH CHRISTOPHER ROBIN GIVES A POOH PARTY, AND WE SAY GOOD-BYE WINNIE-THE-POOH CHAPTER IIN WHICH WE ARE INTRODUCED TO WINNIE-THE-POOH AND SOME BEES, AND THESTORIES BEGINHere is Edward Bear, coming downstairs now, bump, bump, bump, on theback of his head, behind Christopher Robin. It is, as far as he knows,the only way of coming downstairs, but sometimes he feels that therereally is another way, if only he could stop bumping for a moment andthink of it. And then he feels that perhaps there isn't. Anyhow, here heis at the bottom, and ready to be introduced to you. Winnie-the-Pooh.When I first heard his name, I said, just as you are going to say, "ButI thought he was a boy?""So did I," said Christopher Robin."Then you can't call him Winnie?""I don't.""But you said——""He's Winnie-ther-Pooh. Don't you know what 'ther' means?""Ah, yes, now I do," I said quickly; and I hope you do too, because itis all the explanation you are going to get.Sometimes Winnie-the-Pooh likes a game of some sort when he comesdownstairs, and sometimes he likes to sit quietly in front of the fireand listen to a story. This evening——"What about a story?" said Christopher Robin."What about a story?" I said."Could you very sweetly tell Winnie-the-Pooh one?""I suppose I could," I said. "What sort of stories does he like?""About himself. Because he's that sort of Bear.""Oh, I see.""So could you very sweetly?""I'll try," I said.So I tried.Once upon a time, a very long time ago now, about last Friday,Winnie-the-Pooh lived in a forest all by himself under the name ofSanders. ("What does 'under the name' mean?" asked Christopher Robin."It means he had the name over the door in gold letters, and livedunder it.""Winnie-the-Pooh wasn't quite sure," said Christopher Robin."Now I am," said a growly voice."Then I will go on," said I.)One day when he was out walking, he came to an open place in the middleof the forest, and in the middle of this place was a large oak-tree,and, from the top of the tree, there came a loud buzzing-noise. Winnie-the-Pooh sat down at the foot of the tree, put his head betweenhis paws and began to think.First of all he said to himself: "That buzzing-noise means something.You don't get a buzzing-noise like that, just buzzing and buzzing,without its meaning something. If there's a buzzing-noise, somebody'smaking a buzzing-noise, and the only reason for making a buzzing-noisethat I know of is because you're a bee."Then he thought another long time, and said: "And the only reason forbeing a bee that I know of is making honey."And then he got up, and said: "And the only reason for making honey isso as I can eat it." So he began to climb the tree. He climbed and he climbed and he climbed, and as he climbed he sang alittle song to himself. It went like this:  Isn't it funny How a bear likes honey? Buzz! Buzz! Buzz! I wonder why he does?Then he climbed a little further ... and a little further ... andthen just a little further. By that time he had thought of another song.  It's a very funny thought that, if Bears were Bees, They'd build their nests at the bottom of trees. And that being so (if the Bees were Bears), We shouldn't have to climb up all these stairs.He was getting rather tired by this time, so that is why he sang aComplaining Song. He was nearly there now, and if he just stood on thatbranch ...Crack!"Oh, help!" said Pooh, as he dropped ten feet on the branch below him. "If only I hadn't——" he said, as he bounced twenty feet on to the nextbranch."You see, what I meant to do," he explained, as he turnedhead-over-heels, and crashed on to another branch thirty feet below,"what I meant to do——""Of course, it was rather——" he admitted, as he slithered veryquickly through the next six branches."It all comes, I suppose," he decided, as he said good-bye to the lastbranch, spun round three times, and flew gracefully into a gorse-bush,"it all comes of liking honey so much. Oh, help!"He crawled out of the gorse-bush, brushed the prickles from his nose,and began to think again. And the first person he thought of wasChristopher Robin. ("Was that me?" said Christopher Robin in an awed voice, hardly daringto believe it."That was you."Christopher Robin said nothing, but his eyes got larger and larger, andhis face got pinker and pinker.)So Winnie-the-Pooh went round to his friend Christopher Robin, who livedbehind a green door in another part of the forest. "Good morning, Christopher Robin," he said."Good morning, Winnie-ther-Pooh," said you."I wonder if you've got such a thing as a balloon about you?""A balloon?""Yes, I just said to myself coming along: 'I wonder if Christopher Robinhas such a thing as a balloon about him?' I just said it to myself,thinking of balloons, and wondering.""What do you want a balloon for?" you said.Winnie-the-Pooh looked round to see that nobody was listening, put hispaw to his mouth, and said in a deep whisper: "Honey!""But you don't get honey with balloons!""I do," said Pooh.Well, it just happened that you had been to a party the day before atthe house of your friend Piglet, and you had balloons at the party. Youhad had a big green balloon; and one of Rabbit's relations had had a bigblue one, and had left it behind, being really too young to go to aparty at all; and so you had brought the green one and the blue onehome with you."Which one would you like?" you asked Pooh.He put his head between his paws and thought very carefully."It's like this," he said. "When you go after honey with a balloon, thegreat thing is not to let the bees know you're coming. Now, if you havea green balloon, they might think you were only part of the tree, andnot notice you, and, if you have a blue balloon, they might think youwere only part of the sky, and not notice you, and the question is:Which is most likely?""Wouldn't they notice you underneath the balloon?" you asked."They might or they might not," said Winnie-the-Pooh. "You never cantell with bees." He thought for a moment and said: "I shall try to looklike a small black cloud. That will deceive them." "Then you had better have the blue balloon," you said; and so it wasdecided. Well, you both went out with the blue balloon, and you took your gunwith you, just in case, as you always did, and Winnie-the-Pooh went to avery muddy place that he knew of, and rolled and rolled until he wasblack all over; and then, when the balloon was blown up as big as big,and you and Pooh were both holding on to the string, you let gosuddenly, and Pooh Bear floated gracefully up into the sky, and stayedthere—level with the top of the tree and about twenty feet away fromit. "Hooray!" you shouted."Isn't that fine?" shouted Winnie-the-Pooh down to you. "What do I looklike?""You look like a Bear holding on to a balloon," you said."Not," said Pooh anxiously, "—not like a small black cloud in a bluesky?""Not very much.""Ah, well, perhaps from up here it looks different. And, as I say, younever can tell with bees."There was no wind to blow him nearer to the tree, so there he stayed. Hecould see the honey, he could smell the honey, but he couldn't quitereach the honey.After a little while he called down to you."Christopher Robin!" he said in a loud whisper."Hallo!""I think the bees suspect something!""What sort of thing?""I don't know. But something tells me that they're suspicious!" "Perhaps they think that you're after their honey.""It may be that. You never can tell with bees."There was another little silence, and then he called down to you again."Christopher Robin!""Yes?""Have you an umbrella in your house?""I think so.""I wish you would bring it out here, and walk up and down with it, andlook up at me every now and then, and say 'Tut-tut, it looks like rain.'I think, if you did that, it would help the deception which we arepractising on these bees."Well, you laughed to yourself, "Silly old Bear!" but you didn't say italoud because you were so fond of him, and you went home for yourumbrella. "Oh, there you are!" called down Winnie-the-Pooh, as soon as you gotback to the tree. "I was beginning to get anxious. I have discoveredthat the bees are now definitely Suspicious.""Shall I put my umbrella up?" you said."Yes, but wait a moment. We must be practical. The important bee todeceive is the Queen Bee. Can you see which is the Queen Bee from downthere?""No.""A pity. Well, now, if you walk up and down with your umbrella, saying,'Tut-tut, it looks like rain,' I shall do what I can by singing a littleCloud Song, such as a cloud might sing.... Go!"So, while you walked up and down and wondered if it would rain,Winnie-the-Pooh sang this song:  How sweet to be a Cloud Floating in the Blue! Every little cloud Always sings aloud.   "How sweet to be a Cloud Floating in the Blue!" It makes him very proud To be a little cloud. The bees were still buzzing as suspiciously as ever. Some of them,indeed, left their nests and flew all round the cloud as it began thesecond verse of this song, and one bee sat down on the nose of the cloudfor a moment, and then got up again. "Christopher—ow!—Robin," called out the cloud."Yes?""I have just been thinking, and I have come to a very importantdecision. These are the wrong sort of bees.""Are they?""Quite the wrong sort. So I should think they would make the wrong sortof honey, shouldn't you?" "Would they?""Yes. So I think I shall come down.""How?" asked you.Winnie-the-Pooh hadn't thought about this. If he let go of the string,he would fall—bump—and he didn't like the idea of that. So hethought for a long time, and then he said:"Christopher Robin, you must shoot the balloon with your gun. Have yougot your gun?""Of course I have," you said. "But if I do that, it will spoil theballoon," you said."But if you don't," said Pooh, "I shall have to let go, and that wouldspoil me."When he put it like this, you saw how it was, and you aimed verycarefully at the balloon, and fired."Ow!" said Pooh."Did I miss?" you asked."You didn't exactly miss," said Pooh, "but you missed the balloon.""I'm so sorry," you said, and you fired again, and this time you hit theballoon, and the air came slowly out, and Winnie-the-Pooh floated downto the ground.But his arms were so stiff from holding on to the string of the balloonall that time that they stayed up straight in the air for more than aweek, and whenever a fly came and settled on his nose he had to blow itoff. And I think—but I am not sure—that that is why he was alwayscalled Pooh. "Is that the end of the story?" asked Christopher Robin."That's the end of that one. There are others.""About Pooh and Me?""And Piglet and Rabbit and all of you. Don't you remember?""I do remember, and then when I try to remember, I forget.""That day when Pooh and Piglet tried to catch the Heffalump——""They didn't catch it, did they?""No.""Pooh couldn't, because he hasn't any brain. Did I catch it?""Well, that comes into the story."Christopher Robin nodded."I do remember," he said, "only Pooh doesn't very well, so that's why helikes having it told to him again. Because then it's a real story andnot just a remembering.""That's just how I feel," I said.Christopher Robin gave a deep sigh, picked his Bear up by the leg, andwalked off to the door, trailing Pooh behind him. At the door he turnedand said, "Coming to see me have my bath?""I might," I said."I didn't hurt him when I shot him, did I?""Not a bit."He nodded and went out, and in a moment I heard Winnie-the-Pooh—bump,bump, bump—going up the stairs behind him. CHAPTER IIIN WHICH POOH GOES VISITING AND GETS INTO A TIGHT PLACE Edward Bear, known to his friends as Winnie-the-Pooh, or Pooh forshort, was walking through the forest one day, humming proudly tohimself. He had made up a little hum that very morning, as he was doinghis Stoutness Exercises in front of the glass: Tra-la-la, tra-la-la,as he stretched up as high as he could go, and then Tra-la-la,tra-la—oh, help!—la, as he tried to reach his toes. After breakfasthe had said it over and over to himself until he had learnt it off byheart, and now he was humming it right through, properly. It went likethis:  Tra-la-la, tra-la-la, Tra-la-la, tra-la-la, Rum-tum-tiddle-um-tum. Tiddle-iddle, tiddle-iddle, Tiddle-iddle, tiddle-iddle, Rum-tum-tum-tiddle-um. Well, he was humming this hum to himself, and walking along gaily,wondering what everybody else was doing, and what it felt like, beingsomebody else, when suddenly he came to a sandy bank, and in the bankwas a large hole."Aha!" said Pooh. (Rum-tum-tiddle-um-tum.) "If I know anything aboutanything, that hole means Rabbit," he said, "and Rabbit means Company,"he said, "and Company means Food and Listening-to-Me-Humming and suchlike. Rum-tum-tum-tiddle-um."So he bent down, put his head into the hole, and called out:"Is anybody at home?"There was a sudden scuffling noise from inside the hole, and thensilence."What I said was, 'Is anybody at home?'" called out Pooh very loudly."No!" said a voice; and then added, "You needn't shout so loud. I heardyou quite well the first time.""Bother!" said Pooh. "Isn't there anybody here at all?""Nobody."Winnie-the-Pooh took his head out of the hole, and thought for a little,and he thought to himself, "There must be somebody there, becausesomebody must have said 'Nobody.'" So he put his head back in thehole, and said:"Hallo, Rabbit, isn't that you?""No," said Rabbit, in a different sort of voice this time."But isn't that Rabbit's voice?""I don't think so," said Rabbit. "It isn't meant to be.""Oh!" said Pooh.He took his head out of the hole, and had another think, and then he putit back, and said:"Well, could you very kindly tell me where Rabbit is?""He has gone to see his friend Pooh Bear, who is a great friend of his.""But this is Me!" said Bear, very much surprised."What sort of Me?""Pooh Bear.""Are you sure?" said Rabbit, still more surprised."Quite, quite sure," said Pooh."Oh, well, then, come in." So Pooh pushed and pushed and pushed his way through the hole, and atlast he got in."You were quite right," said Rabbit, looking at him all over. "It isyou. Glad to see you.""Who did you think it was?""Well, I wasn't sure. You know how it is in the Forest. One can't haveanybody coming into one's house. One has to be careful. What about amouthful of something?"Pooh always liked a little something at eleven o'clock in the morning,and he was very glad to see Rabbit getting out the plates and mugs; andwhen Rabbit said, "Honey or condensed milk with your bread?" he was soexcited that he said, "Both," and then, so as not to seem greedy, headded, "But don't bother about the bread, please." And for a long timeafter that he said nothing ... until at last, humming to himself in arather sticky voice, he got up, shook Rabbit lovingly by the paw, andsaid that he must be going on."Must you?" said Rabbit politely."Well," said Pooh, "I could stay a little longer if it—if you——" andhe tried very hard to look in the direction of the larder."As a matter of fact," said Rabbit, "I was going out myself directly.""Oh, well, then, I'll be going on. Good-bye.""Well, good-bye, if you're sure you won't have any more.""Is there any more?" asked Pooh quickly.Rabbit took the covers off the dishes, and said, "No, there wasn't.""I thought not," said Pooh, nodding to himself. "Well, good-bye. I mustbe going on." So he started to climb out of the hole. He pulled with his front paws,and pushed with his back paws, and in a little while his nose was out inthe open again ... and then his ears ... and then his front paws ...and then his shoulders ... and then——"Oh, help!" said Pooh. "I'd better go back.""Oh, bother!" said Pooh. "I shall have to go on.""I can't do either!" said Pooh. "Oh, help and bother!"Now by this time Rabbit wanted to go for a walk too, and finding thefront door full, he went out by the back door, and came round to Pooh,and looked at him. "Hallo, are you stuck?" he asked."N-no," said Pooh carelessly. "Just resting and thinking and humming tomyself.""Here, give us a paw."Pooh Bear stretched out a paw, and Rabbit pulled and pulled andpulled...."Ow!" cried Pooh. "You're hurting!""The fact is," said Rabbit, "you're stuck.""It all comes," said Pooh crossly, "of not having front doors bigenough.""It all comes," said Rabbit sternly, "of eating too much. I thought atthe time," said Rabbit, "only I didn't like to say anything," saidRabbit, "that one of us was eating too much," said Rabbit, "and I knewif wasn't me," he said. "Well, well, I shall go and fetch ChristopherRobin."Christopher Robin lived at the other end of the Forest, and when he cameback with Rabbit, and saw the front half of Pooh, he said, "Silly oldBear," in such a loving voice that everybody felt quite hopeful again."I was just beginning to think," said Bear, sniffing slightly, "thatRabbit might never be able to use his front door again. And I shouldhate that," he said."So should I," said Rabbit."Use his front door again?" said Christopher Robin. "Of course he'll usehis front door again.""Good," said Rabbit."If we can't pull you out, Pooh, we might push you back."Rabbit scratched his whiskers thoughtfully, and pointed out that, whenonce Pooh was pushed back, he was back, and of course nobody was moreglad to see Pooh than he was, still there it was, some lived in treesand some lived underground, and——"You mean I'd never get out?" said Pooh."I mean," said Rabbit, "that having got so far, it seems a pity towaste it."Christopher Robin nodded."Then there's only one thing to be done," he said. "We shall have towait for you to get thin again.""How long does getting thin take?" asked Pooh anxiously."About a week, I should think.""But I can't stay here for a week!""You can stay here all right, silly old Bear. It's getting you outwhich is so difficult.""We'll read to you," said Rabbit cheerfully. "And I hope it won't snow,"he added. "And I say, old fellow, you're taking up a good deal of roomin my house—do you mind if I use your back legs as a towel-horse?Because, I mean, there they are—doing nothing—and it would be veryconvenient just to hang the towels on them.""A week!" said Pooh gloomily. "What about meals?""I'm afraid no meals," said Christopher Robin, "because of getting thinquicker. But we will read to you."Bear began to sigh, and then found he couldn't because he was so tightlystuck; and a tear rolled down his eye, as he said:"Then would you read a Sustaining Book, such as would help and comfort aWedged Bear in Great Tightness?" So for a week Christopher Robin read that sort of book at the North endof Pooh, and Rabbit hung his washing on the South end ... and inbetween Bear felt himself getting slenderer and slenderer. And at theend of the week Christopher Robin said, "Now!" So he took hold of Pooh's front paws and Rabbit took hold of ChristopherRobin, and all Rabbit's friends and relations took hold of Rabbit, andthey all pulled together....And for a long time Pooh only said "Ow!" ...And "Oh!" ... And then, all of a sudden, he said "Pop!" just as if a cork werecoming out of a bottle.And Christopher Robin and Rabbit and all Rabbit's friends and relationswent head-over-heels backwards ... and on the top of them cameWinnie-the-Pooh—free!So, with a nod of thanks to his friends, he went on with his walkthrough the forest, humming proudly to himself. But, Christopher Robinlooked after him lovingly, and said to himself, "Silly old Bear!"CHAPTER IIIIN WHICH POOH AND PIGLET GO HUNTING AND NEARLY CATCH A WOOZLEThe Piglet lived in a very grand house in the middle of a beech-tree,and the beech-tree was in the middle of the forest, and the Piglet livedin the middle of the house. Next to his house was a piece of brokenboard which had: "TRESPASSERS W" on it. When Christopher Robin asked thePiglet what it meant, he said it was his grandfather's name, and hadbeen in the family for a long time, Christopher Robin said youcouldn't be called Trespassers W, and Piglet said yes, you could,because his grandfather was, and it was short for Trespassers Will,which was short for Trespassers William. And his grandfather had had twonames in case he lost one—Trespassers after an uncle, and William afterTrespassers. "I've got two names," said Christopher Robin carelessly."Well, there you are, that proves it," said Piglet.One fine winter's day when Piglet was brushing away the snow in front ofhis house, he happened to look up, and there was Winnie-the-Pooh. Poohwas walking round and round in a circle, thinking of something else, andwhen Piglet called to him, he just went on walking."Hallo!" said Piglet, "what are you doing?""Hunting," said Pooh."Hunting what?""Tracking something," said Winnie-the-Pooh very mysteriously."Tracking what?" said Piglet, coming closer."That's just what I ask myself. I ask myself, What?""What do you think you'll answer?""I shall have to wait until I catch up with it," said Winnie-the-Pooh."Now, look there." He pointed to the ground in front of him. "What doyou see there?" "Tracks," said Piglet. "Paw-marks." He gave a little squeak ofexcitement. "Oh, Pooh! Do you think it's a—a—a Woozle?""It may be," said Pooh. "Sometimes it is, and sometimes it isn't. Younever can tell with paw-marks."With these few words he went on tracking, and Piglet, after watching himfor a minute or two, ran after him. Winnie-the-Pooh had come to a suddenstop, and was bending over the tracks in a puzzled sort of way."What's the matter?" asked Piglet."It's a very funny thing," said Bear, "but there seem to betwo animals now. This—whatever-it-was—has been joined byanother—whatever-it-is—and the two of them are now proceeding incompany. Would you mind coming with me, Piglet, in case they turn outto be Hostile Animals?"Piglet scratched his ear in a nice sort of way, and said that he hadnothing to do until Friday, and would be delighted to come, in case itreally was a Woozle."You mean, in case it really is two Woozles," said Winnie-the-Pooh, andPiglet said that anyhow he had nothing to do until Friday. So off theywent together. There was a small spinney of larch trees just here, and it seemed as ifthe two Woozles, if that is what they were, had been going round thisspinney; so round this spinney went Pooh and Piglet after them; Pigletpassing the time by telling Pooh what his Grandfather Trespassers W haddone to Remove Stiffness after Tracking, and how his GrandfatherTrespassers W had suffered in his later years from Shortness of Breath,and other matters of interest, and Pooh wondering what a Grandfather waslike, and if perhaps this was Two Grandfathers they were after now, and,if so, whether he would be allowed to take one home and keep it, andwhat Christopher Robin would say. And still the tracks went on in frontof them....Suddenly Winnie-the-Pooh stopped, and pointed excitedly in front of him."Look!""What?" said Piglet, with a jump. And then, to show that he hadn'tbeen frightened, he jumped up and down once or twice more in anexercising sort of way. "The tracks!" said Pooh. "A third animal has joined the other two!""Pooh!" cried Piglet. "Do you think it is another Woozle?""No," said Pooh, "because it makes different marks. It is either TwoWoozles and one, as it might be, Wizzle, or Two, as it might be, Wizzlesand one, if so it is, Woozle. Let us continue to follow them."So they went on, feeling just a little anxious now, in case the threeanimals in front of them were of Hostile Intent. And Piglet wished verymuch that his Grandfather T. W. were there, instead of elsewhere, andPooh thought how nice it would be if they met Christopher Robin suddenlybut quite accidentally, and only because he liked Christopher Robin somuch. And then, all of a sudden, Winnie-the-Pooh stopped again, andlicked the tip of his nose in a cooling manner, for he was feeling morehot and anxious than ever in his life before. There were four animalsin front of them!"Do you see, Piglet? Look at their tracks! Three, as it were, Woozles,and one, as it was, Wizzle. Another Woozle has joined them!"And so it seemed to be. There were the tracks; crossing over each otherhere, getting muddled up with each other there; but, quite plainly everynow and then, the tracks of four sets of paws. "I think," said Piglet, when he had licked the tip of his nose too,and found that it brought very little comfort, "I think that I havejust remembered something. I have just remembered something that Iforgot to do yesterday and shan't be able to do to-morrow. So I supposeI really ought to go back and do it now.""We'll do it this afternoon, and I'll come with you," said Pooh."It isn't the sort of thing you can do in the afternoon," said Pigletquickly. "It's a very particular morning thing, that has to be done inthe morning, and, if possible, between the hours of——What would yousay the time was?""About twelve," said Winnie-the-Pooh, looking at the sun."Between, as I was saying, the hours of twelve and twelve five. So,really, dear old Pooh, if you'll excuse me——What's that?"Pooh looked up at the sky, and then, as he heard the whistle again, helooked up into the branches of a big oak-tree, and then he saw a friendof his. "It's Christopher Robin," he said."Ah, then you'll be all right," said Piglet. "You'll be quite safe withhim. Good-bye," and he trotted off home as quickly as he could, veryglad to be Out of All Danger again. Christopher Robin came slowly down his tree."Silly old Bear," he said, "what were you doing? First you went roundthe spinney twice by yourself, and then Piglet ran after you and youwent round again together, and then you were just going round a fourthtime——""Wait a moment," said Winnie-the-Pooh, holding up his paw.He sat down and thought, in the most thoughtful way he could think. Thenhe fitted his paw into one of the Tracks ... and then he scratched hisnose twice, and stood up."Yes," said Winnie-the-Pooh."I see now," said Winnie-the-Pooh."I have been Foolish and Deluded," said he, "and I am a Bear of No Brainat All.""You're the Best Bear in All the World," said Christopher Robinsoothingly."Am I?" said Pooh hopefully. And then he brightened up suddenly."Anyhow," he said, "it is nearly Luncheon Time."So he went home for it.CHAPTER IVIN WHICH EEYORE LOSES A TAIL AND POOH FINDS ONEThe Old Grey Donkey, Eeyore, stood by himself in a thistly corner ofthe forest, his front feet well apart, his head on one side, and thoughtabout things. Sometimes he thought sadly to himself, "Why?" andsometimes he thought, "Wherefore?" and sometimes he thought, "Inasmuchas which?"—and sometimes he didn't quite know what he was thinkingabout. So when Winnie-the-Pooh came stumping along, Eeyore was very gladto be able to stop thinking for a little, in order to say "How do youdo?" in a gloomy manner to him. "And how are you?" said Winnie-the-Pooh.Eeyore shook his head from side to side."Not very how," he said. "I don't seem to have felt at all how for along time.""Dear, dear," said Pooh, "I'm sorry about that. Let's have a look atyou."So Eeyore stood there, gazing sadly at the ground, and Winnie-the-Poohwalked all round him once. "Why, what's happened to your tail?" he said in surprise."What has happened to it?" said Eeyore."It isn't there!""Are you sure?""Well, either a tail is there or it isn't there. You can't make amistake about it. And yours isn't there!""Then what is?""Nothing." "Let's have a look," said Eeyore, and he turned slowly round to theplace where his tail had been a little while ago, and then, finding thathe couldn't catch it up, he turned round the other way, until he cameback to where he was at first, and then he put his head down and lookedbetween his front legs, and at last he said, with a long, sad sigh, "Ibelieve you're right.""Of course I'm right," said Pooh."That Accounts for a Good Deal," said Eeyore gloomily. "It ExplainsEverything. No Wonder.""You must have left it somewhere," said Winnie-the-Pooh."Somebody must have taken it," said Eeyore. "How Like Them," he added,after a long silence. Pooh felt that he ought to say something helpful about it, but didn'tquite know what. So he decided to do something helpful instead."Eeyore," he said solemnly, "I, Winnie-the-Pooh, will find your tail foryou.""Thank you, Pooh," answered Eeyore. "You're a real friend," said he."Not like Some," he said.So Winnie-the-Pooh went off to find Eeyore's tail.It was a fine spring morning in the forest as he started out. Littlesoft clouds played happily in a blue sky, skipping from time to time infront of the sun as if they had come to put it out, and then slidingaway suddenly so that the next might have his turn. Through them andbetween them the sun shone bravely; and a copse which had worn its firsall the year round seemed old and dowdy now beside the new green lacewhich the beeches had put on so prettily. Through copse and spinneymarched Bear; down open slopes of gorse and heather, over rocky beds ofstreams, up steep banks of sandstone into the heather again; and so atlast, tired and hungry, to the Hundred Acre Wood. For it was in theHundred Acre Wood that Owl lived."And if anyone knows anything about anything," said Bear to himself,"it's Owl who knows something about something," he said, "or my name'snot Winnie-the-Pooh," he said. "Which it is," he added. "So there youare."Owl lived at The Chestnuts, an old-world residence of great charm, whichwas grander than anybody else's, or seemed so to Bear, because it hadboth a knocker and a bell-pull. Underneath the knocker there was anotice which said:PLES RING IF AN RNSER IS REQIRD.Underneath the bell-pull there was a notice which said:PLEZ CNOKE IF AN RNSR IS NOT REQID. These notices had been written by Christopher Robin, who was the onlyone in the forest who could spell; for Owl, wise though he was in manyways, able to read and write and spell his own name WOL, yet somehowwent all to pieces over delicate words like MEASLES and BUTTEREDTOAST.Winnie-the-Pooh read the two notices very carefully, first from left toright, and afterwards, in case he had missed some of it, from right toleft. Then, to make quite sure, he knocked and pulled the knocker, andhe pulled and knocked the bell-rope, and he called out in a very loudvoice, "Owl! I require an answer! It's Bear speaking." And the dooropened, and Owl looked out."Hallo, Pooh," he said. "How's things?""Terrible and Sad," said Pooh, "because Eeyore, who is a friend of mine,has lost his tail. And he's Moping about it. So could you very kindlytell me how to find it for him?""Well," said Owl, "the customary procedure in such cases is as follows.""What does Crustimoney Proseedcake mean?" said Pooh. "For I am a Bear ofVery Little Brain, and long words Bother me.""It means the Thing to Do.""As long as it means that, I don't mind," said Pooh humbly."The thing to do is as follows. First, Issue a Reward. Then——""Just a moment," said Pooh, holding up his paw. "What do we do tothis—what you were saying? You sneezed just as you were going to tellme.""I didn't sneeze.""Yes, you did, Owl.""Excuse me, Pooh, I didn't. You can't sneeze without knowing it.""Well, you can't know it without something having been sneezed.""What I said was, 'First Issue a Reward'.""You're doing it again," said Pooh sadly."A Reward!" said Owl very loudly. "We write a notice to say that we willgive a large something to anybody who finds Eeyore's tail." "I see, I see," said Pooh, nodding his head. "Talking about largesomethings," he went on dreamily, "I generally have a small somethingabout now—about this time in the morning," and he looked wistfully atthe cupboard in the corner of Owl's parlour; "just a mouthful ofcondensed milk or whatnot, with perhaps a lick of honey——""Well, then," said Owl, "we write out this notice, and we put it up allover the forest.""A lick of honey," murmured Bear to himself, "or—or not, as the casemay be." And he gave a deep sigh, and tried very hard to listen to whatOwl was saying.But Owl went on and on, using longer and longer words, until at last hecame back to where he started, and he explained that the person to writeout this notice was Christopher Robin."It was he who wrote the ones on my front door for me. Did you see them,Pooh?"For some time now Pooh had been saying "Yes" and "No" in turn, with hiseyes shut, to all that Owl was saying, and having said, "Yes, yes," lasttime, he said "No, not at all," now, without really knowing what Owl wastalking about."Didn't you see them?" said Owl, a little surprised. "Come and look atthem now."So they went outside. And Pooh looked at the knocker and the noticebelow it, and he looked at the bell-rope and the notice below it, andthe more he looked at the bell-rope, the more he felt that he had seensomething like it, somewhere else, sometime before."Handsome bell-rope, isn't it?" said Owl.Pooh nodded."It reminds me of something," he said, "but I can't think what. Wheredid you get it?" "I just came across it in the Forest. It was hanging over a bush, and Ithought at first somebody lived there, so I rang it, and nothinghappened, and then I rang it again very loudly, and it came off in myhand, and as nobody seemed to want it, I took it home, and——""Owl," said Pooh solemnly, "you made a mistake. Somebody did want it.""Who?""Eeyore. My dear friend Eeyore. He was—he was fond of it.""Fond of it?""Attached to it," said Winnie-the-Pooh sadly. So with these words he unhooked it, and carried it back to Eeyore; andwhen Christopher Robin had nailed it on in its right place again, Eeyorefrisked about the forest, waving his tail so happily thatWinnie-the-Pooh came over all funny, and had to hurry home for a littlesnack of something to sustain him. And, wiping his mouth half an hourafterwards, he sang to himself proudly:  Who found the Tail? "I," said Pooh, "At a quarter to two (Only it was quarter to eleven really), I found the Tail!"  CHAPTER VIN WHICH PIGLET MEETS A HEFFALUMPOne day, when Christopher Robin and Winnie-the-Pooh and Piglet wereall talking together, Christopher Robin finished the mouthful he waseating and said carelessly: "I saw a Heffalump to-day, Piglet.""What was it doing?" asked Piglet."Just lumping along," said Christopher Robin. "I don't think it sawme.""I saw one once," said Piglet. "At least, I think I did," he said. "Onlyperhaps it wasn't.""So did I," said Pooh, wondering what a Heffalump was like."You don't often see them," said Christopher Robin carelessly."Not now," said Piglet."Not at this time of year," said Pooh. Then they all talked about something else, until it was time for Poohand Piglet to go home together. At first as they stumped along the pathwhich edged the Hundred Acre Wood, they didn't say much to each other;but when they came to the stream and had helped each other across thestepping stones, and were able to walk side by side again over theheather, they began to talk in a friendly way about this and that, andPiglet said, "If you see what I mean, Pooh," and Pooh said, "It's justwhat I think myself, Piglet," and Piglet said, "But, on the other hand,Pooh, we must remember," and Pooh said, "Quite true, Piglet, although Ihad forgotten it for the moment." And then, just as they came to the SixPine Trees, Pooh looked round to see that nobody else was listening, andsaid in a very solemn voice:"Piglet, I have decided something.""What have you decided, Pooh?""I have decided to catch a Heffalump."Pooh nodded his head several times as he said this, and waited forPiglet to say "How?" or "Pooh, you couldn't!" or something helpful ofthat sort, but Piglet said nothing. The fact was Piglet was wishing thathe had thought about it first."I shall do it," said Pooh, after waiting a little longer, "by means ofa trap. And it must be a Cunning Trap, so you will have to help me,Piglet.""Pooh," said Piglet, feeling quite happy again now, "I will." And thenhe said, "How shall we do it?" and Pooh said, "That's just it. How?" Andthen they sat down together to think it out.Pooh's first idea was that they should dig a Very Deep Pit, and then theHeffalump would come along and fall into the Pit, and——"Why?" said Piglet."Why what?" said Pooh."Why would he fall in?"Pooh rubbed his nose with his paw, and said that the Heffalump might bewalking along, humming a little song, and looking up at the sky,wondering if it would rain, and so he wouldn't see the Very Deep Pituntil he was half-way down, when it would be too late.Piglet said that this was a very good Trap, but supposing it wereraining already?Pooh rubbed his nose again, and said that he hadn't thought of that. Andthen he brightened up, and said that, if it were raining already, theHeffalump would be looking at the sky wondering if it would clear up,and so he wouldn't see the Very Deep Pit until he was half-waydown.... When it would be too late.Piglet said that, now that this point had been explained, he thought itwas a Cunning Trap.Pooh was very proud when he heard this, and he felt that the Heffalumpwas as good as caught already, but there was just one other thing whichhad to be thought about, and it was this. Where should they dig theVery Deep Pit?Piglet said that the best place would be somewhere where a Heffalumpwas, just before he fell into it, only about a foot farther on."But then he would see us digging it," said Pooh."Not if he was looking at the sky.""He would Suspect," said Pooh, "if he happened to look down." He thoughtfor a long time and then added sadly, "It isn't as easy as I thought. Isuppose that's why Heffalumps hardly ever get caught.""That must be it," said Piglet.They sighed and got up; and when they had taken a few gorse prickles outof themselves they sat down again; and all the time Pooh was saying tohimself, "If only I could think of something!" For he felt sure that aVery Clever Brain could catch a Heffalump if only he knew the right wayto go about it."Suppose," he said to Piglet, "you wanted to catch me, how would youdo it?""Well," said Piglet, "I should do it like this. I should make a Trap,and I should put a Jar of Honey in the Trap, and you would smell it, andyou would go in after it, and——""And I would go in after it," said Pooh excitedly, "only very carefullyso as not to hurt myself, and I would get to the Jar of Honey, and Ishould lick round the edges first of all, pretending that there wasn'tany more, you know, and then I should walk away and think about it alittle, and then I should come back and start licking in the middle ofthe jar, and then——""Yes, well never mind about that. There you would be, and there I shouldcatch you. Now the first thing to think of is, What do Heffalumps like?I should think acorns, shouldn't you? We'll get a lot of——I say, wakeup, Pooh!"Pooh, who had gone into a happy dream, woke up with a start, and saidthat Honey was a much more trappy thing than Haycorns. Piglet didn'tthink so; and they were just going to argue about it, when Pigletremembered that, if they put acorns in the Trap, he would have to findthe acorns, but if they put honey, then Pooh would have to give up someof his own honey, so he said, "All right, honey then," just as Poohremembered it too, and was going to say, "All right, haycorns.""Honey," said Piglet to himself in a thoughtful way, as if it were nowsettled. "I'll dig the pit, while you go and get the honey.""Very well," said Pooh, and he stumped off. As soon as he got home, he went to the larder; and he stood on a chair,and took down a very large jar of honey from the top shelf. It had HUNNYwritten on it, but, just to make sure, he took off the paper cover andlooked at it, and it looked just like honey. "But you never can tell,"said Pooh. "I remember my uncle saying once that he had seen cheese justthis colour." So he put his tongue in, and took a large lick. "Yes," hesaid, "it is. No doubt about that. And honey, I should say, right downto the bottom of the jar. Unless, of course," he said, "somebody putcheese in at the bottom just for a joke. Perhaps I had better go alittle further ... just in case ... in case Heffalumps don'tlike cheese ... same as me.... Ah!" And he gave a deep sigh. "Iwas right. It is honey, right the way down." Having made certain of this, he took the jar back to Piglet, and Pigletlooked up from the bottom of his Very Deep Pit, and said, "Got it?" andPooh said, "Yes, but it isn't quite a full jar," and he threw it down toPiglet, and Piglet said, "No, it isn't! Is that all you've got left?"and Pooh said "Yes." Because it was. So Piglet put the jar at the bottomof the Pit, and climbed out, and they went off home together. "Well, good night, Pooh," said Piglet, when they had got to Pooh'shouse. "And we meet at six o'clock to-morrow morning by the Pine Trees,and see how many Heffalumps we've got in our Trap.""Six o'clock, Piglet. And have you got any string?""No. Why do you want string?""To lead them home with.""Oh! ... I think Heffalumps come if you whistle.""Some do and some don't. You never can tell with Heffalumps. Well, goodnight!""Good night!"And off Piglet trotted to his house TRESPASSERS W, while Pooh made hispreparations for bed.Some hours later, just as the night was beginning to steal away, Poohwoke up suddenly with a sinking feeling. He had had that sinking feelingbefore, and he knew what it meant. He was hungry. So he went to thelarder, and he stood on a chair and reached up to the top shelf, andfound—nothing."That's funny," he thought. "I know I had a jar of honey there. A fulljar, full of honey right up to the top, and it had HUNNY written on it,so that I should know it was honey. That's very funny." And then hebegan to wander up and down, wondering where it was and murmuring amurmur to himself. Like this:  It's very, very funny, 'Cos I know I had some honey; 'Cos it had a label on, Saying HUNNY. A goloptious full-up pot too, And I don't know where it's got to, No, I don't know where it's gone— Well, it's funny.He had murmured this to himself three times in a singing sort of way,when suddenly he remembered. He had put it into the Cunning Trap tocatch the Heffalump."Bother!" said Pooh. "It all comes of trying to be kind to Heffalumps."And he got back into bed.But he couldn't sleep. The more he tried to sleep, the more he couldn't.He tried Counting Sheep, which is sometimes a good way of getting tosleep, and, as that was no good, he tried counting Heffalumps. And thatwas worse. Because every Heffalump that he counted was making straightfor a pot of Pooh's honey, and eating it all. For some minutes he laythere miserably, but when the five hundred and eighty-seventh Heffalumpwas licking its jaws, and saying to itself, "Very good honey this, Idon't know when I've tasted better," Pooh could bear it no longer. Hejumped out of bed, he ran out of the house, and he ran straight to theSix Pine Trees. The Sun was still in bed, but there was a lightness in the sky over theHundred Acre Wood which seemed to show that it was waking up and wouldsoon be kicking off the clothes. In the half-light the Pine Trees lookedcold and lonely, and the Very Deep Pit seemed deeper than it was, andPooh's jar of honey at the bottom was something mysterious, a shape andno more. But as he got nearer to it his nose told him that it was indeedhoney, and his tongue came out and began to polish up his mouth, readyfor it. "Bother!" said Pooh, as he got his nose inside the jar. "A Heffalump hasbeen eating it!" And then he thought a little and said, "Oh, no, Idid. I forgot."Indeed, he had eaten most of it. But there was a little left at the verybottom of the jar, and he pushed his head right in, and began tolick.... By and by Piglet woke up. As soon as he woke he said to himself, "Oh!"Then he said bravely, "Yes," and then, still more bravely, "Quite so."But he didn't feel very brave, for the word which was really jiggetingabout in his brain was "Heffalumps."What was a Heffalump like?Was it Fierce?Did it come when you whistled? And how did it come?Was it Fond of Pigs at all?If it was Fond of Pigs, did it make any difference what sort of Pig?Supposing it was Fierce with Pigs, would it make any difference if thePig had a grandfather called TRESPASSERS WILLIAM? He didn't know the answer to any of these questions ... and he wasgoing to see his first Heffalump in about an hour from now!Of course Pooh would be with him, and it was much more Friendly withtwo. But suppose Heffalumps were Very Fierce with Pigs and Bears?Wouldn't it be better to pretend that he had a headache, and couldn't goup to the Six Pine Trees this morning? But then suppose that it was avery fine day, and there was no Heffalump in the trap, here he would be,in bed all the morning, simply wasting his time for nothing. What shouldhe do?And then he had a Clever Idea. He would go up very quietly to the SixPine Trees now, peep very cautiously into the Trap, and see if therewas a Heffalump there. And if there was, he would go back to bed, andif there wasn't, he wouldn't.So off he went. At first he thought that there wouldn't be a Heffalumpin the Trap, and then he thought that there would, and as he got nearerhe was sure that there would, because he could hear it heffalumpingabout it like anything."Oh, dear, oh, dear, oh, dear!" said Piglet to himself. And he wanted torun away. But somehow, having got so near, he felt that he must just seewhat a Heffalump was like. So he crept to the side of the Trap andlooked in.... And all the time Winnie-the-Pooh had been trying to get the honey-jaroff his head. The more he shook it, the more tightly it stuck."Bother!" he said, inside the jar, and "Oh, help!" and, mostly,"Ow!" And he tried bumping it against things, but as he couldn't seewhat he was bumping it against, it didn't help him; and he tried toclimb out of the Trap, but as he could see nothing but jar, and not muchof that, he couldn't find his way. So at last he lifted up his head, jarand all, and made a loud, roaring noise of Sadness and Despair ... andit was at that moment that Piglet looked down. "Help, help!" cried Piglet, "a Heffalump, a Horrible Heffalump!" and hescampered off as hard as he could, still crying out, "Help, help, aHerrible Hoffalump! Hoff, Hoff, a Hellible Horralump! Holl, Holl, aHoffable Hellerump!" And he didn't stop crying and scampering until hegot to Christopher Robin's house."Whatever's the matter, Piglet?" said Christopher Robin, who was justgetting up."Heff," said Piglet, breathing so hard that he could hardly speak, "aHeff—a Heff—a Heffalump.""Where?""Up there," said Piglet, waving his paw."What did it look like?""Like—like——It had the biggest head you ever saw, Christopher Robin.A great enormous thing, like—like nothing. A huge big—well, like a—Idon't know—like an enormous big nothing. Like a jar.""Well," said Christopher Robin, putting on his shoes, "I shall go andlook at it. Come on." Piglet wasn't afraid if he had Christopher Robin with him, so off theywent...."I can hear it, can't you?" said Piglet anxiously, as they got near."I can hear something," said Christopher Robin.It was Pooh bumping his head against a tree-root he had found."There!" said Piglet. "Isn't it awful?" And he held on tight toChristopher Robin's hand.Suddenly Christopher Robin began to laugh ... and he laughed ... and helaughed ... and he laughed. And while he was still laughing—Crashwent the Heffalump's head against the tree-root, Smash went the jar,and out came Pooh's head again.... Then Piglet saw what a Foolish Piglet he had been, and he was so ashamedof himself that he ran straight off home and went to bed with aheadache. But Christopher Robin and Pooh went home to breakfasttogether."Oh, Bear!" said Christopher Robin. "How I do love you!""So do I," said Pooh.CHAPTER VIIN WHICH EEYORE HAS A BIRTHDAY AND GETS TWO PRESENTSEeyore, the old grey Donkey, stood by the side of the stream, andlooked at himself in the water."Pathetic," he said. "That's what it is. Pathetic."He turned and walked slowly down the stream for twenty yards, splashedacross it, and walked slowly back on the other side. Then he looked athimself in the water again."As I thought," he said. "No better from this side. But nobody minds.Nobody cares. Pathetic, that's what it is." There was a crackling noise in the bracken behind him, and out camePooh."Good morning, Eeyore," said Pooh."Good morning, Pooh Bear," said Eeyore gloomily. "If it is a goodmorning," he said. "Which I doubt," said he."Why, what's the matter?""Nothing, Pooh Bear, nothing. We can't all, and some of us don't. That'sall there is to it.""Can't all what?" said Pooh, rubbing his nose."Gaiety. Song-and-dance. Here we go round the mulberry bush.""Oh!" said Pooh. He thought for a long time, and then asked, "Whatmulberry bush is that?""Bon-hommy," went on Eeyore gloomily. "French word meaning bonhommy," heexplained. "I'm not complaining, but There It Is." Pooh sat down on a large stone, and tried to think this out. It soundedto him like a riddle, and he was never much good at riddles, being aBear of Very Little Brain. So he sang Cottleston Pie instead:  Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie, A fly can't bird, but a bird can fly. Ask me a riddle and I reply: "Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie."That was the first verse. When he had finished it, Eeyore didn'tactually say that he didn't like it, so Pooh very kindly sang the secondverse to him:  Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie, A fish can't whistle and neither can I. Ask me a riddle and I reply: "Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie."Eeyore still said nothing at all, so Pooh hummed the third verse quietlyto himself:  Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie, Why does a chicken, I don't know why. Ask me a riddle and I reply: "Cottleston, Cottleston, Cottleston Pie." "That's right," said Eeyore. "Sing. Umty-tiddly, umty-too. Here we gogathering Nuts and May. Enjoy yourself.""I am," said Pooh."Some can," said Eeyore."Why, what's the matter?""Is anything the matter?""You seem so sad, Eeyore.""Sad? Why should I be sad? It's my birthday. The happiest day of theyear.""Your birthday?" said Pooh in great surprise."Of course it is. Can't you see? Look at all the presents I have had."He waved a foot from side to side. "Look at the birthday cake. Candlesand pink sugar."Pooh looked—first to the right and then to the left."Presents?" said Pooh. "Birthday cake?" said Pooh. "Where?""Can't you see them?""No," said Pooh."Neither can I," said Eeyore. "Joke," he explained. "Ha ha!"Pooh scratched his head, being a little puzzled by all this."But is it really your birthday?" he asked."It is.""Oh! Well, Many happy returns of the day, Eeyore.""And many happy returns to you, Pooh Bear.""But it isn't my birthday.""No, it's mine.""But you said 'Many happy returns'——""Well, why not? You don't always want to be miserable on my birthday, doyou?""Oh, I see," said Pooh."It's bad enough," said Eeyore, almost breaking down, "being miserablemyself, what with no presents and no cake and no candles, and no propernotice taken of me at all, but if everybody else is going to bemiserable too——"This was too much for Pooh. "Stay there!" he called to Eeyore, as heturned and hurried back home as quick as he could; for he felt that hemust get poor Eeyore a present of some sort at once, and he couldalways think of a proper one afterwards. Outside his house he found Piglet, jumping up and down trying to reachthe knocker."Hallo, Piglet," he said."Hallo, Pooh," said Piglet."What are you trying to do?""I was trying to reach the knocker," said Piglet. "I just cameround——""Let me do it for you," said Pooh kindly. So he reached up and knockedat the door. "I have just seen Eeyore," he began, "and poor Eeyore is ina Very Sad Condition, because it's his birthday, and nobody has takenany notice of it, and he's very Gloomy—you know what Eeyore is—andthere he was, and——What a long time whoever lives here is answeringthis door." And he knocked again."But Pooh," said Piglet, "it's your own house!""Oh!" said Pooh. "So it is," he said. "Well, let's go in."So in they went. The first thing Pooh did was to go to the cupboard tosee if he had quite a small jar of honey left; and he had, so he took itdown. "I'm giving this to Eeyore," he explained, "as a present. What are yougoing to give?""Couldn't I give it too?" said Piglet. "From both of us?""No," said Pooh. "That would not be a good plan.""All right, then, I'll give him a balloon. I've got one left from myparty. I'll go and get it now, shall I?""That, Piglet, is a very good idea. It is just what Eeyore wants tocheer him up. Nobody can be uncheered with a balloon."So off Piglet trotted; and in the other direction went Pooh, with hisjar of honey. It was a warm day, and he had a long way to go. He hadn't gone more thanhalf-way when a sort of funny feeling began to creep all over him. Itbegan at the tip of his nose and trickled all through him and out at thesoles of his feet. It was just as if somebody inside him were saying,"Now then, Pooh, time for a little something.""Dear, dear," said Pooh, "I didn't know it was as late as that." So hesat down and took the top off his jar of honey. "Lucky I brought thiswith me," he thought. "Many a bear going out on a warm day like thiswould never have thought of bringing a little something with him." Andhe began to eat. "Now let me see," he thought, as he took his last lick of the inside ofthe jar, "where was I going? Ah, yes, Eeyore." He got up slowly.And then, suddenly, he remembered. He had eaten Eeyore's birthdaypresent!"Bother!" said Pooh. "What shall I do? I must give himsomething." For a little while he couldn't think of anything. Then he thought:"Well, it's a very nice pot, even if there's no honey in it, and if Iwashed it clean, and got somebody to write 'A Happy Birthday' on it,Eeyore could keep things in it, which might be Useful." So, as he wasjust passing the Hundred Acre Wood, he went inside to call on Owl, wholived there."Good morning, Owl," he said."Good morning, Pooh," said Owl."Many happy returns of Eeyore's birthday," said Pooh."Oh, is that what it is?""What are you giving him, Owl?""What are you giving him, Pooh?""I'm giving him a Useful Pot to Keep Things In, and I wanted to askyou——""Is this it?" said Owl, taking it out of Pooh's paw."Yes, and I wanted to ask you——""Somebody has been keeping honey in it," said Owl."You can keep anything in it," said Pooh earnestly. "It's Very Usefullike that. And I wanted to ask you——""You ought to write 'A Happy Birthday' on it.""That was what I wanted to ask you," said Pooh. "Because my spellingis Wobbly. It's good spelling but it Wobbles, and the letters get in thewrong places. Would you write 'A Happy Birthday' on it for me?""It's a nice pot," said Owl, looking at it all round. "Couldn't I giveit too? From both of us?""No," said Pooh. "That would not be a good plan. Now I'll just wash itfirst, and then you can write on it."Well, he washed the pot out, and dried it, while Owl licked the end ofhis pencil, and wondered how to spell "birthday.""Can you read, Pooh?" he asked a little anxiously. "There's a noticeabout knocking and ringing outside my door, which Christopher Robinwrote. Could you read it?""Christopher Robin told me what it said, and then I could.""Well, I'll tell you what this says, and then you'll be able to."So Owl wrote ... and this is what he wrote: HIPY PAPY BTHUTHDTH THUTHDA BTHUTHDY.Pooh looked on admiringly."I'm just saying 'A Happy Birthday'," said Owl carelessly."It's a nice long one," said Pooh, very much impressed by it."Well, actually, of course, I'm saying 'A Very Happy Birthday withlove from Pooh.' Naturally it takes a good deal of pencil to say a longthing like that.""Oh, I see," said Pooh.While all this was happening, Piglet had gone back to his own house toget Eeyore's balloon. He held it very tightly against himself, so thatit shouldn't blow away, and he ran as fast as he could so as to get toEeyore before Pooh did; for he thought that he would like to be thefirst one to give a present, just as if he had thought of it withoutbeing told by anybody. And running along, and thinking how pleasedEeyore would be, he didn't look where he was going ... and suddenly heput his foot in a rabbit hole, and fell down flat on his face. BANG!!!???***!!!Piglet lay there, wondering what had happened. At first he thought thatthe whole world had blown up; and then he thought that perhaps only theForest part of it had; and then he thought that perhaps only he had,and he was now alone in the moon or somewhere, and would never seeChristopher Robin or Pooh or Eeyore again. And then he thought, "Well,even if I'm in the moon, I needn't be face downwards all the time," sohe got cautiously up and looked about him.He was still in the Forest!"Well, that's funny," he thought. "I wonder what that bang was. Icouldn't have made such a noise just falling down. And where's myballoon? And what's that small piece of damp rag doing?"It was the balloon!"Oh, dear!" said Piglet "Oh, dear, oh, dearie, dearie, dear! Well, it'stoo late now. I can't go back, and I haven't another balloon, andperhaps Eeyore doesn't like balloons so very much."So he trotted on, rather sadly now, and down he came to the side of thestream where Eeyore was, and called out to him."Good morning, Eeyore," shouted Piglet."Good morning, Little Piglet," said Eeyore. "If it is a good morning,"he said. "Which I doubt," said he. "Not that it matters," he said."Many happy returns of the day," said Piglet, having now got closer.Eeyore stopped looking at himself in the stream, and turned to stare atPiglet."Just say that again," he said."Many hap——""Wait a moment."Balancing on three legs, he began to bring his fourth leg verycautiously up to his ear. "I did this yesterday," he explained, as hefell down for the third time. "It's quite easy. It's so as I can hearbetter.... There, that's done it! Now then, what were you saying?" Hepushed his ear forward with his hoof. "Many happy returns of the day," said Piglet again."Meaning me?""Of course, Eeyore.""My birthday?""Yes.""Me having a real birthday?""Yes, Eeyore, and I've brought you a present."Eeyore took down his right hoof from his right ear, turned round, andwith great difficulty put up his left hoof."I must have that in the other ear," he said. "Now then.""A present," said Piglet very loudly."Meaning me again?""Yes.""My birthday still?""Of course, Eeyore.""Me going on having a real birthday?""Yes, Eeyore, and I brought you a balloon." "Balloon?" said Eeyore. "You did say balloon? One of those bigcoloured things you blow up? Gaiety, song-and-dance, here we are andthere we are?""Yes, but I'm afraid—I'm very sorry, Eeyore—but when I was runningalong to bring it you, I fell down.""Dear, dear, how unlucky! You ran too fast, I expect. You didn't hurtyourself, Little Piglet?""No, but I—I—oh, Eeyore, I burst the balloon!"There was a very long silence."My balloon?" said Eeyore at last.Piglet nodded."My birthday balloon?""Yes, Eeyore," said Piglet sniffing a little. "Here it is. With—withmany happy returns of the day." And he gave Eeyore the small piece ofdamp rag."Is this it?" said Eeyore, a little surprised.Piglet nodded."My present?"Piglet nodded again."The balloon?""Yes.""Thank you, Piglet," said Eeyore. "You don't mind my asking," he wenton, "but what colour was this balloon when it—when it was a balloon?""Red.""I just wondered.... Red," he murmured to himself. "My favouritecolour.... How big was it?""About as big as me.""I just wondered.... About as big as Piglet," he said to himselfsadly. "My favourite size. Well, well."Piglet felt very miserable, and didn't know what to say. He was stillopening his mouth to begin something, and then deciding that it wasn'tany good saying that, when he heard a shout from the other side of theriver, and there was Pooh."Many happy returns of the day," called out Pooh, forgetting that he hadsaid it already."Thank you, Pooh, I'm having them," said Eeyore gloomily."I've brought you a little present," said Pooh excitedly."I've had it," said Eeyore.Pooh had now splashed across the stream to Eeyore, and Piglet wassitting a little way off, his head in his paws, snuffling to himself."It's a Useful Pot," said Pooh. "Here it is. And it's got 'A Very HappyBirthday with love from Pooh' written on it. That's what all thatwriting is. And it's for putting things in. There!"When Eeyore saw the pot, he became quite excited."Why!" he said. "I believe my Balloon will just go into that Pot!""Oh, no, Eeyore," said Pooh. "Balloons are much too big to go into Pots.What you do with a balloon is, you hold the ballon——""Not mine," said Eeyore proudly. "Look, Piglet!" And as Piglet lookedsorrowfully round, Eeyore picked the balloon up with his teeth, andplaced it carefully in the pot; picked it out and put it on the ground;and then picked it up again and put it carefully back."So it does!" said Pooh. "It goes in!""So it does!" said Piglet. "And it comes out!""Doesn't it?" said Eeyore. "It goes in and out like anything.""I'm very glad," said Pooh happily, "that I thought of giving you aUseful Pot to put things in.""I'm very glad," said Piglet happily, "that I thought of giving youSomething to put in a Useful Pot."But Eeyore wasn't listening. He was taking the balloon out, and puttingit back again, as happy as could be.... "And didn't I give him anything?" asked Christopher Robin sadly."Of course you did," I said. "You gave him—don't you remember—alittle—a little——""I gave him a box of paints to paint things with.""That was it.""Why didn't I give it to him in the morning?""You were so busy getting his party ready for him. He had a cake withicing on the top, and three candles, and his name in pink sugar,and——""Yes, I remember," said Christopher Robin.CHAPTER VIIIN WHICH KANGA AND BABY ROO COME TO THE FOREST, AND PIGLET HAS A BATHNobody seemed to know where they came from, but there they were in theForest: Kanga and Baby Roo. When Pooh asked Christopher Robin, "How didthey come here?" Christopher Robin said, "In the Usual Way, if you knowwhat I mean, Pooh," and Pooh, who didn't, said "Oh!" Then he nodded hishead twice and said, "In the Usual Way. Ah!" Then he went to call uponhis friend Piglet to see what he thought about it. And at Piglet'shouse he found Rabbit. So they all talked about it together. "What I don't like about it is this," said Rabbit. "Here are we—you,Pooh, and you, Piglet, and Me—and suddenly——""And Eeyore," said Pooh."And Eeyore—and then suddenly——""And Owl," said Pooh."And Owl—and then all of a sudden——""Oh, and Eeyore," said Pooh. "I was forgetting him.""Here—we—are," said Rabbit very slowly and carefully, "all—of—us,and then, suddenly, we wake up one morning and, what do we find? We finda Strange Animal among us. An animal of whom we have never even heardbefore! An animal who carries her family about with her in her pocket!Suppose I carried my family about with me in my pocket, how manypockets should I want?""Sixteen," said Piglet."Seventeen, isn't it?" said Rabbit. "And one more for ahandkerchief—that's eighteen. Eighteen pockets in one suit! I haven'ttime."There was a long and thoughtful silence ... and then Pooh, who hadbeen frowning very hard for some minutes, said: "I make it fifteen.""What?" said Rabbit."Fifteen.""Fifteen what?""Your family.""What about them?"Pooh rubbed his nose and said that he thought Rabbit had been talkingabout his family."Did I?" said Rabbit carelessly."Yes, you said——""Never mind, Pooh," said Piglet impatiently."The question is, What are we to do about Kanga?""Oh, I see," said Pooh."The best way," said Rabbit, "would be this. The best way would be tosteal Baby Roo and hide him, and then when Kanga says, 'Where's BabyRoo?' we say, 'Aha!'""Aha!" said Pooh, practising. "Aha! Aha! ... Of course," he wenton, "we could say 'Aha!' even if we hadn't stolen Baby Roo.""Pooh," said Rabbit kindly, "you haven't any brain.""I know," said Pooh humbly."We say 'Aha!' so that Kanga knows that we know where Baby Roo is.'Aha!' means 'We'll tell you where Baby Roo is, if you promise to goaway from the Forest and never come back.' Now don't talk while Ithink."Pooh went into a corner and tried saying 'Aha!' in that sort of voice.Sometimes it seemed to him that it did mean what Rabbit said, andsometimes it seemed to him that it didn't. "I suppose it's justpractice," he thought. "I wonder if Kanga will have to practise too soas to understand it.""There's just one thing," said Piglet, fidgeting a bit. "I was talkingto Christopher Robin, and he said that a Kanga was Generally Regarded asOne of the Fiercer Animals. I am not frightened of Fierce Animals in theordinary way, but it is well known that, if One of the Fiercer Animalsis Deprived of Its Young, it becomes as fierce as Two of the FiercerAnimals. In which case 'Aha!' is perhaps a foolish thing to say.""Piglet," said Rabbit, taking out a pencil, and licking the end of it,"you haven't any pluck.""It is hard to be brave," said Piglet, sniffing slightly, "when you'reonly a Very Small Animal." Rabbit, who had begun to write very busily, looked up and said:"It is because you are a very small animal that you will be Useful inthe adventure before us."Piglet was so excited at the idea of being Useful, that he forgot to befrightened any more, and when Rabbit went on to say that Kangas wereonly Fierce during the winter months, being at other times of anAffectionate Disposition, he could hardly sit still, he was so eager tobegin being useful at once."What about me?" said Pooh sadly. "I suppose I shan't be useful?""Never mind, Pooh," said Piglet comfortingly. "Another time perhaps.""Without Pooh," said Rabbit solemnly as he sharpened his pencil, "theadventure would be impossible.""Oh!" said Piglet, and tried not to look disappointed. But Pooh wentinto a corner of the room and said proudly to himself, "Impossiblewithout Me! That sort of Bear.""Now listen all of you," said Rabbit when he had finished writing, andPooh and Piglet sat listening very eagerly with their mouths open. Thiswas what Rabbit read out:PLAN TO CAPTURE BABY ROO1. General Remarks. Kanga runs faster than any of Us, even Me.2. More General Remarks. Kanga never takes her eye off Baby Roo, except when he's safely buttoned up in her pocket.3. Therefore. If we are to capture Baby Roo, we must get a Long Start, because Kanga runs faster than any of Us, even Me.(See 1.)4. A Thought. If Roo had jumped out of Kanga's pocket and Piglet had jumped in, Kanga wouldn't know the difference, because Piglet is a Very Small Animal.5. Like Roo.6. But Kanga would have to be looking the other way first, so as not to see Piglet jumping in.7. See 2.8. Another Thought. But if Pooh was talking to her very excitedly, she might look the other way for a moment.9. And then I could run away with Roo.10. Quickly.11. And Kanga wouldn't discover the difference until Afterwards. Well, Rabbit read this out proudly, and for a little while after he hadread it nobody said anything. And then Piglet, who had been opening andshutting his mouth without making any noise, managed to say veryhuskily:"And—Afterwards?""How do you mean?""When Kanga does Discover the Difference?""Then we all say 'Aha!'""All three of us?""Yes.""Oh!""Why, what's the trouble, Piglet?""Nothing," said Piglet, "as long as we all three say it. As long as weall three say it," said Piglet, "I don't mind," he said, "but Ishouldn't care to say 'Aha!' by myself. It wouldn't sound nearly sowell. By the way," he said, "you are quite sure about what you saidabout the winter months?""The winter months?""Yes, only being Fierce in the Winter Months.""Oh, yes, yes, that's all right. Well, Pooh? You see what you have todo?""No," said Pooh Bear. "Not yet," he said. "What do I do?""Well, you just have to talk very hard to Kanga so as she doesn't noticeanything.""Oh! What about?""Anything you like.""You mean like telling her a little bit of poetry or something?""That's it," said Rabbit. "Splendid. Now come along."So they all went out to look for Kanga.Kanga and Roo were spending a quiet afternoon in a sandy part of theForest. Baby Roo was practising very small jumps in the sand, andfalling down mouse-holes and climbing out of them, and Kanga wasfidgeting about and saying "Just one more jump, dear, and then we mustgo home." And at that moment who should come stumping up the hill butPooh. "Good afternoon, Kanga.""Good afternoon, Pooh.""Look at me jumping," squeaked Roo, and fell into another mouse-hole."Hallo, Roo, my little fellow!""We were just going home," said Kanga. "Good afternoon, Rabbit. Goodafternoon, Piglet."Rabbit and Piglet, who had now come up from the other side of the hill,said "Good afternoon," and "Hallo, Roo," and Roo asked them to look athim jumping, so they stayed and looked.And Kanga looked too...."Oh, Kanga," said Pooh, after Rabbit had winked at him twice, "I don'tknow if you are interested in Poetry at all?""Hardly at all," said Kanga."Oh!" said Pooh."Roo, dear, just one more jump and then we must go home."There was a short silence while Roo fell down another mouse-hole."Go on," said Rabbit in a loud whisper behind his paw."Talking of Poetry," said Pooh, "I made up a little piece as I wascoming along. It went like this. Er—now let me see——""Fancy!" said Kanga. "Now Roo, dear——""You'll like this piece of poetry," said Rabbit."You'll love it," said Piglet."You must listen very carefully," said Rabbit."So as not to miss any of it," said Piglet."Oh, yes," said Kanga, but she still looked at Baby Roo."How did it go, Pooh?" said Rabbit.Pooh gave a little cough and began.  LINES WRITTEN BY A BEAR OF VERY LITTLE BRAIN  On Monday, when the sun is hot I wonder to myself a lot: "Now is it true, or is it not, "That what is which and which is what?"  On Tuesday, when it hails and snows, The feeling on me grows and grows That hardly anybody knows If those are these or these are those.  On Wednesday, when the sky is blue, And I have nothing else to do, I sometimes wonder if it's true That who is what and what is who.  On Thursday, when it starts to freeze And hoar-frost twinkles on the trees, How very readily one sees That these are whose—but whose are these?  On Friday——"Yes, it is, isn't it?" said Kanga, not waiting to hear what happened onFriday. "Just one more jump, Roo, dear, and then we really must begoing." Rabbit gave Pooh a hurrying-up sort of nudge."Talking of Poetry," said Pooh quickly, "have you ever noticed that treeright over there?""Where?" said Kanga. "Now, Roo——""Right over there," said Pooh, pointing behind Kanga's back."No," said Kanga. "Now jump in, Roo, dear, and we'll go home.""You ought to look at that tree right over there," said Rabbit. "Shall Ilift you in, Roo?" And he picked up Roo in his paws."I can see a bird in it from here," said Pooh. "Or is it a fish?""You ought to see that bird from here," said Rabbit. "Unless it's afish.""It isn't a fish, it's a bird," said Piglet."So it is," said Rabbit."Is it a starling or a blackbird?" said Pooh."That's the whole question," said Rabbit. "Is it a blackbird or astarling?"And then at last Kanga did turn her head to look. And the moment thather head was turned, Rabbit said in a loud voice "In you go, Roo!" andin jumped Piglet into Kanga's pocket, and off scampered Rabbit, with Rooin his paws, as fast as he could."Why, where's Rabbit?" said Kanga, turning round again. "Are you allright, Roo, dear?"Piglet made a squeaky Roo-noise from the bottom of Kanga's pocket."Rabbit had to go away," said Pooh. "I think he thought of something hehad to go and see about suddenly.""And Piglet?""I think Piglet thought of something at the same time. Suddenly." "Well, we must be getting home," said Kanga. "Good-bye, Pooh." And inthree large jumps she was gone.Pooh looked after her as she went."I wish I could jump like that," he thought. "Some can and some can't.That's how it is."But there were moments when Piglet wished that Kanga couldn't. Often,when he had had a long walk home through the Forest, he had wished thathe were a bird; but now he thought jerkily to himself at the bottom ofKanga's pocket,this                              take"If      is          shall      really    toflying I      never              it."And as he went up in the air he said, "Ooooooo!" and as he came downhe said, "Ow!" And he was saying, "Ooooooo-ow, Ooooooo-ow,Ooooooo-ow" all the way to Kanga's house.Of course as soon as Kanga unbuttoned her pocket, she saw what hadhappened. Just for a moment, she thought she was frightened, and thenshe knew she wasn't; for she felt quite sure that Christopher Robinwould never let any harm happen to Roo. So she said to herself, "If theyare having a joke with me, I will have a joke with them." "Now then, Roo, dear," she said, as she took Piglet out of her pocket."Bed-time.""Aha!" said Piglet, as well as he could after his Terrifying Journey.But it wasn't a very good "Aha!" and Kanga didn't seem to understandwhat it meant."Bath first," said Kanga in a cheerful voice."Aha!" said Piglet again, looking round anxiously for the others. Butthe others weren't there. Rabbit was playing with Baby Roo in his ownhouse, and feeling more fond of him every minute, and Pooh, who haddecided to be a Kanga, was still at the sandy place on the top of theForest, practising jumps. "I am not at all sure," said Kanga in a thoughtful voice, "that itwouldn't be a good idea to have a cold bath this evening. Would youlike that, Roo, dear?"Piglet, who had never been really fond of baths, shuddered a longindignant shudder, and said in as brave a voice as he could:"Kanga, I see that the time has come to spleak painly.""Funny little Roo," said Kanga, as she got the bath-water ready."I am not Roo," said Piglet loudly. "I am Piglet!""Yes, dear, yes," said Kanga soothingly. "And imitating Piglet's voicetoo! So clever of him," she went on, as she took a large bar of yellowsoap out of the cupboard. "What will he be doing next?""Can't you see?" shouted Piglet. "Haven't you got eyes? Look atme!""I am looking, Roo, dear," said Kanga rather severely. "And you knowwhat I told you yesterday about making faces. If you go on making faceslike Piglet's, you will grow up to look like Piglet—and then thinkhow sorry you will be. Now then, into the bath, and don't let me have tospeak to you about it again."Before he knew where he was, Piglet was in the bath, and Kanga wasscrubbing him firmly with a large lathery flannel. "Ow!" cried Piglet. "Let me out! I'm Piglet!""Don't open the mouth, dear, or the soap goes in," said Kanga. "There!What did I tell you?""You—you—you did it on purpose," spluttered Piglet, as soon as hecould speak again ... and then accidentally had another mouthful oflathery flannel."That's right, dear, don't say anything," said Kanga, and in anotherminute Piglet was out of the bath, and being rubbed dry with a towel."Now," said Kanga, "there's your medicine, and then bed.""W-w-what medicine?" said Piglet."To make you grow big and strong, dear. You don't want to grow up smalland weak like Piglet, do you? Well, then!"At that moment there was a knock at the door."Come in," said Kanga, and in came Christopher Robin. "Christopher Robin, Christopher Robin!" cried Piglet. "Tell Kanga who Iam! She keeps saying I'm Roo. I'm not Roo, am I?"Christopher Robin looked at him very carefully, and shook his head."You can't be Roo," he said, "because I've just seen Roo playing inRabbit's house.""Well!" said Kanga. "Fancy that! Fancy my making a mistake like that.""There you are!" said Piglet. "I told you so. I'm Piglet."Christopher Robin shook his head again."Oh, you're not Piglet," he said. "I know Piglet well, and he's quitea different colour."Piglet began to say that this was because he had just had a bath, andthen he thought that perhaps he wouldn't say that, and as he opened hismouth to say something else, Kanga slipped the medicine spoon in, andthen patted him on the back and told him that it was really quite a nicetaste when you got used to it."I knew it wasn't Piglet," said Kanga. "I wonder who it can be.""Perhaps it's some relation of Pooh's," said Christopher Robin. "Whatabout a nephew or an uncle or something?"Kanga agreed that this was probably what it was, and said that theywould have to call it by some name."I shall call it Pootel," said Christopher Robin. "Henry Pootel forshort."And just when it was decided, Henry Pootel wriggled out of Kanga's armsand jumped to the ground. To his great joy Christopher Robin had leftthe door open. Never had Henry Pootel Piglet run so fast as he ran then,and he didn't stop running until he had got quite close to his house.But when he was a hundred yards away he stopped running, and rolled therest of the way home, so as to get his own nice comfortable colouragain.... So Kanga and Roo stayed in the Forest. And every Tuesday Roo spent theday with his great friend Rabbit, and every Tuesday Kanga spent the daywith her great friend Pooh, teaching him to jump, and every TuesdayPiglet spent the day with his great friend Christopher Robin. So theywere all happy again.CHAPTER VIIIIN WHICH CHRISTOPHER ROBIN LEADS AN EXPOTITION TO THE NORTH POLEOne fine day Pooh had stumped up to the top of the Forest to see ifhis friend Christopher Robin was interested in Bears at all. Atbreakfast that morning (a simple meal of marmalade spread lightly over ahoneycomb or two) he had suddenly thought of a new song. It began likethis:  "Sing Ho! for the life of a Bear."When he had got as far as this, he scratched his head, and thought tohimself "That's a very good start for a song, but what about the secondline?" He tried singing "Ho," two or three times, but it didn't seem tohelp. "Perhaps it would be better," he thought, "if I sang Hi for thelife of a Bear." So he sang it ... but it wasn't. "Very well, then,"he said, "I shall sing that first line twice, and perhaps if I sing itvery quickly, I shall find myself singing the third and fourth linesbefore I have time to think of them, and that will be a Good Song. Nowthen:"  Sing Ho! for the life of a Bear! Sing Ho! for the life of a Bear! I don't much mind if it rains or snows, 'Cos I've got a lot of honey on my nice new nose, I don't much care if it snows or thaws, 'Cos I've got a lot of honey on my nice clean paws! Sing Ho! for a Bear! Sing Ho! for a Pooh! And I'll have a little something in an hour or two!He was so pleased with this song that he sang it all the way to the topof the Forest, "and if I go on singing it much longer," he thought, "itwill be time for the little something, and then the last line won't betrue." So he turned it into a hum instead.Christopher Robin was sitting outside his door, putting on his BigBoots. As soon as he saw the Big Boots, Pooh knew that an Adventure wasgoing to happen, and he brushed the honey off his nose with the back ofhis paw, and spruced himself up as well as he could, so as to look Readyfor Anything."Good-morning, Christopher Robin," he called out."Hallo, Pooh Bear. I can't get this boot on.""That's bad," said Pooh."Do you think you could very kindly lean against me, 'cos I keep pullingso hard that I fall over backwards." Pooh sat down, dug his feet into the ground, and pushed hard againstChristopher Robin's back, and Christopher Robin pushed hard against his,and pulled and pulled at his boot until he had got it on."And that's that," said Pooh. "What do we do next?""We are all going on an Expedition," said Christopher Robin, as he gotup and brushed himself. "Thank you, Pooh.""Going on an Expotition?" said Pooh eagerly. "I don't think I've everbeen on one of those. Where are we going to on this Expotition?""Expedition, silly old Bear. It's got an 'x' in it.""Oh!" said Pooh. "I know." But he didn't really."We're going to discover the North Pole.""Oh!" said Pooh again. "What is the North Pole?" he asked."It's just a thing you discover," said Christopher Robin carelessly, notbeing quite sure himself."Oh! I see," said Pooh. "Are bears any good at discovering it?""Of course they are. And Rabbit and Kanga and all of you. It's anExpedition. That's what an Expedition means. A long line of everybody.You'd better tell the others to get ready, while I see if my gun's allright. And we must all bring Provisions.""Bring what?""Things to eat.""Oh!" said Pooh happily. "I thought you said Provisions. I'll go andtell them." And he stumped off.The first person he met was Rabbit. "Hallo, Rabbit," he said, "is that you?""Let's pretend it isn't," said Rabbit, "and see what happens.""I've got a message for you.""I'll give it to him.""We're all going on an Expotition with Christopher Robin!""What is it when we're on it?""A sort of boat, I think," said Pooh."Oh! that sort.""Yes. And we're going to discover a Pole or something. Or was it a Mole?Anyhow we're going to discover it.""We are, are we?" said Rabbit."Yes. And we've got to bring Pro—things to eat with us. In case we wantto eat them. Now I'm going down to Piglet's. Tell Kanga, will you?"He left Rabbit and hurried down to Piglet's house. The Piglet wassitting on the ground at the door of his house blowing happily at adandelion, and wondering whether it would be this year, next year,sometime or never. He had just discovered that it would be never, andwas trying to remember what "it" was, and hoping it wasn't anythingnice, when Pooh came up. "Oh! Piglet," said Pooh excitedly, "we're going on an Expotition, all ofus, with things to eat. To discover something.""To discover what?" said Piglet anxiously."Oh! just something.""Nothing fierce?""Christopher Robin didn't say anything about fierce. He just said it hadan 'x'.""It isn't their necks I mind," said Piglet earnestly. "It's their teeth.But if Christopher Robin is coming I don't mind anything."In a little while they were all ready at the top of the Forest, and theExpotition started. First came Christopher Robin and Rabbit, then Pigletand Pooh; then Kanga, with Roo in her pocket, and Owl; then Eeyore; and,at the end, in a long line, all Rabbit's friends-and-relations. "I didn't ask them," explained Rabbit carelessly. "They just came. Theyalways do. They can march at the end, after Eeyore.""What I say," said Eeyore, "is that it's unsettling. I didn't want tocome on this Expo—what Pooh said. I only came to oblige. But here Iam; and if I am the end of the Expo—what we're talking about—thenlet me be the end. But if, every time I want to sit down for alittle rest, I have to brush away half a dozen of Rabbit's smallerfriends-and-relations first, then this isn't an Expo—whatever itis—at all, it's simply a Confused Noise. That's what I say." "I see what Eeyore means," said Owl. "If you ask me——""I'm not asking anybody," said Eeyore. "I'm just telling everybody. Wecan look for the North Pole, or we can play 'Here we go gathering Nutsand May' with the end part of an ant's nest. It's all the same to me."There was a shout from the top of the line."Come on!" called Christopher Robin."Come on!" called Pooh and Piglet"Come on!" called Owl."We're starting," said Rabbit. "I must go." And he hurried off to thefront of the Expotition with Christopher Robin."All right," said Eeyore. "We're going. Only Don't Blame Me."So off they all went to discover the Pole. And as they walked, theychattered to each other of this and that, all except Pooh, who wasmaking up a song."This is the first verse," he said to Piglet, when he was ready with it."First verse of what?""My song.""What song?""This one.""Which one?""Well, if you listen, Piglet, you'll hear it.""How do you know I'm not listening?"Pooh couldn't answer that one, so he began to sing.  They all went off to discover the Pole, Owl and Piglet and Rabbit and all; It's a Thing you Discover, as I've been tole By Owl and Piglet and Rabbit and all. Eeyore, Christopher Robin and Pooh And Rabbit's relations all went too— And where the Pole was none of them knew.... Sing Hey! for Owl and Rabbit and all!"Hush!" said Christopher Robin turning round to Pooh, "we're just comingto a Dangerous Place." "Hush!" said Pooh turning round quickly to Piglet."Hush!" said Piglet to Kanga."Hush!" said Kanga to Owl, while Roo said "Hush!" several times tohimself very quietly."Hush!" said Owl to Eeyore."Hush!" said Eeyore in a terrible voice to all Rabbit'sfriends-and-relations, and "Hush!" they said hastily to each other alldown the line, until it got to the last one of all. And the last andsmallest friend-and-relation was so upset to find that the wholeExpotition was saying "Hush!" to him, that he buried himself headdownwards in a crack in the ground, and stayed there for two days untilthe danger was over, and then went home in a great hurry, and livedquietly with his Aunt ever-afterwards. His name was Alexander Beetle. They had come to a stream which twisted and tumbled between high rockybanks, and Christopher Robin saw at once how dangerous it was."It's just the place," he explained, "for an Ambush.""What sort of bush?" whispered Pooh to Piglet. "A gorse-bush?""My dear Pooh," said Owl in his superior way, "don't you know what anAmbush is?""Owl," said Piglet, looking round at him severely, "Pooh's whisper was aperfectly private whisper, and there was no need——""An Ambush," said Owl, "is a sort of Surprise.""So is a gorse-bush sometimes," said Pooh."An Ambush, as I was about to explain to Pooh," said Piglet, "is a sortof Surprise.""If people jump out at you suddenly, that's an Ambush," said Owl."It's an Ambush, Pooh, when people jump at you suddenly," explainedPiglet.Pooh, who now knew what an Ambush was, said that a gorse-bush had sprungat him suddenly one day when he fell off a tree, and he had taken sixdays to get all the prickles out of himself."We are not talking about gorse-bushes," said Owl a little crossly."I am," said Pooh.They were climbing very cautiously up the stream now, going from rock torock, and after they had gone a little way they came to a place wherethe banks widened out at each side, so that on each side of the waterthere was a level strip of grass on which they could sit down and rest.As soon as he saw this, Christopher Robin called "Halt!" and they allsat down and rested."I think," said Christopher Robin, "that we ought to eat all ourProvisions now, so that we shan't have so much to carry.""Eat all our what?" said Pooh."All that we've brought," said Piglet, getting to work."That's a good idea," said Pooh, and he got to work too."Have you all got something?" asked Christopher Robin with his mouthfull."All except me," said Eeyore. "As Usual." He looked round at them in hismelancholy way. "I suppose none of you are sitting on a thistle by anychance?""I believe I am," said Pooh. "Ow!" He got up, and looked behind him."Yes, I was. I thought so.""Thank you, Pooh. If you've quite finished with it." He moved across toPooh's place, and began to eat. "It don't do them any Good, you know, sitting on them," he went on, ashe looked up munching. "Takes all the Life out of them. Remember thatanother time, all of you. A little Consideration, a little Thought forOthers, makes all the difference."As soon as he had finished his lunch Christopher Robin whispered toRabbit, and Rabbit said "Yes, yes, of course," and they walked a littleway up the stream together."I didn't want the others to hear," said Christopher Robin."Quite so," said Rabbit, looking important."It's—I wondered—It's only—Rabbit, I suppose you don't know, Whatdoes the North Pole look like?""Well," said Rabbit, stroking his whiskers. "Now you're asking me.""I did know once, only I've sort of forgotten," said Christopher Robincarelessly."It's a funny thing," said Rabbit, "but I've sort of forgotten too,although I did know once.""I suppose it's just a pole stuck in the ground?""Sure to be a pole," said Rabbit, "because of calling it a pole, and ifit's a pole, well, I should think it would be sticking in the ground,shouldn't you, because there'd be nowhere else to stick it.""Yes, that's what I thought.""The only thing," said Rabbit, "is, where is it sticking?""That's what we're looking for," said Christopher Robin.They went back to the others. Piglet was lying on his back, sleepingpeacefully. Roo was washing his face and paws in the stream, while Kangaexplained to everybody proudly that this was the first time he had everwashed his face himself, and Owl was telling Kanga an InterestingAnecdote full of long words like Encyclopædia and Rhododendron to whichKanga wasn't listening."I don't hold with all this washing," grumbled Eeyore. "This modernBehind-the-ears nonsense. What do you think, Pooh?""Well," said Pooh, "I think——"But we shall never know what Pooh thought, for there came a suddensqueak from Roo, a splash, and a loud cry of alarm from Kanga."So much for washing," said Eeyore."Roo's fallen in!" cried Rabbit, and he and Christopher Robin camerushing down to the rescue. "Look at me swimming!" squeaked Roo from the middle of his pool, and washurried down a waterfall into the next pool."Are you all right, Roo dear?" called Kanga anxiously."Yes!" said Roo. "Look at me sw——" and down he went over the nextwaterfall into another pool.Everybody was doing something to help. Piglet, wide awake suddenly, wasjumping up and down and making "Oo, I say" noises; Owl was explainingthat in a case of Sudden and Temporary Immersion the Important Thing wasto keep the Head Above Water; Kanga was jumping along the bank, saying"Are you sure you're all right, Roo dear?" to which Roo, from whateverpool he was in at the moment, was answering "Look at me swimming!"Eeyore had turned round and hung his tail over the first pool into whichRoo fell, and with his back to the accident was grumbling quietly tohimself, and saying, "All this washing; but catch on to my tail, littleRoo, and you'll be all right"; and, Christopher Robin and Rabbit camehurrying past Eeyore, and were calling out to the others in front ofthem."All right, Roo, I'm coming," called Christopher Robin."Get something across the stream lower down, some of you fellows,"called Rabbit.But Pooh was getting something. Two pools below Roo he was standing witha long pole in his paws, and Kanga came up and took one end of it, andbetween them they held it across the lower part of the pool; and Roo,still bubbling proudly, "Look at me swimming," drifted up against it,and climbed out. "Did you see me swimming?" squeaked Roo excitedly, while Kanga scoldedhim and rubbed him down. "Pooh, did you see me swimming? That's calledswimming, what I was doing. Rabbit, did you see what I was doing?Swimming. Hallo, Piglet! I say, Piglet! What do you think I was doing!Swimming! Christopher Robin, did you see me——"But Christopher Robin wasn't listening. He was looking at Pooh."Pooh," he said, "where did you find that pole?"Pooh looked at the pole in his hands."I just found it," he said. "I thought it ought to be useful. I justpicked it up.""Pooh," said Christopher Robin solemnly, "the Expedition is over. Youhave found the North Pole!""Oh!" said Pooh.Eeyore was sitting with his tail in the water when they all got back tohim. "Tell Roo to be quick, somebody," he said. "My tail's getting cold. Idon't want to mention it, but I just mention it. I don't want tocomplain but there it is. My tail's cold.""Here I am!" squeaked Roo."Oh, there you are.""Did you see me swimming?"Eeyore took his tail out of the water, and swished it from side to side."As I expected," he said. "Lost all feeling. Numbed it. That's what it'sdone. Numbed it. Well, as long as nobody minds, I suppose it's allright.""Poor old Eeyore. I'll dry it for you," said Christopher Robin, and hetook out his handkerchief and rubbed it up."Thank you, Christopher Robin. You're the only one who seems tounderstand about tails. They don't think—that's what the matter withsome of these others. They've no imagination. A tail isn't a tail tothem, it's just a Little Bit Extra at the back.""Never mind, Eeyore," said Christopher Robin, rubbing his hardest. "Isthat better?""It's feeling more like a tail perhaps. It Belongs again, if you knowwhat I mean.""Hullo, Eeyore," said Pooh, coming up to them with his pole."Hullo, Pooh. Thank you for asking, but I shall be able to use it againin a day or two.""Use what?" said Pooh."What we are talking about.""I wasn't talking about anything," said Pooh, looking puzzled."My mistake again. I thought you were saying how sorry you were about mytail, being all numb, and could you do anything to help?""No," said Pooh. "That wasn't me," he said. He thought for a little andthen suggested helpfully, "Perhaps it was somebody else.""Well, thank him for me when you see him."Pooh looked anxiously at Christopher Robin."Pooh's found the North Pole," said Christopher Robin. "Isn't thatlovely?"Pooh looked modestly down."Is that it?" said Eeyore."Yes," said Christopher Robin."Is that what we were looking for?""Yes," said Pooh."Oh!" said Eeyore. "Well, anyhow—it didn't rain," he said.They stuck the pole in the ground, and Christopher Robin tied a messageon to it.NORTH POLEDISCOVERED BY POOHPOOH FOUND IT. Then they all went home again. And I think, but I am not quite sure,that Roo had a hot bath and went straight to bed. But Pooh went back tohis own house, and feeling very proud of what he had done, had a littlesomething to revive himself.CHAPTER IXIN WHICH PIGLET IS ENTIRELY SURROUNDED BY WATERIt rained and it rained and it rained. Piglet told himself that neverin all his life, and he was goodness knows how old—three, was it,or four?—never had he seen so much rain. Days and days and days."If only," he thought, as he looked out of the window, "I had been inPooh's house, or Christopher Robin's house, or Rabbit's house when itbegan to rain, then I should have had Company all this time, instead ofbeing here all alone, with nothing to do except wonder when it willstop." And he imagined himself with Pooh, saying, "Did you ever see suchrain, Pooh?" and Pooh saying, "Isn't it awful, Piglet?" and Pigletsaying, "I wonder how it is over Christopher Robin's way" and Poohsaying, "I should think poor old Rabbit is about flooded out by thistime." It would have been jolly to talk like this, and really, it wasn'tmuch good having anything exciting like floods, if you couldn't sharethem with somebody.For it was rather exciting. The little dry ditches in which Piglet hadnosed about so often had become streams, the little streams across whichhe had splashed were rivers, and the river, between whose steep banksthey had played so happily, had sprawled out of its own bed and wastaking up so much room everywhere, that Piglet was beginning to wonderwhether it would be coming into his bed soon."It's a little Anxious," he said to himself, "to be a Very Small AnimalEntirely Surrounded by Water. Christopher Robin and Pooh could escape byClimbing Trees, and Kanga could escape by Jumping, and Rabbit couldescape by Burrowing, and Owl could escape by Flying, and Eeyore couldescape by—by Making a Loud Noise Until Rescued, and here am I,surrounded by water and I can't do anything."It went on raining, and every day the water got a little higher, untilnow it was nearly up to Piglet's window ... and still he hadn't doneanything. "There's Pooh," he thought to himself. "Pooh hasn't much Brain, but henever comes to any harm. He does silly things and they turn out right.There's Owl. Owl hasn't exactly got Brain, but he Knows Things. He wouldknow the Right Thing to Do when Surrounded by Water. There's Rabbit. Hehasn't Learnt in Books, but he can always Think of a Clever Plan.There's Kanga. She isn't Clever, Kanga isn't, but she would be soanxious about Roo that she would do a Good Thing to Do without thinkingabout It. And then there's Eeyore. And Eeyore is so miserable anyhowthat he wouldn't mind about this. But I wonder what Christopher Robinwould do?"Then suddenly he remembered a story which Christopher Robin had told himabout a man on a desert island who had written something in a bottle andthrown it in the sea; and Piglet thought that if he wrote something in abottle and threw it in the water, perhaps somebody would come and rescuehim!He left the window and began to search his house, all of it that wasn'tunder water, and at last he found a pencil and a small piece of drypaper, and a bottle with a cork to it. And he wrote on one side of thepaper:HELP!PIGLET (ME)and on the other side:IT'S ME PIGLET, HELP HELP.Then he put the paper in the bottle, and he corked the bottle up astightly as he could, and he leant out of his window as far as he couldlean without falling in, and he threw the bottle as far as he couldthrow—splash!—and in a little while it bobbed up again on the water;and he watched it floating slowly away in the distance, until his eyesached with looking, and sometimes he thought it was the bottle, andsometimes he thought it was just a ripple on the water which he wasfollowing, and then suddenly he knew that he would never see it againand that he had done all that he could do to save himself. "So now," he thought, "somebody else will have to do something, and Ihope they will do it soon, because if they don't I shall have to swim,which I can't, so I hope they do it soon." And then he gave a very longsigh and said, "I wish Pooh were here. It's so much more friendly withtwo."When the rain began Pooh was asleep. It rained, and it rained, and itrained, and he slept and he slept and he slept. He had had a tiring day.You remember how he discovered the North Pole; well, he was so proud ofthis that he asked Christopher Robin if there were any other Poles suchas a Bear of Little Brain might discover."There's a South Pole," said Christopher Robin, "and I expect there's anEast Pole and a West Pole, though people don't like talking about them."Pooh was very excited when he heard this, and suggested that they shouldhave an Expotition to discover the East Pole, but Christopher Robin hadthought of something else to do with Kanga; so Pooh went out to discoverthe East Pole by himself. Whether he discovered it or not, I forget; buthe was so tired when he got home that, in the very middle of his supper,after he had been eating for little more than half-an-hour, he fell fastasleep in his chair, and slept and slept and slept.Then suddenly he was dreaming. He was at the East Pole, and it was avery cold pole with the coldest sort of snow and ice all over it. He hadfound a bee-hive to sleep in, but there wasn't room for his legs, so hehad left them outside. And Wild Woozles, such as inhabit the East Pole,came and nibbled all the fur off his legs to make nests for their Young.And the more they nibbled, the colder his legs got, until suddenly hewoke up with an Ow!—and there he was, sitting in his chair with hisfeet in the water, and water all round him!He splashed to his door and looked out.. ."This is Serious," said Pooh. "I must have an Escape."So he took his largest pot of honey and escaped with it to a broadbranch of his tree, well above the water, and then he climbed down againand escaped with another pot ... and when the whole Escape wasfinished, there was Pooh sitting on his branch, dangling his legs, andthere, beside him, were ten pots of honey.... Two days later, there was Pooh, sitting on his branch, dangling hislegs, and there, beside him, were four pots of honey....Three days later, there was Pooh, sitting on his branch, dangling hislegs, and there beside him, was one pot of honey.Four days later, there was Pooh ... And it was on the morning of the fourth day that Piglet's bottle camefloating past him, and with one loud cry of "Honey!" Pooh plunged intothe water, seized the bottle, and struggled back to his tree again."Bother!" said Pooh, as he opened it. "All that wet for nothing. What'sthat bit of paper doing?"He took it out and looked at it."It's a Missage," he said to himself, "that's what it is. And thatletter is a 'P,' and so is that, and so is that, and 'P' means 'Pooh,'so it's a very important Missage to me, and I can't read it. I must findChristopher Robin or Owl or Piglet, one of those Clever Readers who canread things, and they will tell me what this missage means. Only I can'tswim. Bother!"Then he had an idea, and I think that for a Bear of Very Little Brain,it was a good idea. He said to himself:"If a bottle can float, then a jar can float, and if a jar floats, I cansit on the top of it, if it's a very big jar." So he took his biggest jar, and corked it up. "All boats have to have aname," he said, "so I shall call mine The Floating Bear." And withthese words he dropped his boat into the water and jumped in after it. For a little while Pooh and The Floating Bear were uncertain as towhich of them was meant to be on the top, but after trying one or twodifferent positions, they settled down with The Floating Bearunderneath and Pooh triumphantly astride it, paddling vigorously withhis feet. Christopher Robin lived at the very top of the Forest. It rained, and itrained, and it rained, but the water couldn't come up to his house. Itwas rather jolly to look down into the valleys and see the water allround him, but it rained so hard that he stayed indoors most of thetime, and thought about things. Every morning he went out with hisumbrella and put a stick in the place where the water came up to, andevery next morning he went out and couldn't see his stick any more, sohe put another stick in the place where the water came up to, and thenhe walked home again, and each morning he had a shorter way to walk thanhe had had the morning before. On the morning of the fifth day he sawthe water all round him, and knew that for the first time in his life hewas on a real island. Which was very exciting. It was on this morning that Owl came flying over the water to say "Howdo you do," to his friend Christopher Robin."I say, Owl," said Christopher Robin, "isn't this fun? I'm on anisland!""The atmospheric conditions have been very unfavourable lately," saidOwl."The what?""It has been raining," explained Owl."Yes," said Christopher Robin. "It has.""The flood-level has reached an unprecedented height.""The who?""There's a lot of water about," explained Owl."Yes," said Christopher Robin, "there is.""However, the prospects are rapidly becoming more favourable. At anymoment——""Have you seen Pooh?""No. At any moment——""I hope he's all right," said Christopher Robin. "I've been wonderingabout him. I expect Piglet's with him. Do you think they're all right,Owl?""I expect so. You see, at any moment——""Do go and see, Owl. Because Pooh hasn't got very much brain, and hemight do something silly, and I do love him so, Owl. Do you see, Owl?""That's all right," said Owl. "I'll go. Back directly." And he flew off.In a little while he was back again."Pooh isn't there," he said."Not there?""Has been there. He's been sitting on a branch of his tree outside hishouse with nine pots of honey. But he isn't there now.""Oh, Pooh!" cried Christopher Robin. "Where are you?" "Here I am," said a growly voice behind him."Pooh!"They rushed into each other's arms."How did you get here, Pooh?" asked Christopher Robin, when he was readyto talk again."On my boat," said Pooh proudly. "I had a Very Important Missage sent mein a bottle, and owing to having got some water in my eyes, I couldn'tread it, so I brought it to you. On my boat." With these proud words he gave Christopher Robin the missage."But it's from Piglet!" cried Christopher Robin when he had read it."Isn't there anything about Pooh in it?" asked Bear, looking over hisshoulder.Christopher Robin read the message aloud."Oh, are those 'P's' piglets? I thought they were poohs.""We must rescue him at once! I thought he was with you, Pooh. Owl,could you rescue him on your back?""I don't think so," said Owl, after grave thought. "It is doubtful ifthe necessary dorsal muscles——""Then would you fly to him at once and say that Rescue is Coming? AndPooh and I will think of a Rescue and come as quick as ever we can. Oh,don't talk, Owl, go on quick!" And, still thinking of something tosay, Owl flew off."Now then, Pooh," said Christopher Robin, "where's your boat?""I ought to say," explained Pooh as they walked down to the shore of theisland, "that it isn't just an ordinary sort of boat. Sometimes it's aBoat, and sometimes it's more of an Accident. It all depends.""Depends on what?""On whether I'm on the top of it or underneath it.""Oh! Well, where is it?""There!" said Pooh, pointing proudly to The Floating Bear.It wasn't what Christopher Robin expected, and the more he looked at it,the more he thought what a Brave and Clever Bear Pooh was, and the moreChristopher Robin thought this, the more Pooh looked modestly down hisnose and tried to pretend he wasn't."But it's too small for two of us," said Christopher Robin sadly."Three of us with Piglet.""That makes it smaller still. Oh, Pooh Bear, what shall we do?"And then this Bear, Pooh Bear, Winnie-the-Pooh, F.O.P. (Friend ofPiglet's), R.C. (Rabbit's Companion), P.D. (Pole Discoverer), E.C. andT.F. (Eeyore's Comforter and Tail-finder)—in fact, Pooh himself—saidsomething so clever that Christopher Robin could only look at him withmouth open and eyes staring, wondering if this was really the Bear ofVery Little Brain whom he had known and loved so long."We might go in your umbrella," said Pooh."?""We might go in your umbrella," said Pooh."? ?""We might go in your umbrella," said Pooh."!!!!!!"For suddenly Christopher Robin saw that they might. He opened hisumbrella and put it point downwards in the water. It floated butwobbled. Pooh got in. He was just beginning to say that it was all rightnow, when he found that it wasn't, so after a short drink which hedidn't really want he waded back to Christopher Robin. Then they bothgot in together, and it wobbled no longer. "I shall call this boat The Brain of Pooh," said Christopher Robin,and The Brain of Pooh set sail forthwith in a south-westerlydirection, revolving gracefully. You can imagine Piglet's joy when at last the ship came in sight of him.In after-years he liked to think that he had been in Very Great Dangerduring the Terrible Flood, but the only danger he had really been in wasin the last half-hour of his imprisonment, when Owl, who had just flownup, sat on a branch of his tree to comfort him, and told him a very longstory about an aunt who had once laid a seagull's egg by mistake, andthe story went on and on, rather like this sentence, until Piglet whowas listening out of his window without much hope, went to sleep quietlyand naturally, slipping slowly out of the window towards the water untilhe was only hanging on by his toes, at which moment luckily, a suddenloud squawk from Owl, which was really part of the story, being what hisaunt said, woke the Piglet up and just gave him time to jerk himselfback into safety and say, "How interesting, and did she?" when—well,you can imagine his joy when at last he saw the good ship, Brain ofPooh (Captain, C. Robin; 1st Mate, P. Bear) coming over the sea torescue him. Christopher Robin and Pooh again.... And that is really the end of the story, and I am very tired after thatlast sentence, I think I shall stop there.CHAPTER XIN WHICH CHRISTOPHER ROBIN GIVES POOH A PARTY, AND WE SAY GOOD-BYEOne day when the sun had come back over the Forest, bringing with itthe scent of may, and all the streams of the Forest were tinklinghappily to find themselves their own pretty shape again, and the littlepools lay dreaming of the life they had seen and the big things they haddone, and in the warmth and quiet of the Forest the cuckoo was tryingover his voice carefully and listening to see if he liked it, andwood-pigeons were complaining gently to themselves in their lazycomfortable way that it was the other fellow's fault, but it didn'tmatter very much; on such a day as this Christopher Robin whistled in aspecial way he had, and Owl came flying out of the Hundred Acre Wood tosee what was wanted. "Owl," said Christopher Robin, "I am going to give a party.""You are, are you?" said Owl."And it's to be a special sort of party, because it's because of whatPooh did when he did what he did to save Piglet from the flood.""Oh, that's what it's for, is it?" said Owl."Yes, so will you tell Pooh as quickly as you can, and all the others,because it will be to-morrow.""Oh, it will, will it?" said Owl, still being as helpful as possible."So will you go and tell them, Owl?"Owl tried to think of something very wise to say, but couldn't, so heflew off to tell the others. And the first person he told was Pooh."Pooh," he said, "Christopher Robin is giving a party.""Oh!" said Pooh. And then seeing that Owl expected him to say somethingelse, he said "Will there be those little cake things with pink sugaricing?"Owl felt that it was rather beneath him to talk about little cake thingswith pink sugar icing, so he told Pooh exactly what Christopher Robinhad said, and flew off to Eeyore. "A party for Me?" thought Pooh to himself. "How grand!" And he began towonder if all the other animals would know that it was a special PoohParty, and if Christopher Robin had told them about The Floating Bearand the Brain of Pooh and all the wonderful ships he had invented andsailed on, and he began to think how awful it would be if everybody hadforgotten about it, and nobody quite knew what the party was for; andthe more he thought like this, the more the party got muddled in hismind, like a dream when nothing goes right. And the dream began to singitself over in his head until it became a sort of song. It was an  ANXIOUS POOH SONG.  3 Cheers for Pooh! (For Who?) For Pooh— (Why what did he do?) I thought you knew; He saved his friend from a wetting! 3 Cheers for Bear! (For where?) For Bear— He couldn't swim, But he rescued him! (He rescued who?) Oh, listen, do! I am talking of Pooh— (Of who?) Of Pooh! (I'm sorry I keep forgetting). Well, Pooh was a Bear of Enormous Brain (Just say it again!) Of enormous brain— (Of enormous what?) Well, he ate a lot, And I don't know if he could swim or not, But he managed to float On a sort of boat (On a sort of what?) Well, a sort of pot— So now let's give him three hearty cheers (So now let's give him three hearty whiches?) And hope he'll be with us for years and years, And grow in health and wisdom and riches! 3 Cheers for Pooh! (For who?) For Pooh— 3 Cheers for Bear! (For where?) For Bear— 3 Cheers for the wonderful Winnie-the-Pooh! (Just tell me, somebody—WHAT DID HE DO?)While this was going on inside him, Owl was talking to Eeyore."Eeyore," said Owl, "Christopher Robin is giving a party.""Very interesting," said Eeyore. "I suppose they will be sending me downthe odd bits which got trodden on. Kind and Thoughtful. Not at all,don't mention it." "There is an Invitation for you.""What's that like?""An Invitation!" "Yes, I heard you. Who dropped it?""This isn't anything to eat, it's asking you to the party. To-morrow."Eeyore shook his head slowly."You mean Piglet. The little fellow with the excited ears. That'sPiglet. I'll tell him." "No, no!" said Owl, getting quite fussy. "It's you!""Are you sure?""Of course I'm sure. Christopher Robin said 'All of them! Tell all ofthem.'""All of them, except Eeyore?""All of them," said Owl sulkily."Ah!" said Eeyore. "A mistake, no doubt, but still, I shall come. Onlydon't blame me if it rains."But it didn't rain. Christopher Robin had made a long table out of somelong pieces of wood, and they all sat round it. Christopher Robin sat atone end, and Pooh sat at the other, and between them on one side wereOwl and Eeyore and Piglet, and between them on the other side wereRabbit, and Roo and Kanga. And all Rabbit's friends and relations spreadthemselves about on the grass, and waited hopefully in case anybodyspoke to them, or dropped anything, or asked them the time.It was the first party to which Roo had ever been, and he was veryexcited. As soon as ever they had sat down he began to talk."Hallo, Pooh!" he squeaked."Hallo, Roo!" said Pooh.Roo jumped up and down in his seat for a little while and then beganagain."Hallo, Piglet!" he squeaked.Piglet waved a paw at him, being too busy to say anything."Hallo, Eeyore!" said Roo.Eeyore nodded gloomily at him. "It will rain soon, you see if itdoesn't," he said.Roo looked to see if it didn't, and it didn't, so he said "Hallo,Owl!"—and Owl said "Hallo, my little fellow," in a kindly way, and wenton telling Christopher Robin about an accident which had nearly happenedto a friend of his whom Christopher Robin didn't know, and Kanga said toRoo, "Drink up your milk first, dear, and talk afterwards." So Roo, whowas drinking his milk, tried to say that he could do both at once ...and had to be patted on the back and dried for quite a long timeafterwards. When they had all nearly eaten enough, Christopher Robin banged on thetable with his spoon, and everybody stopped talking and was very silent,except Roo who was just finishing a loud attack of hiccups and trying tolook as if it was one of Rabbit's relations. "This party," said Christopher Robin, "is a party because of whatsomeone did, and we all know who it was, and it's his party, because ofwhat he did, and I've got a present for him and here it is." Then hefelt about a little and whispered, "Where is it?"While he was looking, Eeyore coughed in an impressive way and began tospeak."Friends," he said, "including oddments, it is a great pleasure, orperhaps I had better say it has been a pleasure so far, to see you at myparty. What I did was nothing. Any of you—except Rabbit and Owl andKanga—would have done the same. Oh, and Pooh. My remarks do not, ofcourse, apply to Piglet and Roo, because they are too small. Any of youwould have done the same. But it just happened to be Me. It was not, Ineed hardly say, with an idea of getting what Christopher Robin islooking for now"—and he put his front leg to his mouth and said in aloud whisper, "Try under the table"—"that I did what I did—but becauseI feel that we should all do what we can to help. I feel that we shouldall——""H—hup!" said Roo accidentally."Roo, dear!" said Kanga reproachfully."Was it me?" asked Roo, a little surprised."What's Eeyore talking about?" Piglet whispered to Pooh."I don't know," said Pooh rather dolefully."I thought this was your party.""I thought it was once. But I suppose it isn't.""I'd sooner it was yours than Eeyore's," said Piglet."So would I," said Pooh."H—hup!" said Roo again."AS—I—WAS—SAYING," said Eeyore loudly and sternly, "as I was sayingwhen I was interrupted by various Loud Sounds, I feel that——""Here it is!" cried Christopher Robin excitedly. "Pass it down to sillyold Pooh. It's for Pooh.""For Pooh?" said Eeyore."Of course it is. The best bear in all the world.""I might have known," said Eeyore. "After all, one can't complain. Ihave my friends. Somebody spoke to me only yesterday. And was it lastweek or the week before that Rabbit bumped into me and said 'Bother!'The Social Round. Always something going on." Nobody was listening, for they were all saying "Open it, Pooh," "What isit, Pooh?" "I know what it is," "No, you don't" and other helpfulremarks of this sort. And of course Pooh was opening it as quickly asever he could, but without cutting the string, because you never knowwhen a bit of string might be Useful. At last it was undone.When Pooh saw what it was, he nearly fell down, he was so pleased. Itwas a Special Pencil Case. There were pencils in it marked "B" for Bear,and pencils marked "HB" for Helping Bear, and pencils marked "BB" forBrave Bear. There was a knife for sharpening the pencils, andindia-rubber for rubbing out anything which you had spelt wrong, and aruler for ruling lines for the words to walk on, and inches marked onthe ruler in case you wanted to know how many inches anything was, andBlue Pencils and Red Pencils and Green Pencils for saying special thingsin blue and red and green. And all these lovely things were in littlepockets of their own in a Special Case which shut with a click when youclicked it. And they were all for Pooh."Oh!" said Pooh."Oh, Pooh!" said everybody else except Eeyore."Thank-you," growled Pooh.But Eeyore was saying to himself, "This writing business. Pencils andwhat-not. Over-rated, if you ask me. Silly stuff. Nothing in it."Later on, when they had all said "Good-bye" and "Thank-you" toChristopher Robin, Pooh and Piglet walked home thoughtfully together inthe golden evening, and for a long time they were silent. "When you wake up in the morning, Pooh," said Piglet at last, "what'sthe first thing you say to yourself?""What's for breakfast?" said Pooh. "What do you say, Piglet?""I say, I wonder what's going to happen exciting to-day?" said Piglet.Pooh nodded thoughtfully."It's the same thing," he said."And what did happen?" asked Christopher Robin."When?""Next morning.""I don't know.""Could you think and tell me and Pooh some time?""If you wanted it very much.""Pooh does," said Christopher Robin.He gave a deep sigh, picked his bear up by the leg and walked off to thedoor, trailing Winnie-the-Pooh behind him. At the door he turned andsaid "Coming to see me have my bath?""I might," I said."Was Pooh's pencil case any better than mine?""It was just the same," I said.He nodded and went out ... and in a moment I heardWinnie-the-Pooh—bump, bump, bump—going up the stairs behind him. Printed in Canadaby Warwick Bros. & Rutter, LimitedPrinters and BookbindersToronto[Transcriber's Note: Near the end of Chapter VI, the reference to Kanga was modified toread "... and every Tuesday Kanga spent the day with her good friendPooh ..."]*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WINNIE-THE-POOH ***Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions willbe renamed.Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyrightlaw means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the UnitedStates without permission and without paying copyrightroyalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use partof this license, apply to copying and distributing ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by followingthe terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for useof the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything forcopies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is veryeasy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creationof derivative works, reports, performances and research. ProjectGutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you maydo practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protectedby U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademarklicense, especially commercial redistribution.START: FULL LICENSETHE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSEPLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORKTo protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the freedistribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the FullProject Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online atwww.gutenberg.org/license.Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree toand accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by allthe terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return ordestroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in yourpossession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to aProject Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be boundby the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the personor entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only beused on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people whoagree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a fewthings that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic workseven without complying with the full terms of this agreement. Seeparagraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with ProjectGutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of thisagreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“theFoundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collectionof Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individualworks in the collection are in the public domain in the UnitedStates. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in theUnited States and you are located in the United States, we do notclaim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long asall references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hopethat you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promotingfree access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping theProject Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easilycomply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in thesame format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License whenyou share it without charge with others.1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also governwhat you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries arein a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of thisagreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or anyother Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes norepresentations concerning the copyright status of any work in anycountry other than the United States.1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or otherimmediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appearprominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any workon which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which thephrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,performed, viewed, copied or distributed:     This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online    at www.gutenberg.org. If you    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work isderived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does notcontain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of thecopyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone inthe United States without paying any fees or charges. If you areredistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “ProjectGutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must complyeither with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 orobtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is postedwith the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distributionmust comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and anyadditional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional termswill be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all worksposted with the permission of the copyright holder found at thebeginning of this work.1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of thiswork or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute thiselectronic work, or any part of this electronic work, withoutprominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 withactive links or immediate access to the full terms of the ProjectGutenberg™ License.1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, includingany word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide accessto or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a formatother than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the officialversion posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expenseto the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a meansof obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “PlainVanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include thefull Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ worksunless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providingaccess to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksprovided that:         • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg        Literary Archive Foundation.”             • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™        works.             • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of        receipt of the work.             • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.    1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms thanare set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writingfrom the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager ofthe Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as setforth in Section 3 below.1.F.1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerableeffort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofreadworks not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the ProjectGutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, maycontain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurateor corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or otherintellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk orother medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage orcannot be read by your equipment.1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Rightof Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the ProjectGutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a ProjectGutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim allliability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legalfees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICTLIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSEPROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THETRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BELIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE ORINCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCHDAMAGE.1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover adefect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you canreceive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending awritten explanation to the person you received the work from. If youreceived the work on a physical medium, you must return the mediumwith your written explanation. The person or entity that provided youwith the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy inlieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the personor entity providing it to you may choose to give you a secondopportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. Ifthe second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writingwithout further opportunities to fix the problem.1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forthin paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NOOTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOTLIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain impliedwarranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types ofdamages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreementviolates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, theagreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer orlimitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity orunenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void theremaining provisions.1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, thetrademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyoneproviding copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works inaccordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with theproduction, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any ofthe following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of thisor any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, oradditions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) anyDefect you cause.Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution ofelectronic works in formats readable by the widest variety ofcomputers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Itexists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donationsfrom people in all walks of life.Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with theassistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’sgoals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection willremain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the ProjectGutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secureand permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and futuregenerations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, seeSections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationThe Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of thestate of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the InternalRevenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identificationnumber is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted byU.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and upto date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s websiteand official page at www.gutenberg.org/contactSection 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive FoundationProject Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespreadpublic support and donations to carry out its mission ofincreasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can befreely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widestarray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exemptstatus with the IRS.The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulatingcharities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the UnitedStates. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes aconsiderable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep upwith these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locationswhere we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SENDDONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular statevisit www.gutenberg.org/donate.While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where wehave not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibitionagainst accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states whoapproach us with offers to donate.International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot makeany statements concerning tax treatment of donations received fromoutside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donationmethods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of otherways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. Todonate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donateSection 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksProfessor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the ProjectGutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could befreely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced anddistributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network ofvolunteer support.Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printededitions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright inthe U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do notnecessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paperedition.Most people start at our website which has the main PG searchfacility: www.gutenberg.org.This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg LiteraryArchive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how tosubscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.